quantum haystacks this acceptance talk is a curious mixture of personal-history and developing ideas in the context of the growing field of ir covering several decades . i want to concentrate on models and theories , interpreted loosely , and try and give an insight into where i have got to in my thinking , where the ideas came from , and where i believe we are going.in the last few years i have been working on the development of what might be coined as a design-language for ir . it takes its inspiration from quantum-mechanics , but by analogy only . the mathematical objects represent documents ; these objects might be vectors (or density operators) in an n-dimensional vector-space (usually a hilbert space) . a request for information , or a query , is taken as an observable and is represented as a linear operator on the space . linear-operators can be expressed as matrices . such an operator , hermitian , has a set of eigenvectors forming a basis for the space ; which we interpret as a point-of-view or perspective from which to understand the space . thus any document-vector can be located with respect to the basis , and we can calculate an inner-product between such a vector and any basis vector , which may be interpreted as a probability-of-relevance . the probability of observing any given eigenvector is now given by the square of that inner-product assuming all vectors are normalised . hence we connect the probability of observation to the geometry of the space . furthermore , the subspaces of the space make up a lattice-structure which is equivalent to a logic . this makes up the entire mathematical structure , and the language for handling this structure is linear-algebra : vectors , matrices , projections , inner-products , neatly captured by the dirac notation used in quantum-mechanics . our probability is slightly different from classical probability , the same for logic ; we end up with quantum-logic and quantum probability.a commitment to this kind of mathematical structure , with which to model objects and processes in ir , depends on two critical assumptions . the distances in the space between objects are a source of important relationships with respect to relevance and aboutness . the observation of a property such as relevance or aboutness is user dependent in the sense that a potential interaction is specified by a user through an operator which when measured achieves outcomes with a probability determined by the geometry of the space . . the geometry of this mathematical structure and the probability defined on it are closely connected by the following theorem due to gleason (1957) . one may summarise this theorem by saying that the probability of a subspace is given by a simple algorithm derived from a projection onto the subspace and a special kind of operator , namely a statistical operator , or density matrix . and conversely , that given a probability measure on the subspaces then we can encode that measure uniquely through such an algorithm . this is a very powerful theorem and its consequences remain to be explored.so how did i get to this point and form of abstraction ? most of my research work can be divided into contributions to the following areas : clustering-evaluation probabilistic-models logic models geometry . in all these areas i have attempted to search for underlying mathematical structures that would lead to computations . these topics have in common that they depend on the construction of measures on a space which in some sense determines the usefulness or effectiveness of the structure . for clustering one considers mapping from metric-spaces to ultrametic spaces and measure the closeness of fit . in the case of evaluation , one starts with a relational conjoint structure and imposes some constraints given by what is to be measured , one then constructs a numerical-representation of this structure leading to such measures as f (or e) . for probabilistic-models the main difficulty is concerned with deciding on an appropriate event-space on which to define the ` right ' probability measures . for me the most significant example in this context was the attempt to construct a logical uncertainty principle which formulated a measure of uncertainty on incomplete logical constructs . this attempt left unspecified the exact form of the measure . in the geometry of ir i finally managed to formulate that measure as a projection-valued measure.this way of thinking did not appear out of nowhere . it was heavily influenced by the work of fairthorne (1961) whose work on brouwerian logic (an intuitionistic-logic) was picked up by salton in his early book on ir . at an earlier stage mackay (1950) wrote a paper that opened with , ` this paper relates to the borderline linking experimental and theoretical physics with mathematical logic , and covers at several points ground which is common to the theory of communication . ' he goes on to define an ` information-operator ' which is very similar in scope and intent to the hermitian operator above . maron , who collaborated with mackay , stated in his 1965 paper , ` therefore , it can be argued that index descriptions should not be viewed as properties of documents : they function to relate documents and users . ' one can see that the development of these early ideas was continued to the construction of the geometry of ir.what does it leave to be done ? an attempt should be made to use this design-language to build an ir-system . on the theoretical front it is worth considering whether it would be better to start with a transition-probability space rather than a hilbert space as von neumann did in 1937 (translated in 1981) . the assumption that closed linear subspaces will be the elements of our logic can be challenged , as perhaps a construction with different elements is possible . it is not obvious what the best form of conditional-probability might be in these spaces . agreeing on a form of conditionalisation is intimately tied up with how to model contextuality . there is some evidence to suggest that contextuality plays a role in modelling the conjuncton of concepts (widdows , 2004) . such contexts have been modelled in quantum-theory almost from the beginning , for example , gleason 's theorem precludes noncontextual hidden-variable theories .