automatic query-time generation of retrieval expert coefficients for multimedia-retrieval content-based multimedia information-retrieval can be defined as the task of matching a multi-modal-information need against various components of a multimedia corpus and retrieving relevant elements . generally the matching and retrieval takes place across multiple ` features ' which can either be visual or audio , or can be high-level or low-level , and each of which can be seen to be an independent retrieval expert . the task of answering a query can thus be formulated as a data-fusion problem . depending on the query , each expert may perform differently and so retrieval coefficients can be used to weight each expert to increase overall performance . previous approaches to expert coefficient generation have included query-independent coefficients , identification of query-classes and machine-learning-methods , to name a few . the approach i propose is different , as it seeks to dynamically create expert coefficients which are query-dependent . this approach is based upon earlier experiments where an initial correlation was observed between the score-distribution of a retrieval expert , and its relative-performance when compared against other experts for that query . i have created a basic method which leverages these observations to create query-time coefficients which achieve comparable performance to oracle-determined query-independent weights , for the experts and collections used in the aforementioned experiment . previous research which examinedscore distribution did so with respect to relevance , whereas this work seeks to compare expert scores for a given query to determine relative-performance . in my work i aim to explore this correlation by eliminating potential bias from the data-collections , the retrieval experts and the queries used in experiments to obtain more robust observations . using and extending previous investigations into data-fusion , i will explore where data-fusion succeeds in multimedia-retrieval , and where it does not . i then aim to refine and extend my existing techniques for automatic coefficient generation to incorporate the new observations , so as to improve performance . finally i will combine this approach with existing data-fusion methods , such as query-class coefficients , with each approach complimenting the other to achieve further performance-improvements .