beyond classical measures : how to evaluate the effectiveness of interactive information-retrieval-system ? this research explores the relationship between information-retrieval (ir) systems ' effectiveness and users ' performance (accuracy and speed) and their satisfaction with the retrieved results (precision of the results , completeness of the results and overall system-success) . previous studies have concluded that improvements in ir systems based on increase in ir-effectiveness-measures do not reflect on improvement in users ' performance . this work aims at exploiting factors that can possibly be considered as confounding variables in interactive-information-retrieval (iir) evaluation . in this research , we look at substantive approaches to evaluate iir systems . we aim to build an interactive evaluation-framework that brings together aspects of systems ' effectiveness and users ' performance and satisfaction . this research also involves developing methods for capturing users ' satisfaction with the retrieved results of ir systems , as well as examination how users assess their own performance in task-completion . furthermore , we are also interested in identifying evaluation-measures which are used in batch mode (non-interactive experiment) , but correlate well in interactive-ir system . thus , by the end of this research , we hope to develop a valid and reliable metrics for iir evaluation . a first study was set up to explore the relationship between system effectiveness as quantified by traditional measures , such as precision-and-recall , and users ' effectiveness and satisfaction of the results , though this study was limited to few users . the tasks involve finding images for recall-based tasks . it was concluded that no direct relationship between system effectiveness and users ' performance . people learn to adapt to a system regardless to its effectiveness . this study recommends that a combination of measures (e.g. system effectiveness , user-performance and satisfaction) to be used to evaluate iir systems . based on our observation from this study , we found that users ' familiarity of the search topic has increased their performance . thus , we set up a second experiment to investigate how users ' satisfaction correlate with some ir-effectiveness-measures such as precision and the suite of cumulative-gain measures (cg , dcg , ndcg) in simple web-searching tasks . results from this study have shown that cg and precision are better than ndcg at reflecting users ' satisfaction with the results of an ir-system . we have also concluded that users of web-search-engines , in the context of simple search-task , are more concerned with precision than completeness of the search . this stemmed from the stronger correlation between users ' satisfaction with the success of overall search and their satisfaction with the accuracy of the search-results than with their satisfaction with the completeness of the search . many scholars such as [1] , [2] , [3] , and [4] have recommended considering perceptions of the users as important as ir-effectiveness-measures , and both should be interpreted as measures-of-effectiveness . therefore , the issue in iir evaluation should not be focusing on maximizing the retrieval-performance , by refining ir techniques alone , but also understanding users ' satisfaction , behaviors and information needs . this raises the need for more investigation on measures that translate users ' performance and satisfaction as the criterion of a system . future plans are to incorporate variables domain-knowledge , motivation , task-complexity and search behaviours on user-performance and users evaluation of ir-system performance when evaluating interactive-ir systems ; this is in an attempt to explore the suitability of different measures in iir evaluation . thus , the proposed approach adopts a systematic and multidimensional approach to evaluation including not only classical traditional evaluation-measures , such as precision-and-recall , but also interactive non-traditional measures , such as users ' characteristics and their satisfaction .