extending language-modeling techniques to models of search and browsing activity in a-digital library users searching for information in a-digital library or on the www can be modeled as individuals moving through a semantic-space by issuing queries and clicking on hyperlinks . as they go , they emit a stream of interaction data . most of it is linguistic-data . lots of it is captured in logs . some of it is used to guess what the user is searching for . but to most information-retrieval-systems , each user-interaction is a stateless point in this space . there is a timeline connecting each of these points , but systems seldom make use of this as sequence-data , in part because there is no clear way to systematically characterize the meaningful relations within a sequence of user-activity . it is a problem of pragmatics as much as it is of semantics -- the fact that a user clicked on a particular link , or added a particular term to their query , has meaning primarily in relation to the preceding actions . a remaining challenge in ir is to extract features of the user-interaction data that will give meaning to those relations . meanwhile , from the user 's perspective each of these points in time and semantic-space are just part of a path of exploration . to the user , the exact terms in a query , or the specific words surrounding a hypertext link , may be less important than the trajectory those terms establish in relation to the user 's path . identifying the meaningful relations between queries and page views within a sequence of activity increases our understanding of users and their information-needs . formally , we can model query and browsing-behaviors as surface forms of a hidden process . what is missing is a layer of abstraction for mapping sequences of interaction in a way that is both descriptive of users ' needs and useful to automation . the work i describe is an effort to identify features of data in logs of query and browsing activity that are highly predictive of certain types of behavior . sequences of interaction data from individual users are modeled as sequences of expression . statistical-modeling techniques that are effective for modeling sequences in natural-language-processing and bioinformatics are examined for their ability to model sequences of interaction between an information searcher and an information-retrieval-system . queries and click-throughs in this stream of interaction can be tagged with features such as semantic coordinates , timing , frequency of use , type of action , etc. . by analyzing large-collections of interaction-sequences it is possible to identify frequent-patterns of user-behavior . from these patterns we can make predictions about future interactions . for example , certain patterns of link following in a-digital library are highly predictive of users ' next steps while other patterns are not . general models-of-user interaction are useful for design-and-evaluation of search-interfaces . individual models-of-user interaction are useful for personalized-search and customized content . yet very little research has been done to investigate which features are optimal for modeling user queries and browsing as interaction-sequences . an important first step is to identify informative features and the relationships between features . i propose to construct models-of-user behavior based on user-data in logs of query and browsing activity and to identify features that are highly predictive of certain types of user-behaviors . i examine activity within search-sessions on a-digital library as a microcosm of larger systems . i expect to find features that are useful in predictive-models of user-behavior both at an individual and aggregate level . where possible , i hope to identify meaningful relationships between those features . the work has implications beyond the scope of digital-libraries , to larger systems and broader search domains .