exploring and measuring dependency-trees for informationretrieval natural-language-processing-techniques are believed to hold a tremendous potential to supplement the purely quantitative-methods of text-information-retrieval . this has led to the emergence of a large number of nlp-based ir research projects over the last few years , even though the empirical evidence to support this has often been inadequate . most contributions of nlp to ir mainly concentrate on document-representation and compound term matching strategies . researchers have noted that the simple term-based representation of document-content such as vector-representation is usually inadequate for accurate discrimination . the `` bag-of-words '' representation does not invoke linguistic considerations and allow modelling of relationships between subsets of words . however , even though a variety of content indicator such as syntactic-phrase have been tried and investigated for representing documents rather than single terms in ir systems , the matching strategy over those representation still can not go beyond traditional statistical techniques that measure term-co-occurrence characteristics and proximity in analyzing text-structure . in this paper , we propose a novel ir strategy (sir) with nlp-techniques involved at the syntactic-level . within sir , documents and query-representation are built on the basis of a syntactic data-structure of the natural-language-text - the dependency-tree , in which syntactic relationships between words are identified and structured in the form of a tree . in order to capture the syntactic-relations between words in their hierarchical structural-representation , the matching strategy in sir upgrades from the traditional statistical techniques by introducing a similarity-measure method executing on the graph-representation level as the key determiner . a basic ir experiment is designed and implemented on the trec-data to evaluate if this novel ir model is feasible . experimental-results indicate that this approach has the potential to outperform the standard bag-of-words ir model , especially in response to syntactical structured-queries .