affective-feedback : an investigation into the role of emotions in the information-seeking process user-feedback is considered to be a critical element in the information-seeking process . an important aspect of the feedback cycle is relevance-assessment that has progressively become a popular practice in web-searching activities and interactive-information-retrieval (ir) . the value of relevance-assessment lies in the disambiguation of the user 's information-need , which is achieved by applying various feedback techniques . such techniques vary from explicit to implicit and help determine the relevance of the retrieved documents . the former type of feedback is usually obtained through the explicit and intended indication of documents as relevant (positive-feedback) or irrelevant (negative-feedback) . explicit-feedback is a robust method for improving a system 's overall retrieval-performance and producing better query-reformulations [1] , at the expense of users ' cognitive resources . on the other hand , implicit-feedback techniques tend to collect information on search-behavior in a more intelligent and unobtrusive manner . by doing so , they disengage the users from the cognitive burden of document rating and relevance-judgments . information-seeking activities such as reading-time , saving , printing , selecting and referencing have been all treated as indicators of relevance , despite the lack of sufficient evidence to support their effectiveness [2] . besides their apparent differences , both categories of feedback techniques determine document-relevance with respect to the cognitive and situational levels of the interactive-dialogue that occurs between the user and the retrieval-system [5] . however , this approach does not account for the dynamic interplay and adaptation that takes place between the different dialogue levels , but most importantly it does not consider the affective dimension of interaction . users interact with intentions , motivations and feelings apart from real-life problems and information objects , which are all critical-aspects of cognition and decision-making [3] [4] . by evaluating users ' affective-response towards an information-object (e.g. a document) , prior and post to their exposure to it , a more accurate understanding of the object 's properties and degree of relevance to the current information-need may be facilitated . furthermore , systems that can detect and respond accordingly to user emotions could potentially improve the naturalness of human-computer-interaction and progressively optimize their retrieval-strategy . the current study investigates the role of emotions in the information-seeking process , as the latter are communicated through multi-modal-interaction , and reconsiders relevance-feedback with respect to what occurs on the affective level of interaction as well .