from concepts to implementation and visualization : tools from a team-based approach to ir researchers have been studying and developing teaching-materials for information-retrieval (ir) , such as [3] . toolkits also have been built that provide hands-on-experience to students . for example , ir-toolbox [4] is an effort to close the gap between the students ' understanding of ir concepts and real-life indexing and search systems . such tools might be good for helping students in non-technical areas such as in the library-and-information-science field to develop their conceptual-model of search-engines . however , they do not cover emerging topics and skills , such as content-based-image-retrieval (cbir) and fusion search . although there is open-source-software (such as those in http://www.searchtools.com/tools/tools-opensource.html) that can be used to teach basic and advanced ir topics , they require a student to have high-level technical knowledge and to spend a long time to gain a practical understanding of these topics . we present a new and rapid approach to teach basic and advanced ir topics , such as text-retrieval , web-based ir , cbir , and fusion search , to computer-science (cs) graduate-students . we designed projects that would help students grasp the abovementioned ir topics . students , working in teams , were given a practical application to start with -- the superimposed application for image description and retrieval [5] . saidr (earlier , sierra) allows users to associate parts of images with multimedia-information such as text-annotations . also , users may retrieve information in one of two 2 ways : (1) perform text-based retrieval on annotations ; (2) perform cbir on images and parts of images that look like a query image (or part of a query image) . each team was asked to build an enhancement for this application , involving text-retrieval and/or cbir , in three weeks time . the sub-projects are described in table 1 . the outcome of this activity was that students learned about ir concepts while being able to relate their applicability to a real-world-problem (figure 1) . details of these projects may be found at http://collab.dlib.vt.edu/runwiki/wiki.pl?tabletpcimageretrievalsuperimposedinformation . we will demonstrate the tools developed along with the ir concepts they illustrate (table 1) . we believe these tools may aid others to learn about basic and advanced topics in ir .