exploiting xml structure to improve information-retrieval in peer-to-peer systems with the advent of xml as a standard for representation and exchange of structured-documents , a growing amount of xml-documents are being stored in peer-to-peer (p2p) networks . cur rent research on p2p-search engines proposes the use of informa tion retrieval (ir) techniques to perform content-based-search , but does not take into account structural-features of documents . p2p-systems typically have no central index , thus avoiding single-points-of-failures , but distribute all information among participating peers . accordingly , a querying peer has only limited access to the index information and should select carefully which peers can help answering a given query by contributing resources such as local index information or cpu-time for ranking computations . bandwidth consumption is a major issue . to guarantee scalability , p2p-systems have to reduce the number of peers involved in the retrieval-process . as a result , the retrieval quality in terms of recall and precision may suffer substantially . in the proposed thesis , document-structure is considered as an extra source of information to improve the retrieval quality of xml-documents in a p2p environment . the thesis centres on the following questions : how can structural-information help to improve the retrieval of xml-documents in terms of result quality such as precision , recall , and specificity ? can xml structure support the routing of queries in distributed-environments , especially the selection of promising peers ? how can xml-ir techniques be used in a p2p-network while minimizing bandwidth consumption and considering performance aspects ? to answer these questions and to analyze possible achievements , a search-engine is proposed that exploits structural hints expressed explicitly by the user or implicitly by the self-describing structure of xml-documents . additionally , more focused and specific results are obtained by providing ranked-retrieval units that can be either xml-documents as a whole or the most relevant passages of theses documents . xml-information-retrieval techniques are applied in two ways : to select those peers participating in the retrieval-process , and to compute the relevance of documents . the indexing-approach includes both content and structural-information of documents . to support efficient execution of multi term queries , index keys consist of rare combinations of (content , structure) - tuples . performance is increased by using only fixedsized posting lists : frequent index keys are combined with each other iteratively until the new combination is rare , with a posting list size under a pre-set threshold . all posting lists are sorted by taking into account classical ir-measures such as term-frequency and inverted term-frequency as well as weights for potential retrieval units of a document , with a slight bias towards documents on peers with good collections regarding the current index key and with good peer characteristics such as online times , available-bandwidth , and latency . when extracting the posting list for a specific query , a re-ordering on the posting list is performed that takes into account the structural-similarity between key and query . according to this preranking , peers are selected that are expected to hold information about potentially relevant documents and retrieval units the final ranking is computed in parallel on those selected peers . the computation is based on an extension of the vector-space-model and distinguishes between weights for different structures of the same content . this allows weighting xml elements with respect to their discriminative power , e.g. a title will be weighted much higher than a footnote . additionally , relevance is computed as a mixture of content relevance and structural-similarity between a given query and a potential retrieval-unit . currently , a first prototype for p2p information-retrieval of xml-documents called spirix is being implemented . experiments to evaluate the proposed techniques and use of structural hints will be performed on a distributed version of the inex wikipedia collection .