exploiting memory cues in personal lifelog retrieval in recent years personal-lifelogs (pls) have become an emerging field of research . pls are collections of digital-data taken from an individual 's life-experiences , gathered from both digital and physical worlds . pls collections can potentially be collected over periods of years and thus can be very-large . in our research group , four researchers have been engaged in collection of individual one-year-long pls data-sets . these collections include logs of computer and mobile-phone activities , digital-photos , in particular passively captured microsoft-sensecam images , geo-location (via gps) , surrounding people or objects (via bluetooth) , and various biometric data . the complex-data-types and heterogeneous structure of this corpus brings great challenges to traditional content-based-information-retrieval (ir) . yet , the rich connections integral to personal-experience offer exciting potential opportunities to leverage features from human-memory and associated models to support retrieval . my phd project aims to develop an-interface to assist ir from pls . in doing this i plan to exploit features in human-memory , in particular the mechanisms in associative-memory models . previous studies in personal-information re-finding have explored the use of generally well-remembered attributes or metadata of the search targets , such as date , item type/format , authors of documents [1] . there have also been systems which utilize associated computer items or real life events (e.g. [2 , 3]) to assist re-finding tasks . however , few of them looked into exactly what types of associated items/events people tend to recall . i plan to explore associations among pl items , as well as their attributes regarding their role in an individual 's memory , since i believe that some associations and types of metadata which are available and feasible for use , may have been omitted in existing systems ; due to the methods used in previous research where the users ' behaviour may have been guided by the searching or management-tools available to them . as indicated by some information-seeking studies (e.g. [4]) , different search-context , search motivation , or personal differences such as habits , may lead to varied recall of contents and information-seeking behaviours . for this reason , i will also investigate : the influences on personal-information re-finding behaviour of context , lifestyle , and differences in prior personal-experiences of ir tools . results from these studies will be used to explore personalisation in search , e.g. to dynamically increase the importance of geo-location in scoring of search-results for subjects who travel frequently . as indicated by [4] , people tend to make small steps to approach the targets they are looking for , rather than trying to do this in a single search with a `` perfect query '' comprising all of the relevant details , partially because of their trouble in recalling them . to relieve users from the heavy cognitive burden of recalling the exact target , and on the other hand to reduce the rate of inaccurate queries caused by false recall , my proposed interface will be based on browsing and recognizing , instead of traditional recalling and searching . for example , a user will be able to browse and narrow results by recognizing landmarks and estimating the target activities ' time range from the user 's digital or physical life [5] . an important issue in my work will be to consider the challenges of evaluating my work with only a very limited number of pl datasets . to partially address this issue , i am currently in engaged in a number of smaller scale diary-studies of searching experiences for larger numbers of subjects .