personalizing information-retrieval using task features , topic-knowledge , and task product personalization of information-retrieval tailors search towards individual users to meet their particular information-needs . personalization systems obtain additional-information about users and their contexts beyond the queries they submit to the systems , and use this information to bring the desired documents to top ranks . the additional-information can come from various sources : user-preferences , user-behaviors , contexts , etc. [1] to avoid users taking extra effort in providing explicit preferences , most personalization approaches have adopted an implicit strategy to obtain users ' interests from their behaviors and/or contexts , such as query-history , browsing-history , and so on . task , topic-knowledge , and desktop information have been used as evidence for personalization . tailoring display-time threshold based on task information was found to improve implicit-relevance-feedback performance [5] . user 's familiarity with search topics was found to be positively correlated with reading-time but negatively correlated with search efficacy [3] . this indicated the possibility of inferring topic-familiarity from searching-behavior . desktop information was also found to be a good source for personalization [2 , 4] , and personalization using only those files relevant to user queries are more effective than using the entire desktop data [2] . since search often happens in a work-task environment , we examine how user-generated products and retained documents can help improve search-performance . to these ends , this study looks at how the following factors can help personalize search : features of user 's work-tasks (including task-stage and task-type) , user 's familiarity with work-task topic , user 's saving and using behaviors , and task product (s) that the user-generated for the work-task . work-tasks are designed to include multiple sub-tasks , each being a stage . two types of sub-task interdependence are considered : parallel , where the sub-tasks do not depend upon each other , or dependent , where one sub-task depends upon the accomplishment of other sub-task (s) . the study examines the interaction-effects of these factors , dwell-time , and document usefulness . it also looks at a personalization technique that extracts terms for query-expansion from work-task product (s) and user-behaviors . there are three research-questions : rq1 : does the stage of the user 's task-help predict document usefulness from dwell-time in the parallel and the dependent tasks , respectively ? rq2 . does the user 's familiarity with work-task topic help predict document usefulness from dwell-time in the parallel and the dependent tasks , respectively ? rq3 . do user 's task product (s) and saving and using behaviors help with query-disambiguation ? twenty-four participants are recruited , each coming three times (as three experiment sessions) to a usability-laboratory working on three sub-tasks in a general task , either a parallel or a dependent . take the parallel task as an example . it asks the participants to write a three-section article on hybrid cars , and each section is finished in one session . the three sections focus on honda civic sedan hybrid , nissan altima sedan hybrid , and toyota camry sedan hybrid , respectively . when searching for information , half of the participants use a query-expansion condition , where the system recommends search-terms based on their work in previous sessions , and the other half use a non-query expansion system condition . data are collected by three major means : logging software that records user-system interactions , an eye-tracker that records eye-movement , and questionnaires that elicit users ' background-information and their perceptions on a number of aspects . the results will provide new evidence on personalizing search by taking account of the examined contextual-factors .