sifting micro-blogging stream for events of user-interest micro-blogging is a new form of social-communication that encourages users to share information about anything they are seeing or doing , the motivation facilitated by the ability to post brief text-messages through a variety of devices . twitter , the most popular micro-blogging tool , is exhibiting rapid growth [3] : up to 11 \ % of online americans are using twitter by december 2008 , compared to 6 \ % in may 2008 . due to its nature , micro-blogosphere has unique features : (i) it is a source of extremely up-to-date information about what is happening in the world ; (ii) it captures the wisdom of millions of people and covers a broad range of domains . these features make micro-blogosphere more than a popular medium of social-communication : we believe that it has additionally become a valuable source of extremely up-to-date news on virtually any subject of user-interest . making use of micro-blogosphere in this new role we meet the following challenges : (a) since any given subject is generally mentioned in the micro-blogging stream on the continuous basis , a method is needed for locating periods of news on this subject . (b) additionally , even for such periods , stream filtering is required for removing noise and for extracting messages that best describe the news . to address these challenges we make and exploit the following observations : (a) for an arbitrary subject , events that catch user-interest gain distinguishably more attention than the average mentioning of the subject resulting in message activity bursts for it . (b) most of the messages in an activity burst describe common event in close variations - either rephrased or `` retweeted '' between the users . we demonstrate tweetsieve - a system that allows obtaining news on any given subject by sifting the twitter stream . our work is related to frequecy-based analysis applied to blogs [1] , but higher latency and lower coverage in blogs makes the analysis less effective than in case of micro-blogs . in tweetsieve demo , the user is able to express the subject of her interest by an arbitrary search string . the system shows the period of events occuring for the subject and outputs tweets that best describe each of the events . figure 1 shows a screenshot of the system for `` semantic-search '' as a sample subject . the underlying process consists of two steps : identifying activity bursts . counting the messages matching the search string in the stream over time , the frequency curve is constructed . activity bursts in the curve are identified by taking the periods of frequency exceeding the standard-deviation from the average . selecting messages that best describe news events . for the set of all messages matching the search string in an activity burst , we apply the message-granular variation of our keyphrase-extraction algorithm [2] that is specifically suited to efficiently filtering noisy-data . the algorithm clusters messages with respect to their similarity to each other and chooses central messages from the most dense clusters . as the similarity-measure we use jaccard-coefficient for the `` bag-of-words '' representation of messages . the demonstration illustrates the potential of our approach in bringing news acquisition to a new level of promptness and coverage range .