medical-search and classification tools for recommendation their patients ' records from paper to computer , enormous amounts of electronic-medical-records (emr) have become available for medical-research . some of the emr data are well-structured , for which traditional database-management-systems can provide effective retrieval and management functions . however , most of the emr data (such as progress notes and consultation letters) are in free-text formats . how to effectively and efficiently retrieve and discover useful information from the vast amount of such semi-structured-data is a challenge faced by medical professionals . without proper tools , the rich information and knowledge buried in the medical health-records are unavailable for clinical-research and decision-making . the objective of our research is to develop text-analytics tools that are capable of parsing clinical medical-data so that predefined search subjects that correspond to a list of medical diagnoses can be extracted . in addition to this particular core functionality , it is also desired that several important assets should be present within the text-analytics tools in order to improve its overall ability to be used as recommendation tools . in this research , we work with research scientists at the institute for clinical evaluative sciences (ices) in toronto and examine a number of techniques for structuring and processing free-text documents in order to effectively and efficiently search and analyze vast amount of medical-records . we implement several powerful medical-text analytics tools for clinical-data searching and classification . for data-classification , our tools sort through a great amount of patientrecords to identify the likelihood of a patient having myocardial-infarction (mi) or hypertension (htn) , and classify the patients accordingly . our tools can also identify the likelihood of a patient being a smoker , previous smoker or non-smoker based on the text-data of medical-records .