estimating the query-difficulty for information-retrieval many information-retrieval (ir) systems suffer from a radical variance in performance when responding to users ' queries . even for systems that succeed very well on average , the quality of results returned for some of the queries is poor . thus , it is desirable that ir systems will be able to identify `` difficult '' queries in order to handle them properly . understanding why some queries are inherently more difficult than others is essential for ir , and a good answer to this important question will help-search engines to reduce the variance in performance , hence better servicing their customer-needs . the high-variability in query-performance has driven a new research direction in the ir field on estimating the expected quality of the search-results , i.e. the query-difficulty , when no relevance-feedback is given . estimating the query-difficulty is a significant challenge due to the numerous factors that impact retrieval-performance . many prediction methods have been proposed recently . however , as many researchers observed , the prediction-quality of state-of-the-art predictors is still too low to be widely used by ir applications . the low prediction-quality is due to the complexity of the task , which involves factors such as query-ambiguity , missing content , and vocabulary mismatch . the goal of this tutorial is to expose participants to the current-research on query-performance-prediction (also known as query-difficulty-estimation) . participants will become familiar with states-of-the-art performance-prediction methods , and with common evaluation-methodologies for prediction-quality . we will discuss the reasons that cause search-engines to fail for some of the queries , and provide an overview of several approaches for estimating query-difficulty . we then describe common methodologies for evaluating the prediction-quality of those estimators , and some experiments conducted recently with their prediction-quality , as measured over several trec benchmarks . we will cover a few potential applications that can utilize query-difficulty estimators by handling each query individually and selectively based on its estimated difficulty . finally we will summarize with a discussion on open issues and challenges in the field .