robust audio-identification for mp3 popular-music audio-identification via fingerprint has been an active research field with wide applications for years . many technical papers were published and commercial software-systems were also employed . however , most of these previously reported methods work on the raw audio format in spite of the fact that nowadays compressed format audio , especially mp3 music , has grown into the dominant way to store on personal-computers and transmit on the internet . it would be interesting if a compressed unknown audio fragment is able to be directly recognized from the database without the fussy and time-consuming decompression-identification-recompression procedure . so far , very few algorithms run directly in the compressed-domain for music-information-retrieval , and most of them take advantage of mdct coefficients or derived energy type of features . as a first attempt , we propose in this paper utilizing compressed-domain spectral entropy as the audio feature to implement a novel audio-fingerprinting algorithm . the compressed songs stored in a music-database and the possibly distorted compressed query excerpts are first partially decompressed to obtain the mdct coefficients as the intermediate-result . then by grouping granules into longer blocks , remapping the mdct coefficients into 192 new frequency lines to unify the frequency-distribution of long and short windows , and defining 9 new subbands which cover the main frequency bandwidth of popular songs in accordance with the scale-factor bands of short windows , we calculate the spectral entropy of all consecutive blocks and come to the final fingerprint sequence by means of magnitude relationship-modeling . experiments show that such fingerprints exhibit strong robustness against various audio signal distortions like recompression , noise interference , echo addition , equalization , band-pass filtering , pitch-shifting , and slight time-scale modification etc. . for 5s-long query examples which might be severely degraded , an average top-five retrieval-precision rate of more than 90 \ % can be obtained in our test-data-set composed of 1822 popular songs .