finding people and their utterances in social-media since its introduction , social-media , `` a group of internet-based applications that (...) allow the creation and exchange of user-generated-content '' [1] , has attracted more and more users . over the years , many platforms have arisen that allow users to publish information , communicate with others , connect to like-minded , and share anything a users wants to share . text-centric examples are mailing-lists , forums , blogs , community-question-answering , collaborative knowledge sources , social-networks , and microblogs , with new platforms starting all the time . given the volume of information available in social-media , ways of accessing this information intelligently are needed ; this is the scope of my research . why should we care about information in social-media ? here are three examples that motivate my interest . (a) viewpoint research ; someone wants to take note of the viewpoints on a particular issue . (b) answers to problems ; many problems have been encountered before , and people have shared solutions . (c) product-development ; gaining insight into how people use a product and what features they wish for , eases the development of new products . looking at these examples of information-need in social-media , we observe that they revolve not just around relevance in the traditional sense (i.e. , objects relevant to a given topic) , but also around criteria like credibility , authority , viewpoints , expertise , and experiences . however , these additional aspects are typically conditioned on the topical-relevance of information objects . in social-media , `` information objects '' come in several types but many are utterances created by people (blog posts , emails , questions , answers , tweets) . people and their utterances offer two natural entry points to information contained in social-media : utterances that are relevant and people that are of interest . i focus on three tasks in which the interaction between the two is key .