entity information-management in complex-networks entity information-management (eim) deals with organizing , processing and delivering information about entities . its emergence is a result of satisfying more sophisticated information-needs that go beyond document-search . in the recent years , entity-retrieval has attracted much attention in the ir community . inex has started the xml entity-ranking track since 2007 and trec has launched the entity track since 2009 to investigate the problem of related entity finding . some eim problems go beyond retrieval and ranking such as : 1) entity-profiling , which is about characterizing a specific entity , and 2) entity distillation , which is about discovering the trend about an entity . these problems have received less attention while they have many important applications . on the other hand , the entities in the real-world or in the web environment are usually not isolated . they are connected or related with each other in one way or another . for example , the coauthorship makes the authors with similar research interests be connected . the emergence of social-media such as facebook , twitter and youtube has further interweaved the related entities in a much larger scale . millions of users in these sites can become friends , fans or followers of others , or taggers or commenters of different types of entities (e.g. , bookmarks , photos and videos) . these networks are complex in the sense that they are heterogeneous with multiple-types of entities and of interactions , they are large-scale , they are multi-lingual , and they are dynamic . these features of the complex-networks go beyond traditional social-network-analysis and require further research . in this proposed research , i investigate entity information-management in the environment of complex-networks . the main research question is : how can the eim tasks be facilitated by modeling the content-and-structure of complex-networks ? the research is in the intersection of content-based-information-retrieval and complex-network-analysis , which deals with both unstructured-text data and structured networks . the specific targeting eim tasks are entity-retrieval , entity-profiling and entity distillation . in addition to the main research question , the following questions are considered : how can we accomplish a eim task involving diverse entity and interaction types ? how to model the evolution of entity profiles as well as the underlying complex-networks ? how can the existing cross-language-ir work be leveraged to build entity profiles with multi-lingual evidence ? i propose to use probabilistic-models and discriminative-models in particular to address the above research-questions . in my research , i have developed discriminative-models for expert-search to integrate arbitrary document features [3] and to learn flexible combination strategies to rank experts in heterogeneous-information-sources [1] . discriminative graphical-models are proposed to jointly discover homepages by inference on the homepage dependence network [2] . the dependence of table elements is exploited to collectively perform the entity-retrieval task [4] . these works have shown the power of discriminative-models for entity-search and the benefits of utilizing the dependencies among related entities . what i would like to do next is to develop a unified probabilistic-framework to investigate the research-questions raised in this proposal .