investigation on smoothing and aggregation methods in blog-retrieval recently , user-generated-data is growing rapidly and becoming one of the most important source of information in the-web . blogosphere (the collection of blogs on the web) is one of the main source of information in this category . in my work for my phd , i mainly focussed on the blog-distillation task which is : given a user-query find the blogs that are most related to the query topic [3] . there are some properties of blogs that make blog-analysis different from usual text-analysis . one of these properties is related to the time-stamp assigned to each post ; it is possible that the topics of a blog change over the time and this can affect blog relevance to the query . also each post in a blog can have viewer generated comments that can change the relevance of the blog to the query if these are considered as part of the content of the blog . another property is related to the meaning of the links between blogs which are different than links between websites . finally , blog-distillation is different from traditional ad-hoc search since the retrieval-unit is a blog (a collection of posts) , instead of a single-document . with this view , blog-distillation is similar to the task of resource-selection in federated-search [1] . researchers have applied different methods from similar problems to blog-distillation like ad-hoc search-methods , expert-search algorithms or methods from resource-selection in distributed-information-retrieval . based on our preliminary experiments , i decided to divide the blog-distillation problem into two sub-problems . first of all , i want to use mentioned properties of blogs to retrieve the most relevant posts for a given query . this part is very similar to the ad-hoc-retrieval . after that , i want to aggregate relevance of posts in each blog and calculate relevance of the blog . this part requires the development of a cross-modal aggregation model that combines the different blog relevance clues found in the blogosphere . we use structure_based smoothing-methods for improving posts retrieval . the idea behind these smoothing-methods is to change the score of a document based on the score of its similar or related documents . we model the blogosphere as a single graph that represents relations between posts and terms [2] . the idea is that in accordance with the clustering hypothesis , related documents should have similar scores for the same query . to model the relatedness between posts , we define a new measure which takes into account both content-similarity and temporal-distance . in more recent work , in the aggregation part of the problem , we model each post as evidence about relevance of a blog to the query , and use aggregation methods like ordered weighted averaging operators to combine the evidence . the ordered weighted averaging operator , commonly called owa-operator , was introduced by yager [4] . owa provides a parametrized class of mean type aggregation-operators , that can generate or operator (max) , and operator (min) and any other aggregation operator between them . for the next steps , i 'm thinking about capturing the temporal-properties of the blogs . bloggers can change their interests over the time or write about different topics periodically . capturing these changes and using them in the retrieval is one the-future woks that i 'm interested in . also , studying the relations between blogs and news and their effect on each other is an interesting problem .