from federated to aggregated-search federated-search refers to the brokered retrieval of content from a set of auxiliary retrieval-systems instead of from a single , centralized retrieval-system . federated-search tasks occur in , for example , digital-libraries (where documents from several retrieval-systems must be seamlessly merged) or peer-to-peer-information-retrieval (where documents distributed across a network of local indexes must be retrieved) . in the context of web-search , aggregated-search refers to the integration of non-web content (e.g. images , videos , news-articles , maps , tweets) into a web-search result page . this is in contrast with classic web-search where users are presented with a ranked list consisting exclusively of general web-documents . as in other federated-search situations , the non-web content is often retrieved from auxiliary retrieval-systems (e.g. image or video-databases , news indexes) . although aggregated-search can be seen as an instance of federated-search , several aspects make aggregated-search a unique and compelling research-topic . these include large sources of evidence (e.g. click-logs) for deciding what non-web items to return , constrained interfaces (e.g. mobile screens) , and a very heterogeneous set of available auxiliary resources (e.g. images , videos , maps , news-articles) . each of these aspects introduces problems and opportunities not addressed in the federated-search literature . aggregated-search is an important future-research direction for information-retrieval . all major search-engines now provide aggregated-search results . as the number of available auxiliary resources grows , deciding how to effectively surface content from each will become increasingly important . the goal of this tutorial is to provide an overview of federated-search and aggregated-search techniques for an intermediate information-retrieval researcher . at the same time , the content will be valuable for practitioners in industry . we will take the audience through the most influential work in these areas and describe how they relate to real-world aggregated-search systems . we will also list some of the new challenges confronted in aggregated-search and discuss directions for future work .