evaluating the synergic-effect of collaboration in information-seeking it is typically expected that when people work together , they can often accomplish goals that are difficult or even impossible for individuals . we consider this notion of the group achieving more than the sum of all individuals ' achievements to be the synergic-effect in collaboration . similar expectation exists for people working in collaboration for information-seeking-tasks . we , however , lack a methodology and appropriate evaluation-metrics for studying and measuring the synergic-effect . in this paper we demonstrate how to evaluate this effect and discuss what it means to various collaborative-information-seeking (cis) situations . we present a user-study with four different conditions : single user , pair of users at the same computer , pair of users at different computers and co-located , and pair of users remotely located . each of these individuals or pairs was given the same task of information-seeking and usage for the same amount of time . we then combined the outputs of single independent users to form artificial pairs , and compared against the real pairs . not surprisingly , participants using different computers (co-located or remotely located) were able to cover more information-sources than those using a single computer (single user or a pair) . but more interestingly , we found that real pairs with their own computers (co-located or remotely located) were able to cover more unique and useful information than that of the artificially created pairs . this indicates that those working in collaboration achieved something greater and better than what could be achieved by adding independent users , thus , demonstrating the synergic-effect . remotely located real teams were also able to formulate a wider range of queries than those pairs that were co-located or artificially created . this shows that the collaborators working remotely were able to achieve synergy while still being able to think and work independently . through the experiments and measurements presented here , we have also contributed a unique methodology and an evaluation-metric for cis .