descriptive modelling of text-classification and its integration with other ir tasks nowadays , information-retrieval (ir) systems have to deal with multiple sources of data available in different formats . datasets can consist of complex and heterogeneous-objects with relationships between them . in addition , information-needs can vary wildly and they can include different tasks . as a result , the importance of flexibility in ir systems is rapidly growing . this fact is specially important in environments where the information required at different moments is very different and its utility may be contingent on timely implementation . in these cases , how quickly a new problem is solved is as important as how well you solve it . current systems are usually developed for specific cases . it implies that too much engineering effort is needed to adapt them when new knowledge appears or there are changes in the requirements . furthermore , heterogeneous and linked-data present greater challenges , as well as the simultaneous application of different tasks . this research proposes the usage of descriptive approaches for three different purposes : the modelling of the specific task of text-classification (tc) , focusing on knowledge and complex-data exploitation ; the flexible application of models to different tasks ; and the simultaneously application of different ir-tasks . this investigation will contribute to the long-term goal of achieving a descriptive and composable ir technology that provides a modular framework that knowledge engineers can compose into a task-specific solution . the ultimate goal is to develop a flexible framework that offers classifiers , retrieval-models , information extractors , and other functions . in addition , those functional blocks could be customised to satisfy user-needs . descriptive approaches allow a high-level definition of algorithms which are , in some cases , as compact as mathematical formulations . one of the expected benefits is to make the implementation clearer and the knowledge-transfer easier . they allow models from different tasks to be defined as modules that can be `` concatenated '' , processing the information as a pipeline where some of the outputs of one module are the input of the following one . this combination involves minimum engineering effort due to the paradigm 's `` plug & play '' capabilities offered by its functional syntax . this solution provides the flexibility needed to customise and quickly combine different ir-tasks and/or models . classification is a desired candidate for being part of a flexible ir-framework because it can be required in several situations for different purposes . in particular , descriptive approaches will improve its modelling with complex and heterogeneous-objects . furthermore , we aim to show how this approach allows to apply tc models for ad-hoc-retrieval (and vice versa) and their simultaneous application for complex-information-needs . the main hypothesis of this research is that a seamless approach for modelling tc and its integration with other ir-tasks will provide a general-framework for rapid-prototyping and modelling of solutions for specific users . in addition , it will allow new complex-models that take into account relationships and inference from large ontologies . the importance of flexibility for information-systems and the exploitation of complex-information and knowledge from heterogeneous-sources are the main points for discussion . the main challenges are expressiveness and scalability . abstraction improves flexibility and maintainability . however , it limits the modelling power . a balance between abstraction and expressiveness has to be reached . on the other hand , scalability has been traditionally a challenge for descriptive modelling . our goal is to prove the feasibility of our approach for real-scale environments .