web-retrieval : the role of users web-retrieval methods have evolved through three major steps in the last decade or so . they started from standard document-centric ir in the early days of the-web , then made a major step forward by leveraging the structure of the web , using link-analysis techniques in both crawling and ranking challenges . a more recent , no less important but maybe more discrete step forward , has been to enter the user in this equation in two ways : (1) implicitly , through the analysis of usage-data captured by query-logs , and session and click information in general ; the goal here being to improve ranking as well as to measure user 's happiness and engagement ; (2) explicitly , by offering novel interactive features ; the goal here being to better answer users ' needs . this half day tutorial covers the user-related challenges associated with the implicit and explicit role of users in web-retrieval . more specifically , we review and discuss challenges associated with : (1) usage-data analysis and metrics - it is critical to monitor how users take advantage and interact with web-retrieval systems , as this implicit relevant-feedback aggregated at a large-scale , can provide insights on users ' underlying intent as well as approximate quite accurately the level of success of a given feature . here we have to consider not only clicks statistics , the sequences of queries , the time spent in a page , the number of actions per session , etc. . this is the focus of the first part of the tutorial . (2) user-interaction - given the intrinsic problems posed by the-web , the key challenge for the user is to conceive a good query to be submitted to the search-system , one that leads to a manageable and relevant answer . the retrieval-system must assist users during two key stages of interaction : efore the query is fully expressed and after the results are returned . after quite some stagnation on the front-end of web-retrieval , we have seen numerous novel interactive features appear in the last 3 to 4 years , as the leading commercial search engines seem to compete for users ' attention . the second part of the tutorial will be dedicated to explicit user interaction . we will introduce novel material (as compared to previous versions of this tutorial that were given at sigir ' 2010 , wsdm ' 2011 and ecir ' 2011) in order to reflect recent web-search features such as google instant or yahoo! direct-search . the goal of this tutorial is to teach the key principles and technologies behind the activities and challenges briefly outlined above , bring new understanding and insights to the attendees , and hopefully foster future-research . a previous version of this tutorial was offered at the acm sigir ' 2010 , wsdm ' 2011 and ecir ' 2011 .