recommending ephemeral items at web-scale we describe an innovative and scalable recommendation-system successfully deployed at ebay . to build recommenders for long-tail marketplaces requires projection of volatile items into a persistent space of latent products . we first present a generative clustering-model for collections of unstructured , heterogeneous , and ephemeral item data , under the assumption that items are generated from latent products . an item is represented as a vector of independently and distinctly distributed variables , while a latent product is characterized as a vector of probability-distributions , respectively . the probability distributions are chosen as natural stochastic-models for different types of data . the learning-objective is to maximize the total intra-cluster coherence measured by the sum of log likelihoods of items under such a generative-process . in the space of latent products , robust recommendations can then be derived using naive-bayes for ranking , from historical transactional data . item-based recommendations are achieved by inferring latent products from unseen items . in particular , we develop a probabilistic scoring-function of recommended items , which takes into account item-product membership , product purchase probability , and the important auction-end-time factor . with the holistic probabilistic-measure of a prospective item purchase , one can further maximize the expected revenue and the more subjective user satisfaction as well . we evaluated the latent product clustering and recommendation-ranking models using real-world e-commerce data from ebay , in both forms of offline simulation and online a/b-testing . in the recent production launch , our system yielded 3-5 folds improvement over the existing production-system in click-through , purchase-through and gross merchandising value ; thus now driving 100 \ % related recommendation traffic with billions of items at ebay . we believe that this work provides a practical yet principled framework for recommendation in the domains with affluent user self-input data .