information-organization-and-retrieval with collaboratively-generated-content proliferation of ubiquitous-access to the-internet enables millions of web users to collaborate online on a variety of activities . many of these activities result in the construction of large repositories of knowledge , either as their primary aim (e.g. , wikipedia) or as a by-product (e.g. , yahoo!-answers) . in this tutorial , we will discuss organizing and exploiting collaboratively-generated-content (cgc) for information-organization-and-retrieval . specifically , we intend to cover two complementary areas of the problem : (1) using such content as a powerful enabling resource for knowledge-enriched , intelligent representations and new information retrieval algorithms , and (2) development of supporting-technologies for extracting , filtering , and organizing collaboratively created content . the unprecedented amounts of information in cgc enable new , knowledge-rich approaches to information-access , which are significantly more powerful than the conventional word-based methods . considerable progress has been made in this direction over the last few years . examples include explicit-manipulation of human-defined concepts and their use to augment the bag-of-words (cf. explicit-semantic-analysis) , using large-scale taxonomies of topics from wikipedia or the open-directory-project to construct additional class-based features , or using wikipedia for better word-sense-disambiguation . however , the quality and comprehensiveness of collaboratively created content vary widely , and in order for this resource to be useful , a significant amount of preprocessing , filtering , and organization is necessary . consequently , new methods for analyzing cgc and corresponding user-interactions are required to effectively harness the resulting knowledge . thus , not only the content repositories can be used to improve ir methods , but the reverse pollination is also possible , as better information-extraction methods can be used for automatically collecting more knowledge , or verifying the contributed content . this natural connection between modeling the generation-process of cgc and effectively using the accumulated knowledge suggests covering both areas together in a single tutorial . the intended audience of the tutorial includes ir researchers and graduate-students , who would like to learn about the recent advances and research opportunities in working with collaboratively-generated-content . the emphasis of the tutorial is on comparing the existing approaches and presenting practical-techniques that ir practitioners can use in their research . we also cover open-research challenges , as well as survey available resources (software-tools and data) for getting started in this research field .