multidimensional-search result-diversification : diverse search-results for diverse-users hundreds of millions of people today rely on web-based search-engines to satisfy their information-needs . in order to meet the expectations of this vast and diverse user population , the search-engine should present a list of results such that the probability of satisfying the average user is maximized . this leads us to the problem of search-result-diversification . given a user submitted query , the search-engine should include results that are relevant to the user-query and at the same time , diverse enough to meet the expectations of diverse-user-populations . however , it is not clear in what respect the results should be diversified . much of the current work in diversity focuses on ambiguous and underspecified queries and tries to include results corresponding to diverse interpretations of the ambiguous-query . this is not always sufficient . my analysis of a commercial web-search-engine 's logs reveals that even for well-specified informational-queries , click entropy is very high indicating that different users prefer different types of documents . very recently , a diversification algorithm fine-tuned for such informational-queries has been proposed . further , high click entropies were also observed for a large fraction of transactional queries . one major goal of my phd thesis will then be to identify the various possible dimensions along which the search-results can be diversified . having such an information will enhance our understanding about the expectations of an average user from the search-engine . by utilizing aggregate statistics about queries , users and their interaction with the search-engine for different queries , more concrete evidences about diverse user preferences as well as relative-importance of different diversity dimensions can be derived . once we know different diversity dimensions , the next natural question is : given a query , how can we determine the diversification requirement best suited for the query ? for some queries sub-topic coverage may be more important while for others diversification with respect to document source or stylistics might be important . this problem is related to the problem of selective diversification where the goal is to identify queries for which diversification techniques should be used . however , in addition , we are also interested in identifying different diversity classes a given query belongs to . further , for some queries it may be required to diversify along multiple diversity dimensions . in such cases , it is also important to determine the relative-importance of different diversity dimensions for the given query . by utilizing past user-interaction data , query level features (like query-clarity , entropy , lexical-features etc.) and document level features (e.g. popularity , content-quality , previous click history etc.) , classifiers for diversification requirements can be developed . given a user-query , once we know the type of diversity requirements for the user , an appropriate diversification technique is required . i would like to study the problem of simultaneously diversifying search-results along multiple dimensions , as discussed above . one possible way here could be to build upon the nugget_based framework introduced by clarke et al. where we represent each document as a set of nuggets , each nugget corresponding to a diversity dimension .