improving query and result list adaptation in personalized-multilingual-information-retrieval a general characteristic of information-retrieval (ir) and multilingual ir (mir) [5] systems is that if the same query was submitted by different users , the system would yield the same results , regardless of the user . on the other hand , adaptive-hypermedia (ah) systems operate in a personalized manner where the services are adapted to the user [1] . personalized ir (pir) is motivated by the success in both areas , ir and ah [4] . ir systems have the advantage of scalability and ah systems have the advantage of satisfying individual user-needs . the majority of studies in pir literature have focused on monolingual ir , and relatively little work has been done concerning multilingual ir . this phd research-study aims to improve personalization in mir systems , by improving the relevance of multilingual search-results with respect to the user and not just the query . the study investigates how to model different aspects of a multilingual search user . information about users can be demographic information , such as language and country , or information about the user 's search-interests . this information can be gathered explicitly by asking the user to supply the required information or implicitly by inferring the information from the user 's search-history . the study will then investigate how to exploit the modeled user-information to personalize the user 's multilingual search by performing query and result list adaptation . the main research-questions that are addressed in this study are : how to improve the relevance of search-results with respect to individual users in pmir and how to construct profiles that represent aspects and interests of a multilingual search user . so far , the work carried out for this study included : (1) a proposed framework for the delivery and evaluation of pmir [3] ; and (2) exploratory experiments with search-history and collection (result) re-ranking on a dataset of multilingual search-logs [2] . the next stage of experimentation will involve the investigation and development of algorithms for : (1) constructing multilingual user-profiles ; (2) pre-translation and post-translation query-expansion based on terms from the user-profile ; and (3) result list-re-ranking based on the user 's interests , and preferred language . two types of experiments will be conducted in an in-lab setting , with a group of users from different linguistic backgrounds . in the first set of experiments , users will be asked to use a baseline web-search system for their daily search activities over a period of time . the baseline system will be wrapped around one of the major search-engines . interactions with the system will be logged , and part of this information will be used for training the system (constructing user-profiles from text of queries and clicked documents) ; the other part (remaining queries) will be used for testing the effectiveness of the query-adaptation and result list adaptation-algorithms , where the users will be asked to provide some personal relevance-judgements . in the second set of experiments , the users will be asked to use the pmir system to fulfill a number of defined search-tasks . quantitative-and-qualitative techniques will be used to evaluate different aspects of the experiments , including : (1) retrieval-effectiveness , which can be measured using standard ir-metrics ; (2) user 's performance on search-tasks , which can be measured in terms of time and number of actions needed to fulfill the tasks ; (3) user-profile accuracy , which can be assessed by questionnaires that indicate how well the user-profile depicted the users ' search-interests ; and (4) usability and user-satisfaction , which can be assessed using standard system-usability questionnaires .