opinion influence and diffusion in social-network nowadays , more and more people tend to make decisions based on the opinion information from the-internet , in addition to recommendations from offline friends or parents . for example , we may browse the resumes and comments on election candidates to determine if one candidate is qualified , or consult the consumer reports or reviews on special e-commercial websites to decide which brand of computer is suitable for one 's needs . though opinion information is rich on the internet , [2] points out that 58 % of american internet-users deem that online-information is irretrievable , confusing , or conflicting with each other . early works on opinion-mining help to classify opinion polarity , to extract specific opinions and to summarize opinion texts . however , all these works are usually based on plain texts (reviews , comments or news-articles) . with the explosion of web-2.0-applications , especially social-network applications like blogs , discussion-forums , micro-blogs , the massive individual users go to the major media websites , which leads to much more opinion materials posted on the internet by user-shared experiences or views [3] . these opinion-rich and social network-based applications bring new perspectives for opinion-mining as well . first , in addition to plain texts (reviews , newswire) in traditional opinion-mining , we see new types of cyber-based text , like personal diary blogs , cyber-sms tweets . second , if we regard the opinions in plain-text as static , the dynamic-change of opinions in the social-network is a new promising area , and catch increasing attention of worldwide researchers . in the social-network , the opinion held by one individual is not static , but changes , which can be influenced by others . a serial of changes among different users forms the opinion propagation or diffusion in the network . this paper and my doctoral work focus on the opinion influence and diffusion in the social-network , which explore the detailed process of one-to-one influence and the opinion diffusion-process in the social-network . the significance of this work is it can benefit many other related researches , like information maximum , viral-marketing . now some pioneering works have been conducted to investigate the role of social-networks in information-diffusion and influencers in the social-network . these works are usually based on information-diffusion models , like the cascade model (cm) or epidemic-model (em) . however , we argue that it is not enough to simply apply these models to opinion influence and diffusion . 1) for both cm and em , status shift is along specific directions , from inactive to active (cm) or from susceptible to infectious , and then , to recovered (em) . but opinion influence is more complex .