content-based-retrieval for heterogeneous-domains : domain-adaptation by relative aggregation points we introduce the problem of domain-adaptation for content-based-retrieval and propose a domain-adaptation method based on relative aggregation points (raps) . content-based-retrieval including image-retrieval and spoken-document-retrieval enables a user to input examples as a query , and retrieves relevant data based on the similarity to the examples . however , input examples and relevant data can be dissimilar , especially when domains from which the user selects examples and from which the system retrieves data are different . in content-based geographic object-retrieval , for example , suppose that a user who lives in beijing visits kyoto , japan , and wants to search for relatively inexpensive restaurants serving popular local dishes by means of a content-based-retrieval system . since such restaurants in beijing and kyoto are dissimilar due to the difference in the average-cost and areas ' popular dishes , it is difficult to find relevant restaurants in kyoto based on examples selected in beijing . we propose a solution for this problem by assuming that raps in different domains correspond , which may be dissimilar but play the same role . a rap is defined as the expectation of instances in a domain that are classified into a certain class , e.g. the most expensive restaurant , average restaurant , and restaurant serving the most popular dishes . our proposed method constructs a new feature-space based on raps estimated in each domain and bridges the domain difference for improving content-based-retrieval in heterogeneous-domains . to verify the effectiveness of our proposed method , we evaluated various methods with a test-collection developed for content-based geographic object-retrieval . experimental-results show that our proposed method achieved significant improvements over baseline methods . moreover , we observed that the search-performance of content-based-retrieval in heterogeneous-domains was significantly lower than that in homogeneous domains . this finding suggests that relevant data for the same search-intent depend on the search-context , that is , the location where the user searches and the domain from which the system retrieves data .