visual-information-retrieval using java and lire visual-information-retrieval (vir) is an active and vibrant research area , which attempts at providing means for organizing , indexing , annotating , and retrieving visual-information (images and videos) form large , unstructured repositories . the goal of vir is to retrieve the highest number of relevant matches to a given query (often expressed as an example image and/or a series of keywords) . in its early years (1995-2000) the research efforts were dominated by content-based approaches contributed primarily by the image-and-video-processing community . during the past decade , it was widely recognized that the challenges imposed by the semantic gap (the lack of coincidence between an image 's visual contents and its semantic-interpretation) required a clever use of textual-metadata (in addition to information extracted from the image 's pixel contents) to make image-and-video-retrieval solutions efficient and effective . the need to bridge (or at least narrow) the semantic gap has been one of the driving forces behind current vir research . additionally , other related research problems and market opportunities have started to emerge , offering a broad range of exciting problems for computer scientists and engineers to work on . in this tutorial , we present an overview of visual-information-retrieval (vir) concepts , techniques , algorithms , and applications . several topics are supported by examples written in java , using lucene (an open-source java-based indexing and search implementation) and lire (lucene image-retrieval) , an open-source java-based library for content-based-image-retrieval (cbir) written by mathias lux . after motivating the topic , we briefly review the fundamentals of information-retrieval , present the most relevant and effective visual-descriptors currently used in vir , the most common indexing approaches for visual-descriptors , the most prominent machine-learning-techniques used in connection with contemporary vir solutions , as well as the challenges associated with building real-world , large-scale vir solutions , including a brief overview of publicly available datasets used in worldwide challenges , contests , and benchmarks . throughout the tutorial , we integrate examples using lire , whose main features and design-principles are also discussed . finally , we conclude the tutorial with suggestions for deepening the knowledge in the topic , including a brief discussion of the most relevant advances , open challenges , and promising opportunities in vir and related areas . the tutorial is primarily targeted at experienced information-retrieval researchers and practitioners interested in extending their knowledge of document-based ir to equivalent concepts , techniques , and challenges in vir . the acquired knowledge should allow participants to derive insightful conclusions and promising avenues for further investigation .