distilling and exploring nuggets from a corpus this paper describes a live and scalable-system that automatically extracts information-nuggets for entities/topics from a continuously updated corpus for effective exploration and analysis . a nugget is a piece of semantic-information that (1) must be mapped semantically to the transitive-closure of a pre-defined ontology , (2) is explicitly supported by text , and (3) has a natural-language-description that completely conveys its semantic to a user . fig. 1 shows a type of nugget `` involvement in events '' for a person entity (leon panetta) : each nugget has a short description (`` meeting '' , `` news conference '') with a list of supporting passages . our key contributions are (1) we extract nuggets and remove redundancy to produce a summary of salient information with supporting clusters of passages . (2) we present an entity/topic centric exploration interface that also allows users to navigate to other entities involved in a nugget . (3) we use the statistical-nlp technologies developed over the years in the ace , gale and tac-kbp programs , including parsing , mention-detection , within and cross-document-coreference resolution , relation-detection and slot filler extraction . (4) our system is flexible and easily adaptable across domains as demonstrated on two corpora : generic news and scientific papers . search-engines such as google-news and scholar do not retrieve nuggets , and only remove redundancy at document level . news-aggregation applications such as evri categorize news-articles based on the entities of topics but do not extract nuggets . other systems extract richer information , but not all of it has clear semantics ; e.g. , silobreaker presents results as `` the relationship between x and y in the context of [keyphrase] '' , leaving users with the task of interpreting the semantics as it is not tied to a clear ontology . in contrast we remove redundancy , summarize results and present nuggets that have clear semantics .