enhancing knowledge-base with knowledge-transfer a knowledge-base (kb) stores , organizes , and shares information pertinent to entities (i.e. kb nodes) such as people , organizations , and events . a large kb system , such as wikipedia , relies on human curators to create and maintain the content in the systems . however , it has become challenging for human curators to sift through the rapidly growing amount of information and filter out the information irrelevant to a kb node . the area of knowledge-base enhancement (kbe) aims to explore and identify automatic methods to assist human curators to accelerate the process . kbe can be viewed as a special case of information-filtering (if) . however , the lack of high-quality labelled data introduces a major challenge to train a satisfying model for the task . transfer-learning provides solutions to the problem and has explored applications in the area of text-mining , whereas direct application to kbe or if remains absent . transfer-learning is a research area in machine-learning , emphasizing the reuse of previously acquired knowledge to another applicable task . the method is particularly useful in the situations where labeled-instances are absent or difficult to obtain . to accelerate the growth of a kb , a transfer-learning approach enables leveraging the heuristics and models learned from one kb node to another . for example , reusing the learned filtering models from willie nelson , a famous country singer , to eddie rabbitt , another country singer . transfer-learning requires three components : the target task (e.g. the problem to be solved) , the source task (s) (e.g. auxiliary-data , previously studied problem) , and criteria to select appropriate source tasks . the objectives of my dissertation are twofold . first , it explores methods to identify informative source nodes from which to transfer . second , it constructs a knowledge-transfer network to represent the transfer-learning relationship between kb nodes . this proposed research applies a transfer-learning method -- segmented transfer (st) -- and a knowledge-representation -- knowledge-transfer network (ktn) -- to approach the area of kbe . the primary research-questions include : what are the transferable objects in information-filtering algorithms ? what are the kb nodes of high transferability ? what are the factors that determine the transfer-learning relationship ? does it manifest on a knowledge-transfer network-representation ? this interdisciplinary-research crosses the study area of information-filtering , machine-learning , knowledge-representation , and network-analysis . this proposal motivates the problem of kbe , discusses the research-methodology and proposed experiments , and reviews related works in information-filtering and transfer-learning . this line-of-research hopes to extend the application of transfer-learning to kbe and to explore a new dimension of if . the proposed st and ktn intends to bring interdisciplinary-approaches in the emerging field of kbe .