exploiting temporal topic-models in social-media retrieval many of user-generated-contents in the web-2.0 center around real-world incidents such as japanese tsunami , or general concerns such as recent economic-downturn . such type of information is always of interest to users . for instance , when a user reads a news article about a tsunami in japan , she wants to see related flickr photos or more tweets about it . conventional keyword-based-search is inappropriate , since it is not always trivial to formulate ad-hoc interests about the event and material . in some cases , the user might want to explore emerging topics that dominate different sources . present systems fail to connect topically documents across media , and the user has to examine individual sources to infer the topics herself . in this work , we address a special type of user-information need , temporal topic , which refers to any abstract matter active within some points or periods of time . a temporal topic can be a real-world event , e.g. the arab spring revolution , but can also be a less conceivable subject , e.g. the study of vacuum tube computers in 1950s . topics can also be recurrent such as the us presidency campaigns . there are extensive studies on how to detect topics from a collection of documents , but little uses temporal topics as part of user-interest to retrieve documents . we believe that temporal topic-based retrieval is a one solution to improve user-experience of present ir systems , as well as to benefit other applications (e.g. topic-sensitive online-advertisement) . our research goal can be defined in three research-questions . the first question involves finding latent temporal topics in a social-media stream , where documents are well equipped with meta-data (timestamps , geo-spatial-data , etc.) . following mixture-models such as lda , we treat each document as a mix of different temporal topic-models , each model is incorporated with time . a temporal topic consists of at least two types of attributes - time and representing words , as similar to [4] . the dynamics of temporal topics can be characterized in a timeline fashion [4] , or using hierarchical-structures [1] . the challenge lies in devising a model flexible enough to diverse and rapidly changing data without many parameter assumptions . for this , we see bayesian nonpara-metrics [3] as one promising solution , and will extend it to temporal-dimension . the second research question is how to retrieve and rank documents from different social-media sites , based on their relevance to one or several given temporal topics . we identify some following challenges . the first one is representing temporal topics as queries : although there have been attempts using keywords and time-window separately [2] , we aim to unify time and (topical) words in a single query-model . the second challenge is integrating temporal topic-models into ranking-models . inspired by our previous work [4] , we will use language-models to capture the relevance-scores between documents and topics , and investigate advanced methods to index the scores effectively . our last question involves connecting a given document to documents in other sources (data-streams or corpora) that shared one of its latent temporal topics . this task does not only provide unified insight into different social-media sites , but also help improve the quality-of-models by data in diverse sources . however , formalizing the semantics of `` similarity '' for documents in different settings based on temporal topcis is tricky . one baseline method is to apply kullback-leibler-divergence on comparable features (tf-idf , n-grams , photo tags , timestamps , . .) . we can also use language-models [5] to construct a language-model for each candidate document , then estimate how likely it generates the document of interest within a given temporal topic .