relevance as a subjective and situational multidimensional concept relevance is the central concept of information-retrieval . although its important role is unanimously accepted among researchers , numerous different definitions of the term have emerged over the years . considerable effort has been put into creating consistent and universally applicable descriptions of relevance in the form of relevance frameworks . across these various formal-systems of relevance , a wide range of relevance-criteria has been identified . the probably most frequently used single criterion , that in some applications even becomes a synonym for relevance , is topicality . it expresses a document 's topical overlap with the user 's information-need . for textual resources , it is often estimated based on term co-occurrences between query and document . there is , however , a significant number of further noteworthy relevance-criteria . prominent specimen are : (currency) determines how recent and up to date the document is . outdated information may have become invalid over time . (availability) expresses how easy it is to obtain the document . users might not want to invest more than a threshold amount of resources (e.g. , disk space , downloading time or money) to get the document . (readability) describes the document 's readability and understandability . a document with a high topical-relevance towards a given information-need can become irrelevant if the user is not able to extract the desired information from it . (credibility) contains criteria such as the document author 's expertise , the publication 's reputation and the document 's general trustworthiness . (novelty) describes the document 's contribution to satisfying an information-need with respect to the user 's context . e.g. , previous search-results or general knowledge about the domain . it is evident that these criteria can have very different scopes . some of them are static characteristics of the document or the author , others depend on the concrete information-need at hand or even the user 's search-context . currently , state-of-the-art retrieval-models often treat relevance (regardless which interpretation of the term was chosen) as an atomic concept that can be expressed through topical overlap between document and query or a plain linear-combination of multiple scores . considering the broad audiences a web-search-engine has to serve , such a method does not seem optimal as the concrete composition of relevance will vary from person to person depending on social and educational context . furthermore , each individual can be expected to have situational preference for certain combinations of relevance facets depending on the information-need at hand . we investigate combination schemes which respect the dimension-specific relevance distributions . in particular , we developed a risk-aware method of combining relevance-criteria inspired by the economic portfolio-theory . as a first stage , we applied this method for result-set diversification across dimensions .