adaptive diversification of recommendation results via latent-factor portfolio this paper studies result-diversification in collaborative-filtering . we argue that the diversification level in a recommendation list should be adapted to the target users ' individual situations and needs . different users may have different ranges of interests -- the preference of a highly focused user might include only few topics , whereas that of the user with broad interests may encompass a wide range of topics . thus , the recommended items should be diversified according to the interest range of the target user . such an adaptation is also required due to the fact that the uncertainty of the estimated user-preference model may vary significantly between users . to reduce the risk of the recommendation , we should take the difference of the uncertainty into account as well . in this paper , we study the adaptive diversification problem theoretically . we start with commonly used latent-factor-models and reformulate them using the mean-variance-analysis from the portfolio-theory in text-retrieval . the resulting latent-factor portfolio (lfp) model captures the user 's interest range and the uncertainty of the user-preference by employing the variance of the learned user latent-factors . it is shown that the correlations between items (and thus the item diversity) can be obtained by using the correlations between latent-factors (topical diversity) , which in return significantly reduce the computation load . our mathematical derivation also reveals that diversification is necessary , not only for risk-averse system-behavior (non-adpative) , but also for the target users ' individual situations (adaptive) , which are represented by the distribution and the variance of the latent user factors . our experiments confirm the theoretical insights and show that lfp succeeds in improving latent-factor-models by adaptively introducing recommendation diversity to fit the individual user 's needs .