indexing and querying overlapping structures structural-information retrieval is mostly based on hierarchy . however , in real life information is not purely hierarchical and structural elements may overlap each other . the most common example is a document with two distinct structural views , where the logical view is section / subsection / paragraph and the physical view is page / line . each single structural view of this document is a hierarchy and the components are either disjoint or nested inside each other . the overlapping issue arises when one structural element can not be neatly nested into others . for instance , when a paragraph starts in one page and terminates in the next page . similar situations can appear in videos and other multimedia-contents , where temporal or spatial constituents of a media file may overlap each other . querying over overlapping structures is one of the challenges of large-scale search-engines . for instance , fsis (fast-search for internet sites) [1] is a microsoft search platform , which encounters overlaps while analysing content of textual data . fsis uses a pipeline process to extract structure and semantic-information of documents . the pipeline contains several components , where each component writes annotations to the input data . these annotations consist of structural elements and some of them may overlap each other . handling overlapping structures in search-engines will add a novel capability of searching , where users can ask queries such as `` find all the words that overlap two lines '' or `` find the music played during intro scene of avatar movie '' . there are also other use-cases , where the user of the search-engine is not a person , but is a specific program with complex , non-traditional information-retrieval needs . this research attempts to index overlapping structures and provide efficient-query-processing for large-scale search-engines . the current-research on overlapping structures revolves around encoding and modelling data , while indexing and query-processing-methods need investigations . moreover , due to intrinsic complexity of overlaps , xml-indexing and query-processing techniques can not be used for overlapping structures . hence , my research on overlapping structures comprises three main parts : (1) an indexing-method that supports both hierarchies and overlaps ; (2) a query-processing method based on the indexing-technique and (3) a query-language that is close to natural-language and supports both full text and structural queries . our approach for indexing overlaps is to adapt the prepost [3] xml-indexing method to overlapping structures . this method labels each node with its start and end positions and requires modest storage space . however , prepost indexing can not be used for overlapping-nodes . to overcome this issue , we need to define a data-model for overlapping structures . since hierarchies are not sufficient to describe overlapping-components , several data-structures have been introduced by scholars . one of the most interesting data-models is goddag [2] . goddag is a tree-like graph , where nodes can have multiple parentage . this model can support overlaps as well as simple inheritance . our proposed data-model for indexing overlaps is such a tree-like-structure , where we can define overlapping , parent-child and ancestor-descendant relationships .