segmentation strategies for passage-retrieval in audio-visual documents the importance of information-retrieval (ir) in audio-visual recordings has been increasing with steeply growing numbers of audio-visual documents available on-line . compared to traditional ir methods , this task requires specific techniques , such as passage-retrieval which can accelerate the search-process by retrieving the exact relevant passage of a recording instead of the full document . in passage-retrieval , full recordings are divided into shorter segments which serve as individual documents for the further ir setup . this technique also allows normalizing document-length and applying positional-information . it was shown that it can even improve retrieval results . in this work , we examine two general strategies for passage-retrieval : blind segmentation into overlapping regular-length passages and segmentation into variable-length passages based on semantics of their content . time-based segmentation was already shown to improve retrieval of textual-documents and audio-visual recordings . our experiments performed on the test-collection used in the search subtask of the search and hyperlinking task in mediaeval benchmarking 2012 confirm those findings and show that parameters (segment length and shift) tuning for a specific test-collection can further improve the results . our best results on this collection were achieved by using 45-second long segments with 15-second shifts . semantic-based segmentation can be divided into three types : similarity-based (producing segments with high intra-similarity and low inter-similarity) , lexical-chain-based (producing segments with frequent lexically connected words) , and feature-based (combining various features which signalize a segment break in a machine-learning setting) . in this work , we mainly focus on feature-based segmentation which allows exploiting various features from all modalities of the data (including segment length) in a single trainable model and produces segments which can eventually overlap . our preliminary results show that even simple semantic-based segmentation outperforms regular segmentation . our model is a decision-tree incorporating the following features : shot segments , output of texttiling algorithm , cue-words (well , thanks , so , i , now) , sentence breaks , and the length of the silence after the previous word . in terms of the masp , the relative improvement over regular segmentation is more than 19 % .