effective approaches to retrieving and using expertise in social-media expert-retrieval has been widely studied especially after the introduction of expert-finding task in the trec 's enterprise track in 2005 [3] . this track provided two different test-collections crawled from two organizations ' public-facing websites and internal emails which led to the development of many state-of-the-art algorithms on expert-retrieval [1] . until recently , these datasets were considered good representatives of the information-resources available within enterprise . however , the recent growth of social-media also influenced the work environment , and social-media became a common communication and collaboration tool within organizations . according to a recent survey by mckinsey global institute [2] , 29 % of the companies use at least one social-media tool for matching their employees to tasks , and 26 % of them assess their employees ' performance by using social-media . this shows that intra-organizational social-media became an important resource to identify expertise within organizations . in recent years , in addition to the intra-organizational social-media , public social media tools like twitter , facebook , linkedin also became common environments for searching expertise . these tools provide an opportunity for their users to show their specific skills to the world which motivates recruiters to look for talented job candidates on social-media , or writers and reporters to find experts for consulting on specific topics they are working on . with these motivations in mind , in this work we propose to develop expert-retrieval algorithms for intra-organizational and public social media tools . social-media datasets have both challenges and advantages . in terms of challenges , they do not always contain context on one specific domain , instead one social-media tool may contain discussions on technical stuff , hobbies or news concurrently . they may also contain spam posts or advertisements . compared to well-edited enterprise documents , they are much more informal in language . furthermore , depending on the social-media-platform , they may have limits on the number of characters used in posts . even though they include the challenges stated above , they also bring some unique authority signals , such as votes , comments , follower/following information , which can be useful in estimating expertise . furthermore , compared to previously used enterprise documents , social-media provides clear associations between documents and candidates in the context of authorship information . in this work , we propose to develop expert-retrieval approaches which will handle these challenges while making use of the advantages . expert-retrieval is a very useful application by itself ; furthermore , it can be a step towards improving other social-media applications . social-media is different than other web-based tools mainly because it is dependent on its users . in social-media , users are not just content consumers , but they are also the primary and sometimes the only content-creators . therefore , the quality of any user-generated-content in social-media depends on its creator . in this thesis , we propose to use expertise of users in order to improve the existing applications so that they can estimate the relevancy of a content not just based on the content , but also based on the expertise of the content creator . by using expertise of the content generator , we also hope to boost contents that are more reliable . we propose to apply this user 's expertise information in order to improve ad-hoc search and question-answering-applications in social-media . in this work , previous trec enterprise datasets , available intra-organizational social-media and public social media datasets will be used to test the proposed algorithms .