diversified relevance-feedback the need for a search-engine to deal with ambiguous-queries has been known for a long time (diversification) . however , it is only recently that this need has become a focus within information-retrieval-research . how to respond to indications that a result is relevant to a query (relevance-feedback) has also been a long focus of research . when thinking about the results for a query as being clustered by topic , these two areas of information-retrieval-research appear to be opposed to each other . interestingly though , they both appear to improve the performance of search-engines , raising the question : they can be combined or made to work with each other ? when presented with an ambiguous-query there are a number of techniques that can be employed to better select results . the primary technique being researched now is diversification , which aims to populate the results with a set of documents that cover different possible interpretations for the query , while maintaining a degree of relevance , as determined by the search-engine . for example , given a query of `` java '' it is unclear whether the user , without any other information , means the programming-language , the coffee , the island of indonesia or a multitude of other meanings . in order to do this the assumption that documents are independent of each other when assessing potential relevance has to be broken . that is , a documents relevance , as calculated by the search-engine , is no longer dependent only on the query , but also the other documents that have been selected . how a document is identified as being similar to previously selected documents , and the trade-off between estimated relevance and topic-coverage are current areas for information-retrieval-research . for unambiguous queries , or for search-engines that do not perform diversification , it is possible to improve the results selected by reacting to information identifying a given result as truly relevant or not . this mechanism is known as relevance-feedback . the most common response to relevance-feedback is to investigate the documents for their most content-bearing terms , and either add , or subtract , their influence to a newly formed query which is then re-run on the remaining documents to re-order them . there has been a scant amount of research into the combination of these methods . however , carbonell et al. [1] show that an initially diverse result-set can provide a better approach for identifying the topic a user is interested in for a relevance-feedback style approach . this approach was further extended by raman et al. [4] . an important aspect of relevance-feedback is the selection of documents to use . in the 2008 trec relevance feedback track , meij et al. [3] generated a diversified result-set which outperformed other rankings as a source of feedback documents . the use of pseudo-relevance-feedback (assuming the top ranked documents are relevant) to extract sub-topics for use in diversification was explored by santos et al. [5] . these previous approaches suggest that these two ideas are more linked than expected . the atire search-engine [6] will be used to further explore the relationship between diversification and relevance-feedback . atire was selected because it is developed locally , and is designed to be small and fast . atire also produces a competitive baseline , which would have placed 6th in the 2011 trec diversity task while performing no diversification and index-time spam-filtering [2] , although we concede this is not equivalent to submitting a run .