a query and patient understanding framework for medical-records search electronic-medical-records (emrs) are being increasingly used worldwide to facilitate improved healthcare-services [2,3] . they describe the clinical decision process relating to a patient , detailing the observed symptoms , the conducted diagnostic tests , the identified diagnoses and the prescribed treatments . however , medical-records search is challenging , due to the implicit-knowledge inherent within the medical-records - such knowledge may be known by medical practitioners , but hidden to an information-retrieval (ir) system [3] . for instance , the mention of a treatment such as a drug may indicate to a practitioner that a particular diagnosis has been made even if this was not explicitly mentioned in the patient 's emrs . moreover , the fact that a symptom has not been observed by a clinician may rule out some specific diagnoses . our work focuses on searching emrs to identify patients with medical histories relevant to the medical condition (s) stated in a query . the resulting system can be beneficial to healthcare providers , administrators , and researchers who may wish to analyse the effectiveness of a particular medical procedure to combat a specific disease [2,4] . during retrieval , a healthcare provider may indicate a number of inclusion criteria to describe the type of patients of interest . for example , the used criteria may include personal profiles (e.g. age and gender) or some specific medical symptoms and tests , allowing to identify patients that have emrs matching the criteria . to attain effective retrieval-performance , we hypothesise that , in such a medical ir-system , both the information-needs and patients should be modelled based on how the medical process is developed . specifically , our thesis states that since the medical decision process typically encompasses four aspects (symptom , diagnostic test , diagnosis , and treatment) , a medical-search system should take into account these aspects and apply inferences to recover possible implicit-knowledge . we postulate that considering these aspects and their derived implicit-knowledge at different levels of the retrieval-process (namely , sentence , record , and inter-record level) enhances the retrieval-performance . indeed , we propose to build a query and patient understanding framework that can gain insights from emrs and queries , by modelling and reasoning during retrieval in terms of the four aforementioned aspects (symptom , diagnostic test , diagnosis , and treatment) at three different levels of the retrieval-process .