salton-award-lecture : on theoretical argument in information-retrieval (summary only) : on theoretical argument in information-retrieval the last winner of the salton award , tefko saracevic , gave an acceptance address at sigir in philadelphia in 1997 . previous winners were william cooper (1994) , cyril cleverdon (1991) , karen sparck jones (1988) and gerard salton himself (1985) . in this talk , i plan to follow the tradition of acceptance addresses , and present a personal-view of and retrospective on some of the areas in which i work . however , i will not be saying much about what are perhaps the two most obvious parts of my work : the probabilistic-approach to retrieval and evaluation of retrieval-systems . rather i will attempt to get under the skin of my take on ir , by discussing the nature of theoretical argument in the field , partly through examples . this talk is about the place of theory in the study-of-information retrieval (in some sense following bill cooper 's 1994 topic) , but not so much theory with a capital t rather what might be described as small-t theory . the field has a very strong pragmatic orientation , reflected both in the attitudes of the commercial participants and in the emphasis on formal evaluation in the academic environment . nevertheless , there are many theoretical ideas buried in , or implied by , the ways we talk about the field the language we use to discuss it . i will be discussing two areas to illustrate these low-level theoretical ideas : precision devices , and the apparent symmetry between retrieval and filtering . the phrase ` precision device ' used to have a rather clear meaning in ir , in the days of set-based-retrieval systems . in that context , a precision device was a device to enable the restriction of the retrieved set to those most likely (out of the documents originally included) to be useful . these days , with the ubiquitous scoring-and-ranking methods largely replacing set-based-retrieval , the idea has lost its meaning it is worth exploring the formal relationships involved to understand the change a little better . my second area is to do with the relation between filtering and the more traditional type of adhoc information-retrieval . there is a tendency and a temptation to see these as the same kind of thing , sometimes with a more specific assumption of duality , based on the inversion of the roles of documents and queries . it is important to see how far this parallel extends , and where it breaks down . i explore the nature of the duality and the kinds of reasons why it does break down . these examples reflect my interest in the basic logical-structure of information-retrieval-systems and the situations in which such systems may be found . i argue for a certain level of logical argument in information-retrieval , which might be taken as small-t theory , though not as capital-t theory . i believe there are reasons to think a grand theory of ir to be an unattainable goal such a theory would have to encompass so many different aspects of retrieval , having to do for example with human-cognition and behaviour and the structure of knowledge , as well as with the statistical concepts that inform the probabilistic-approach . however , accepting the unattainability of a grand theory does not preclude the development of further and more useful models based on particular aspects and lower-level logic the low-level logic is important not only in its own right , but as the basis for linking together more sophisticated theories concerned with more restricted domains . the most elaborate and complete-theory of (say) user-behaviour is of no use at all without a strong linkage between the parts of that theory and the entities relevant to ir that fall outside its scope . the glue that provides that linkage has to be low-level logic .