cognitive-approach for building user-model in an information-retrieval context (poster session) the recent development of communication-networks and multimedia-system provides users with the availability of a huge amount of information making worse the problem of information-overload [9] . the evolution of system-design is necessary becoming more user-centred , and more personally involving . a review of survey-studies on internet-users since 1993 confirms that a greater percentage of people are becoming online citizens , and professionals are integrating more online components into their work-process . a review of the experimental literature on internet user 's reveals that there is intense interest in humanising the online environment by integrating affective and cognitive components [8] . we are specially in concern with the effects on the evolution on information-retrieval . we can notice significant changes in the information-retrieval world over the past five or so years due to the emergence of internet and one of its most important and widely used services , the world-wide-web (www) or simply the-web . while reviewing the progress of research in information-retrieval and user-modelling , we can observe that many systems and prtotypes are created [5] , [10] , [11] , but all of them , share some basic limitations : the techniques used to represent knowledge in the user-model is based on simple list of keyword , the type of the considered knowledge is very limited , usually restricted to single word , or to (some) structural characteristic : the learning capability are very poor . we aim to propose a cognitive-approach for building user-model in an information-retrieval context . in fact cognitive-approach is based on identifying how users process information and what constitutes an appropriate model to represent this process , and because ir , under the cognitive paradigm takes the user into account in a high-priority way [1] . however , within the cognitive paradigm , there is no general-model valid for our documentary approach that satisfactorily how user-knowledge is represented for the purpose of processing information . the lack of such a model does not allow one to identify a user 's cognitive-state with regard to his or her information-needs and requirements . methodology adopting the cognitive viewpoint in ir are synthesised by daniel [4] in three groups , which comprise the representation of : users and their problem , which stems from the hypothesis proposed by belkin on the ` anomalous states of knowledge ' (ask) , according to which the user searches for information-search strategy , which compile the different ways search-strategies and processes are carried out , depending on the variable involved - user , intermediary , ir systems [6] , [7] document and information , which is considered a major goal of current ir research , since it embraces the whole corpus of studies about user-models intended to eliminate the intermediary 's role in retrieval-system . the aim of this approach is to allow users direct-access to the system by means of the representation of documents and intelligent-interfaces . user-centered paradigm now dominates in studies of information-needs and information-retrieval . we have the goal of developing new approaches to information-retrieval which are based on user-modelling techniques for building and managing the representation of the user preferances . in this paper , we describe two complementary approaches which are necessary for building user-model and its integration in an information-retrieval-system : a conceptual one based on the description of knowledge needed by the user in an information-retrieval context , a functional-approach which deals with dynamic-aspects of the model . within this approach we aim to determine the role played by the model in an information-retrieval context . in many studies of ir interesting in user-modelling we find different kind of knowledge trying to describe user 's need . so our conceptual approach has consisted in enumerating these knowledge and integrating them in their adequate components in information-retrieval architecture . almost of these studies that identified cognitive characteristics have used quantitative-methods to measure them . what is needed is a qualitative-study and appropriate method to ascertain these cognitive characteristic [12] . our main objective is the development of techniques for modelling the user as an interactive part of ir , so we propose our functional-approach which deals with identifying cognitive characteristic within the role played by the user-model in an information-retrieval architecture . so we began by presenting the conceptual approach and so the functional one .