the relational-data-file and the decision-problem for classes of proper-formulas the relational-data-file (rdf) of the rand corporation is among the most developed of question-answering-systems . the `` information-language '' of this system is an applied-predicate-calculus . the atomic units of information are binary relational sentences . the system has an inference-making capacity.as part of the actual construction and implementation of the rdf , a theory was developed by j. l. kuhns to identify those formulas of the-predicate-calculus which represent the `` reasonable '' inquiries to put to this system . accordingly , the classes of definite and proper formulus were defined , and their properties studied . the definite-formulas share a semantic property kuhns judged as necessarily possessed by a reasonable question to be processed by the rdf . the author has previously shown that the decision-problem for the class of definite-formulas is recursively unsolvable . the proper-formulas are definite , and satisfy additional syntactic conditions intended to make them especially suitable for machine-processing . the class of proper-formulas depends on which logical primitives are employed . different primitives give rise to different classes of formulas . a formula which can be effectively transformed into a proper equivalent is admissible . kuhns conjectures that with respect to one particular class of proper-formulas , all definite-formulas are admissible . in the paper it is shown that the decision-problem for several classes of proper-formulas is solvable . the following results are established . theorem 1 : the class of proper-formulas in prenex form on any complete set of connectives is recursive . theorem 2 : the class of proper-formulas on , ? , ? is recursive . theorem 3 : the class of proper-formulas on , ? , ? is recursive . theorem 4 : the class of proper-formulas on , ? , ? , ? , is recursive . thus , there is a mechanical decision-procedure which determines whether an arbitrary formula is a member of the class . it follows that the analogues of kuhns ' conjecture for these classes are false .