salton-award-lecture - information-retrieval and computer-science : an evolving relationship following the tradition of these acceptance talks , i will be giving my thoughts on where our field is going . any discussion of the-future of information-retrieval (ir) research , however , needs to be placed in the context of its history and relationship to other fields . although ir has had a very strong relationship with library-and-information-science , its relationship to computer-science (cs) and its relative standing as a sub-discipline of cs has been more dynamic . ir is quite an old field , and when a number of cs departments were forming in the 60s , it was not uncommon for a faculty member to be pursuing research related to ir . early acm curriculum recommendations for cs contained courses on information-retrieval , and encyclopedias described ir and database-systems as different aspects of the same field . by the 70s , there were only a few ir researchers in cs departments in the u.s. , database-systems was a separate (and thriving) field , and many felt that ir had stagnated and was largely irrelevant . the truth , in fact , was far from that . the ir research-community was a small , but dedicated , group of researchers in the u.s. and europe who were motivated by a desire to understand the process of information-retrieval and to build-systems that would help people find the right information in text-databases . this was (and is) a hard goal and led to different evaluation-metrics and methodologies than the database community . progress in the field was hampered by a lack of large-scale testbeds and tests were limited to databases containing at most a few hundred document abstracts . in the 80s ai boom , ir was still not a mainstream area , despite its focus on a human task involving natural-language . ir focused on a statistical approach to language rather than the much more popular knowledge-based-approach . the fact that ir conferences mix papers on effectiveness as measured by human-judgments with papers measuring performance of file organizations for large-scale-systems has meant that ir has always been difficult to classify into simple categories such as `` systems '' or `` ai '' that are often used in cs departments . since the early 90s , just about everything has changed . large , full-text databases were finally made available for experimentation through darpa funding and trec . this has had an enormous positive impact on the quantity and-quality of ir research . the advent of the-web search-engine has validated the longstanding claims made by ir researchers that simple queries and ranking were the right techniques for information-access in a largely unstructured-information world . what has not changed is that there are still relatively few ir researchers in cs departments . there are , however , many more people in cs departments doing ir-related research , which is just about the same thing . conferences in databases , machine-learning , computational-linguistics , and data-mining publish a number of ir papers done by people who would not primarily consider themselves as ir researchers . given that there is an increasing diffusion of ir ideas into the cs community , it is worth stating what ir , as a field of cs , has accomplished : search-engines have become the infrastructure for much of information-access in our society . ir has provided the basic-research on the algorithms-and-data-structures for these engines , and continues to develop new capabilities such as cross-lingual search , distributed-search , question-answering , and topic-detection-and-tracking . ir championed the statistical-approach to language long before it was accepted by other researchers working on language technologies . statistical-nlp is now mainstream and results from that field are being used to improve ir systems (in question-answering , for example) . ir focused on evaluation as a research area , and developed an evaluation-methodology based on large , standardized testbeds and comparison with human-judgments that has been adopted by researchers in a number of other language-technology areas . ir , because of its focus on measuring success based on human-judgments , has always acknowledged the importance of the user and interaction as a part of information-access . this led to a number of contributions to the design of query and search-interfaces and learning-techniques based on user-feedback . although these achievements are important , the long-term goals of the ir field have not yet been met . what are those goals ? one possibility that is often mentioned is the memex of vannevar-bush [1] . another , more recent , statement of long-term challenges was made in the report of the ir challenges workshop [2] : global information access : satisfy human information needs through natural , efficient interaction with an automated system that leverages world-wide structured and unstructured-data in any language . contextual-retrieval ; combine search technologies and knowledge about query and user-context into a single framework in order to provide the most appropriate answer for a user 's information-need . these goals are , in fact , very similar to long-term challenges coming out of other cs fields . for example , jim gray , a turing-award winner from the database area , mentioned in his address a personal and world memex as long-term goals for his field and cs in general [3] . ir 's long-term goals are clearly important long-term goals for the whole of cs , and achieving those goals will involve everyone interested in the general area of information-management-and-retrieval . rather than talking about what ir can do in isolation to progress towards its goals , i would prefer to talk about what ir can do in collaboration with other areas . there are many examples of potential collaborative-research areas . collaborations with researchers from the nlp and information extraction communities have been developing for some time in order to study topics such as advanced-question-answering . on the other hand , not enough has been done to work with the database community to develop probabilistic-retrieval-models for unstructured , semi-structured , and structured-data . there have been a number of attempts to combine ir and database functionality , none of which has been particularly successful . most recently , some groups have been working on combining ir search with xml-documents , but what is needed is a comprehensive examination of the issues and problems by teams from both areas working together , and the creation of new testbeds that can be used to evaluate proposed models . the time is right for such collaborations . another example of where database , ir , and networking people can work together is in the development of distributed , heterogeneous-information-systems . this requires significant new research in areas like peer-to-peer-architectures , semantic-heterogeneity , automatic-metadata-generation , and retrieval-models . if the information-systems described above are extended to include new data-types such as video , images , sound , and the whole range of scientific-data (such as from the biosciences , geoscience , and astronomy) , then a broad range of new challenges are added that need to be tackled in collaboration with people who know about these types of data . there should also be more cooperation between the data-mining , ir , and summarization communities to tackle the core problem of defining what is new and interesting in streams of data . these and other similar collaborations will the basis for the-future development of the ir field . we will continue to work on research problems that specifically interest us , but this research will increasingly be in the context of larger efforts . ir concepts and ir research will be an important part of the evolving mix of cs expertise that will be used to solve the `` grand '' challenges .