Cumulating and sharing end users knowledge to improve video indexing in a video digital library
In this paper, we focus on a user driven approach to improve video ind exing. It consists in cumulating the large amount of small, individual efforts done by the users who access information, and to provide a community management mechanism to let users share the elicited knowledge. This technique is currently being developed in the “OPALES” environment and tuned up at the “Institut National de l'Audiovisuel&r dquo;(INA), a National Video Library in Paris, to increase the value of its patrimonial video archive collections. It relies on a portal providing private workspaces to end users, so that a large part of their work can be shared between them. The effort for interpreting documents is directly done by the expert users who work for their own job on the archives. OPALES provides an original notion of “point of view” to enable the elicitation and the sharing of knowledge between communities of users, without leading to messy structures. The overall result consists in linking exportable private metadata to archive documents and managing the sharing of the elicited knowledge between users communities. provide bring together the leaders developing the National SMETE Digital Library to provide a brief background and broad overview of the NSDL program. Panelists will discuss the overall vision and broad steps underway to develop the National SMETE Digital Library. Building the National SMETE Digital Library presents many challenges: Developing a shared vision for the form and function of the NSDL; Meeting the needs of diverse learners and of the many disciplines encompassed by the NSDL; Acquiring input from the community of users to ensure that the NSDL is both used and useable; Evaluating progress and impacts; Integrating technologies that already exist, and the development of new technologies; and Providing mechanisms for sharing and cooperation of knowledge and resources among NSDL collaborators.