A national digital library for undergraduate mathematics and science teacher preparation and professional development
The primary goal of the National Digital Library for Undergraduate Mat hematics and Science Teacher Preparation and Professional Development, funded through the NSF Division of Undergraduate Education National Science Digital Libraries Initiative, is to increase the use of best teaching practices by faculty by providing the resources - tools, training, and data - needed to build inquiry and discovery into all undergraduate science and mathematics courses. Improving the math and science education of future and in-service K-12 teachers is one of the most important challenges facing college and university faculties. The preparation of future teachers is a fundamental element in the improvement of the learning experience of all students, from grades K-16. As teachers know, it is natural to teach as we have been taught ourselves. The standards in mathematics and science call for greater integration of inquiry-based techniques and more rigorous mathematical and science content. Teachers at all levels will be better equipped to meet these standards if they are taught using these approaches during their own education. The resources of this collection target two-year and four-year Colleges of Arts and Sciences faculty members and College of Education faculty that teach mathematics and science content courses. The collection focuses primarily on those resources that can be accessed electronically, whether they be web-based text or data resources, software or video that can be downloaded via the web or other electronic means, or emerging technology applications. Resources are reviewed and selected by mathematics and science content experts before they are made available to online users. This review ensures that the resources are accurate, pedagogically effective, and that this digital library is an efficient source of quality materials. This digital library enables faculty at any undergraduate institution-regardless of financial resources-to