Writing Decimal Fractions Writing a Decimal Fraction To write a decimal fraction, Write the whole number part. Write a decimal point for the word "and." Write the decimal part of the number so that the right-most digit appears in the position indicated in the word name. If necessary, insert zeros to the right of the decimal point in order that the right-most digit appears in the correct position. Sample Set B Write each number. Example 6.5.  Thirty-one and twelve hundredths. The decimal position indicated is the hundredths position. 31.12 Example 6.6.  Two and three hundred-thousandths. The decimal position indicated is the hundred thousandths. We'll need to insert enough zeros to the immediate right of the decimal point in order to locate the 3 in the correct position. 2.00003 Example 6.7.  Six thousand twenty-seven and one hundred four millionths. The decimal position indicated is the millionths position. We'll need to insert enough zeros to the immediate right of the decimal point in order to locate the 4 in the correct position. 6,027.000104 Example 6.8.  Seventeen hundredths. The decimal position indicated is the hundredths position. 0.17 Practice Set B Write each decimal fraction. Exercise 6.2.5. (Go to Solution) Three hundred six and forty-nine hundredths. Exercise 6.2.6. (Go to Solution) Nine and four thousandths. Exercise 6.2.7. (Go to Solution) Sixty-one millionths. Writing Decimal Fractions Writing a Decimal Fraction To write a decimal fraction, Write the whole number part. Write a decimal point for the word "and." Write the decimal part of the number so that the right-most digit appears in the position indicated in the word name. If necessary, insert zeros to the right of the decimal point in order that the right-most digit appears in the correct position. Sample Set B Write each number. Example 6.5.  Thirty-one and twelve hundredths. The decimal position indicated is the hundredths position. 31.12 Example 6.6.  Two and three hundred-thousandths. The decimal position indicated is the hundred thousandths. We'll need to insert enough zeros to the immediate right of the decimal point in order to locate the 3 in the correct position. 2.00003 Example 6.7.  Six thousand twenty-seven and one hundred four millionths. The decimal position indicated is the millionths position. We'll need to insert enough zeros to the immediate right of the decimal point in order to locate the 4 in the correct position. 6,027.000104 Example 6.8.  Seventeen hundredths. The decimal position indicated is the hundredths position. 0.17 Practice Set B Write each decimal fraction. Exercise 6.2.5. (Go to Solution) Three hundred six and forty-nine hundredths. Exercise 6.2.6. (Go to Solution) Nine and four thousandths. Exercise 6.2.7. (Go to Solution) Sixty-one millionths.  || 