 || Perfect Squares Perfect Squares Real numbers that are squares of rational numbers are called perfect squares. The numbers 25 and are examples of perfect squares since 25 = 52 and and 5 and are rational numbers. The number 2 is not a perfect square since and is not a rational number. Although we will not make a detailed study of irrational numbers, we will make the following observation: Any indicated square root whose radicand is not a perfect square is an irrational number. The numbers and are each irrational since each radicand is not a perfect square.  || The Product Property of Square Roots Notice that     and Since both and equal 6, it must be that The Product Property This suggests that in general, if x and y are positive real numbers, The square root of the product is the product of the square roots.  || The Quotient Property of Square Roots We can suggest a similar rule for quotients. Notice that      and Since both and equal 3, it must be that The Quotient Property This suggests that in general, if x and y are positive real numbers,      y ≠ 0 The square root of the quotient is the quotient of the square roots. CAUTIONIt is extremely important to remember that For example, notice that but We shall study the process of simplifying a square root expression by distinguishing between two types of square roots: square roots not involving a fraction and square roots involving a fraction.  || Square Roots Not Involving Fractions A square root that does not involve fractions is in simplified form if there are no perfect square in the radicand. The square roots are in simplified form since none of the radicands contains a perfect square. The square roots are not in simplified form since each radicand contains a perfect square. To simplify a square root expression that does not involve a fraction, we can use the following two rules: SIMPLIFYING SQUARE ROOTS WITHOUT FRACTIONS If a factor of the radicand contains a variable with an even exponent, the square root is obtained by dividing the exponent by 2. If a factor of the radicand contains a variable with an odd exponent, the square root is obtained by first factoring the variable factor into two factors so that one has an even exponent and the other has an exponent of 1, then using the product property of square roots.  || Square Roots Involving Fractions A square root expression is in simplified form if there are no perfect squares in the radicand, no fractions in the radicand, or 3. no square root expressions in the denominator. The square root expressions and are in simplified form. The square root expressions and are not in simplified form. SIMPLIFYING SQUARE ROOTS WITH FRACTIONS To simplify the square root expression Write the expression as using the rule Multiply the fraction by 1 in the form of Simplify the remaining fraction, Rationalizing the Denominator The process involved in step 2 is called rationalizing the denominator. This process removes square root expressions from the denominator using the fact that  || 