Dividing by a Polynomial The same technique outlined for dividing by a monomial does not work for polynomials with two or more terms in the denominator. In this section, we will outline a process called polynomial long division The process of dividing two polynomials using the division algorithm. , which is based on the division algorithm for real numbers. For the sake of clarity, we will assume that all expressions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 5: Divide: x 3 + 3 x 2 − 8 x − 4 x − 2 . Solution: Here x − 2 is the divisor and x 3 + 3 x 2 − 8 x − 4 is the dividend. Step 1: To determine the first term of the quotient, divide the leading term of the dividend by the leading term of the divisor. Step 2: Multiply the first term of the quotient by the divisor, remembering to distribute, and line up like terms with the dividend. Step 3: Subtract the resulting quantity from the dividend. Take care to subtract both terms. Step 4: Bring down the remaining terms and repeat the process from step 1. Notice that the leading term is eliminated and that the result has a degree that is one less than the dividend. The complete process is illustrated below: Polynomial long division ends when the degree of the remainder The expression that is left after the division algorithm ends. is less than the degree of the divisor. Here the remainder is 0. Therefore, the binomial divides the polynomial evenly and the answer is the quotient shown above the division line. To check the answer, multiply the divisor by the quotient to see if you obtain the dividend: Answer: x 2 + 5 x + 2   Next, we demonstrate the case where there is a nonzero remainder. Just as with real numbers, the final answer adds the fraction where the remainder is the numerator and the divisor is the denominator to the quotient. In general, when dividing we have If we multiply both sides by the divisor we obtain   Example 6: Divide: 6 x 2 − 5 x + 3 2 x − 1 . Solution: Since the denominator is a binomial, begin by setting up polynomial long division. To start, determine what monomial times 2 x − 1 results in a leading term 6 x 2 . This is the quotient of the given leading terms: ( 6 x 2 ) ÷ ( 2 x ) = 3 x . Multiply 3 x times the divisor 2 x − 1 and line up the result with like terms of the dividend. Subtract the result from the dividend and bring down the constant term +3. Subtracting eliminates the leading term and − 5 x − ( − 3 x ) = − 5 x + 3 x = − 2 x . The quotient of − 2 x and 2 x is −1. Multiply 2 x − 1 by −1 and line up the result. Subtract again and notice that we are left with a remainder. The constant term 2 has degree 0, and thus the division ends. We may write Answer: 3 x − 1 + 2 2 x − 1 . To check that this result is correct, we multiply as follows:   Occasionally, some of the powers of the variables appear to be missing within a polynomial. This can lead to errors when lining up like terms. Therefore, when first learning how to divide polynomials using long division, fill in the missing terms with zero coefficients, called placeholders Terms with zero coefficients used to fill in all missing exponents within a polynomial. .   Example 7: Divide: 27 x 3 + 64 3 x + 4 . Solution: Notice that the binomial in the numerator does not have terms with degree 2 or 1. The division is simplified if we rewrite the expression with placeholders: Set up polynomial long division: We begin with 27 x 3 ÷ 3 x = 9 x 2 and work the rest of the division algorithm. Answer: 9 x 2 − 12 x + 16   Example 8: Divide: 3 x 4 − 2 x 3 + 6 x 2 + 23 x − 7 x 2 − 2 x + 5 . Solution: Begin the process by dividing the leading terms to determine the leading term of the quotient 3 x 4 ÷ x 2 = 3 x 2 . Take care to distribute and line up the like terms. Continue the process until the remainder has a degree less than 2. The remainder is x − 2 . Write the answer with the remainder: Answer: 3 x 2 + 4 x − 1 + x − 2 x 2 − 2 x + 5   Polynomial long division takes time and practice to master. Work lots of problems and remember that you may check your answers by multiplying the quotient by the divisor (and adding the remainder if present) to obtain the dividend.   Try this! Divide: 20 x 4 − 32 x 3 + 7 x 2 + 8 x − 10   5 x − 3 . Answer: 4 x 3 − 4 x 2 − x + 1 − 7 5 x − 3 Video Solution Dividing by a Polynomial The same technique outlined for dividing by a monomial does not work for polynomials with two or more terms in the denominator. In this section, we will outline a process called polynomial long division The process of dividing two polynomials using the division algorithm. , which is based on the division algorithm for real numbers. For the sake of clarity, we will assume that all expressions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 5: Divide: x 3 + 3 x 2 − 8 x − 4 x − 2 . Solution: Here x − 2 is the divisor and x 3 + 3 x 2 − 8 x − 4 is the dividend. Step 1: To determine the first term of the quotient, divide the leading term of the dividend by the leading term of the divisor. Step 2: Multiply the first term of the quotient by the divisor, remembering to distribute, and line up like terms with the dividend. Step 3: Subtract the resulting quantity from the dividend. Take care to subtract both terms. Step 4: Bring down the remaining terms and repeat the process from step 1. Notice that the leading term is eliminated and that the result has a degree that is one less than the dividend. The complete process is illustrated below: Polynomial long division ends when the degree of the remainder The expression that is left after the division algorithm ends. is less than the degree of the divisor. Here the remainder is 0. Therefore, the binomial divides the polynomial evenly and the answer is the quotient shown above the division line. To check the answer, multiply the divisor by the quotient to see if you obtain the dividend: Answer: x 2 + 5 x + 2   Next, we demonstrate the case where there is a nonzero remainder. Just as with real numbers, the final answer adds the fraction where the remainder is the numerator and the divisor is the denominator to the quotient. In general, when dividing we have If we multiply both sides by the divisor we obtain   Example 6: Divide: 6 x 2 − 5 x + 3 2 x − 1 . Solution: Since the denominator is a binomial, begin by setting up polynomial long division. To start, determine what monomial times 2 x − 1 results in a leading term 6 x 2 . This is the quotient of the given leading terms: ( 6 x 2 ) ÷ ( 2 x ) = 3 x . Multiply 3 x times the divisor 2 x − 1 and line up the result with like terms of the dividend. Subtract the result from the dividend and bring down the constant term +3. Subtracting eliminates the leading term and − 5 x − ( − 3 x ) = − 5 x + 3 x = − 2 x . The quotient of − 2 x and 2 x is −1. Multiply 2 x − 1 by −1 and line up the result. Subtract again and notice that we are left with a remainder. The constant term 2 has degree 0, and thus the division ends. We may write Answer: 3 x − 1 + 2 2 x − 1 . To check that this result is correct, we multiply as follows:   Occasionally, some of the powers of the variables appear to be missing within a polynomial. This can lead to errors when lining up like terms. Therefore, when first learning how to divide polynomials using long division, fill in the missing terms with zero coefficients, called placeholders Terms with zero coefficients used to fill in all missing exponents within a polynomial. .   Example 7: Divide: 27 x 3 + 64 3 x + 4 . Solution: Notice that the binomial in the numerator does not have terms with degree 2 or 1. The division is simplified if we rewrite the expression with placeholders: Set up polynomial long division: We begin with 27 x 3 ÷ 3 x = 9 x 2 and work the rest of the division algorithm. Answer: 9 x 2 − 12 x + 16   Example 8: Divide: 3 x 4 − 2 x 3 + 6 x 2 + 23 x − 7 x 2 − 2 x + 5 . Solution: Begin the process by dividing the leading terms to determine the leading term of the quotient 3 x 4 ÷ x 2 = 3 x 2 . Take care to distribute and line up the like terms. Continue the process until the remainder has a degree less than 2. The remainder is x − 2 . Write the answer with the remainder: Answer: 3 x 2 + 4 x − 1 + x − 2 x 2 − 2 x + 5   Polynomial long division takes time and practice to master. Work lots of problems and remember that you may check your answers by multiplying the quotient by the divisor (and adding the remainder if present) to obtain the dividend.   Try this! Divide: 20 x 4 − 32 x 3 + 7 x 2 + 8 x − 10   5 x − 3 . Answer: 4 x 3 − 4 x 2 − x + 1 − 7 5 x − 3 Video Solution  || 