Absolute Value The absolute value The absolute value of a number is the distance from the graph of the number to zero on a number line. of a real number a, denoted | a | , is defined as the distance between zero (the origin) and the graph of that real number on the number line. Since it is a distance, it is always positive. For example, Both 4 and −4 are four units from the origin, as illustrated below:   Example 6: Simplify: a. | − 12 | b. | 12 | Solution: Both −12 and 12 are twelve units from the origin on a number line. Therefore, Answers: a. 12; b. 12   Also, it is worth noting that The absolute value can be expressed textually using the notation abs(a). We often encounter negative absolute values, such as − | 3 | or −abs(3). Notice that the negative sign is in front of the absolute value symbol. In this case, work the absolute value first and then find the opposite of the result. Try not to confuse this with the double-negative property, which states that − ( − 7 ) = + 7 .   Example 7: Simplify: − | − ( − 7 ) | . Solution: First, find the opposite of −7 inside the absolute value. Then find the opposite of the result. Answer: −7   At this point, we can determine what real numbers have a particular absolute value. For example, Think of a real number whose distance to the origin is 5 units. There are two solutions: the distance to the right of the origin and the distance to the left of the origin, namely, { ± 5 } . The symbol (±) is read “plus or minus” and indicates that there are two answers, one positive and one negative. Now consider the following: Here we wish to find a value for which the distance to the origin is negative. Since negative distance is not defined, this equation has no solution. If an equation has no solution, we say the solution is the empty set: Ø. Absolute Value The absolute value The absolute value of a number is the distance from the graph of the number to zero on a number line. of a real number a, denoted | a | , is defined as the distance between zero (the origin) and the graph of that real number on the number line. Since it is a distance, it is always positive. For example, Both 4 and −4 are four units from the origin, as illustrated below:   Example 6: Simplify: a. | − 12 | b. | 12 | Solution: Both −12 and 12 are twelve units from the origin on a number line. Therefore, Answers: a. 12; b. 12   Also, it is worth noting that The absolute value can be expressed textually using the notation abs(a). We often encounter negative absolute values, such as − | 3 | or −abs(3). Notice that the negative sign is in front of the absolute value symbol. In this case, work the absolute value first and then find the opposite of the result. Try not to confuse this with the double-negative property, which states that − ( − 7 ) = + 7 .   Example 7: Simplify: − | − ( − 7 ) | . Solution: First, find the opposite of −7 inside the absolute value. Then find the opposite of the result. Answer: −7   At this point, we can determine what real numbers have a particular absolute value. For example, Think of a real number whose distance to the origin is 5 units. There are two solutions: the distance to the right of the origin and the distance to the left of the origin, namely, { ± 5 } . The symbol (±) is read “plus or minus” and indicates that there are two answers, one positive and one negative. Now consider the following: Here we wish to find a value for which the distance to the origin is negative. Since negative distance is not defined, this equation has no solution. If an equation has no solution, we say the solution is the empty set: Ø.  || 