 || Equations Equation An equation is a statement that two algebraic expressions are equal. The following are examples of equations: Notice that , , and are not equations. They are expressions. They are not equations because there is no statement that each of these expressions is equal to another expression.  || Solutions and Equivalent Equations Conditional Equations The truth of some equations is conditional upon the value chosen for the variable. Such equations are called conditional equations. There are two additional types of equations. They are examined in courses in algebra, so we will not consider them now. Solutions and Solving an Equation The set of values that, when substituted for the variables, make the equation true, are called the solutions of the equation. An equation has been solved when all its solutions have been found. Sample Set A Example 11.16.  Verify that 3 is a solution to . When , Example 11.17.  Verify that is a solution to When , Example 11.18.  Verify that 5 is not a solution to . When , Example 11.19.  Verify that -2 is a solution to . When , Practice Set A Exercise 11.4.1. (Go to Solution) Verify that 5 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.2. (Go to Solution) Verify that is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.3. (Go to Solution) Verify that 0 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.4. (Go to Solution) Verify that 3 is not a solution to . Exercise 11.4.5. (Go to Solution) Verify that -1 is a solution to . Equivalent Equations Some equations have precisely the same collection of solutions. Such equations are called equivalent equations. For example, , , and are all equivalent equations since the only solution to each is . (Can you verify this?)  || Solving Equations We know that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. Table 11.1. This number is the same as this number ↓ ↓ ↓ = 4 = 11 = -1 Addition/Subtraction Property of Equality From this, we can suggest the addition/subtraction property of equality. Given any equation, We can obtain an equivalent equation by adding the same number to both sides of the equation. We can obtain an equivalent equation by subtracting the same number from both sides of the equation. The Idea Behind Equation Solving The idea behind equation solving is to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. Signs of operation (+, -, ⋅,÷) are used to associate two numbers. For example, in the expression , the numbers 5 and 3 are associated by addition. An association can be undone by performing the opposite operation. The addition/subtraction property of equality can be used to undo an association that is made by addition or subtraction. Subtraction is used to undo an addition. Addition is used to undo a subtraction. The procedure is illustrated in the problems of id1163760715212. Sample Set B Use the addition/subtraction property of equality to solve each equation. Example 11.20.  . 4 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 4 from both sides. Check: When , becomes The solution to is . Example 11.21.  . 8 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 8 to both sides. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.22.  . Before we use the addition/subtraction property, we should simplify as much as possible. 6 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 6 from both sides. This is equivalent to . Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.23.  . Begin by simplifying the left side of the equation. 1 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 1 from both sides. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.24.  . In this equation, the variable appears on both sides. We need to isolate it on one side. Although we can choose either side, it will be more convenient to choose the side with the larger coefficient. Since 8 is greater than 6, we’ll isolate on the left side. Since represents , subtract from each side. 4 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 4 to both sides. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.25.  . -8 is associated with by addition. Undo the by subtracting -8 from both sides. Subtracting -8 we get . We actually add 8 to both sides. Check: When becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Practice Set B Exercise 11.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.11. (Go to Solution)  || 