Number Problems The algebraic setups of the word problems that we have previously encountered led to linear equations. When we translate the applications to algebraic setups in this section, the setups lead to quadratic equations. Just as before, we want to avoid relying on the “guess and check” method for solving applications. Using algebra to solve problems simplifies the process and is more reliable.   Example 1: One integer is 4 less than twice another integer, and their product is 96. Set up an algebraic equation and solve it to find the two integers. Solution: First, identify the variables. Avoid two variables by using the relationship between the two unknowns. The key phrase, “their product is 96,” indicates that we should multiply and set the product equal to 96. Once we have the problem translated to a mathematical equation, we then solve. In this case, we can solve by factoring. The first step is to write the equation in standard form: Next, factor completely and set each variable factor equal to zero. The problem calls for two integers whose product is +96. The product of two positive numbers is positive and the product of two negative numbers is positive. Hence we can have two sets of solutions. Use 2 n − 4 to determine the other integers. Answer: Two sets of integers solve this problem: {8, 12} and {−6, −16}. Notice that (8)(12) = 96 and (−6)(−16) = 96; our solutions check out.   With quadratic equations, we often obtain two solutions for the identified unknown. Although it may be the case that both are solutions to the equation, they may not be solutions to the problem. If a solution does not solve the original application, then we disregard it. Recall that consecutive odd and even integers both are separated by two units.   Example 2: The product of two consecutive positive odd integers is 99. Find the integers. Solution: The key phase, “product…is 99,” indicates that we should multiply and set the product equal to 99. Rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form and solve by factoring. Because the problem asks for positive integers, n = 9 is the only solution. Back substitute to determine the next odd integer. Answer: The consecutive positive odd integers are 9 and 11.   Example 3: Given two consecutive positive odd integers, the product of the larger and twice the smaller is equal to 70. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase “twice the smaller” can be translated to 2 n . The phrase “product…is 70” indicates that we should multiply this by the larger odd integer and set the product equal to 70. Solve by factoring. Because the problem asks for positive integers, n = 5 is the only solution. Back substitute into n + 2 to determine the next odd integer. Answer: The positive odd integers are 5 and 7.   Try this! The product of two consecutive positive even integers is 168. Find the integers. Answer: The positive even integers are 12 and 14. Video Solution Number Problems The algebraic setups of the word problems that we have previously encountered led to linear equations. When we translate the applications to algebraic setups in this section, the setups lead to quadratic equations. Just as before, we want to avoid relying on the “guess and check” method for solving applications. Using algebra to solve problems simplifies the process and is more reliable.   Example 1: One integer is 4 less than twice another integer, and their product is 96. Set up an algebraic equation and solve it to find the two integers. Solution: First, identify the variables. Avoid two variables by using the relationship between the two unknowns. The key phrase, “their product is 96,” indicates that we should multiply and set the product equal to 96. Once we have the problem translated to a mathematical equation, we then solve. In this case, we can solve by factoring. The first step is to write the equation in standard form: Next, factor completely and set each variable factor equal to zero. The problem calls for two integers whose product is +96. The product of two positive numbers is positive and the product of two negative numbers is positive. Hence we can have two sets of solutions. Use 2 n − 4 to determine the other integers. Answer: Two sets of integers solve this problem: {8, 12} and {−6, −16}. Notice that (8)(12) = 96 and (−6)(−16) = 96; our solutions check out.   With quadratic equations, we often obtain two solutions for the identified unknown. Although it may be the case that both are solutions to the equation, they may not be solutions to the problem. If a solution does not solve the original application, then we disregard it. Recall that consecutive odd and even integers both are separated by two units.   Example 2: The product of two consecutive positive odd integers is 99. Find the integers. Solution: The key phase, “product…is 99,” indicates that we should multiply and set the product equal to 99. Rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form and solve by factoring. Because the problem asks for positive integers, n = 9 is the only solution. Back substitute to determine the next odd integer. Answer: The consecutive positive odd integers are 9 and 11.   Example 3: Given two consecutive positive odd integers, the product of the larger and twice the smaller is equal to 70. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase “twice the smaller” can be translated to 2 n . The phrase “product…is 70” indicates that we should multiply this by the larger odd integer and set the product equal to 70. Solve by factoring. Because the problem asks for positive integers, n = 5 is the only solution. Back substitute into n + 2 to determine the next odd integer. Answer: The positive odd integers are 5 and 7.   Try this! The product of two consecutive positive even integers is 168. Find the integers. Answer: The positive even integers are 12 and 14. Video Solution  || 