 || Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We now have the techniques needed to solve linear systems. For this reason, we are no longer limited to using one variable when setting up equations that model applications. If we translate an application to a mathematical setup using two variables, then we need to form a linear system with two equations.   Example 1: The sum of two numbers is 40 and their difference is 8. Find the numbers. Solution: Identify variables. Set up equations: When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first key phrase, “the sum of the two numbers is 40,” translates as follows: And the second key phrase, “the difference is 8,” leads us to the second equation: Therefore, our algebraic setup consists of the following system: Solve: We can solve the resulting system using any method of our choosing. Here we choose to solve by elimination. Adding the equations together eliminates the variable y. Once we have x, back substitute to find y. Check: The sum of the two numbers should be 42 and their difference 8. Answer: The two numbers are 24 and 16.   Example 2: The sum of 9 times a larger number and twice a smaller is 6. The difference of 3 times the larger and the smaller is 7. Find the numbers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the larger and smaller number. The first sentence describes a sum and the second sentence describes a difference. This leads to the following system: Solve using the elimination method. Multiply the second equation by 2 and add. Back substitute to find y. Answer: The larger number is 4/3 and the smaller number is −3.   Try this! The sum of two numbers is 3. When twice the smaller number is subtracted from 6 times the larger the result is 22. Find the numbers. Answer: The two numbers are −1/2 and 7/2. Video Solution  || Interest and Money Problems In this section, the interest and money problems Applications involving simple interest and money. should seem familiar. The difference is that we will be making use of two variables when setting up the algebraic equations.   Example 3: A roll of 32 bills contains only $5 bills and $10 bills. If the value of the roll is $220, then how many of each bill are in the roll? Solution: Begin by identifying the variables. When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first equation is created from the fact that there are 32 bills. The second equation sums the value of each bill: the total value is $220. Present both equations as a system; this is our algebraic setup. Here we choose to solve by elimination, although substitution would work just as well. Eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by −5. Now add the equations together: Once we have y, the number of $10 bills, back substitute to find x. Answer: There are twenty $5 bills and twelve $10 bills. The check is left to the reader.   Example 4: A total of $6,300 was invested in two accounts. Part was invested in a CD at a 4 1 2 % annual interest rate and part was invested in a money market fund at a 3 3 4 % annual interest rate. If the total simple interest for one year was $267.75, then how much was invested in each account? Solution: The total amount in both accounts can be expressed as To set up a second equation, use the fact that the total interest was $267.75. Recall that the interest for one year is the interest rate times the principal ( I = p r t = p r ⋅ 1 = p r ). Use this to add the interest in both accounts. Be sure to use the decimal equivalents for the interest rates given as percentages. These two equations together form the following linear system: Eliminate y by multiplying the first equation by −0.0375. Next, add the equations together to eliminate the variable y. Back substitute. Answer: $4,200 was invested at 4 1 2 % and $2,100 was invested at 3 3 4 % .   At this point, we should be able to solve these types of problems in two ways: with one variable and now with two variables. Setting up word problems with two variables often simplifies the entire process, particularly when the relationships between the variables are not so clear.   Try this! On the first day of a two-day meeting, 10 coffees and 10 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $20.00. Since nobody drank the coffee and all the doughnuts were eaten, the next day only 2 coffees and 14 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $13.00. How much did each coffee and each doughnut cost? Answer: Coffee: $1.25; doughnut: $0.75 Video Solution  || Mixture Problems Mixture problems Applications involving a mixture of amounts usually given as a percentage of some total. often include a percentage and some total amount. It is important to make a distinction between these two types of quantities. For example, if a problem states that a 20-ounce container is filled with a 2% saline (salt) solution, then this means that the container is filled with a mixture of salt and water as follows: Percentage Amount Salt 2% = 0.02 0.02(20 ounces) = 0.4 ounces Water 98% = 0.98 0.98(20 ounces) = 19.6 ounces In other words, we multiply the percentage times the total to get the amount of each part of the mixture.   Example 5: A 2% saline solution is to be combined and mixed with a 5% saline solution to produce 72 ounces of a 2.5% saline solution. How much of each is needed? Solution: The total amount of saline solution needed is 72 ounces. This leads to one equation, The second equation adds up the amount of salt in the correct percentages. The amount of salt is obtained by multiplying the percentage times the amount, where the variables x and y represent the amounts of the solutions. The algebraic setup consists of both equations presented as a system: Solve. Back substitute. Answer: We need 60 ounces of the 2% saline solution and 12 ounces of the 5% saline solution.   Example 6: A 50% alcohol solution is to be mixed with a 10% alcohol solution to create an 8-ounce mixture of a 32% alcohol solution. How much of each is needed? Solution: The total amount of the mixture must be 8 ounces. The second equation adds up the amount of alcohol from each solution in the correct percentages. The amount of alcohol in the end result is 32% of 8 ounces, or 0.032(8). Now we can form a system of two linear equations and two variables as follows: In this example, multiply the second equation by 100 to eliminate the decimals. In addition, multiply the first equation by −10 to line up the variable y to eliminate. We obtain the following equivalent system: Add the equations and then solve for x: Back substitute. Answer: To obtain 8 ounces of a 32% alcohol mixture we need to mix 4.4 ounces of the 50% alcohol solution and 3.6 ounces of the 10% solution.   Try this! A 70% antifreeze concentrate is to be mixed with water to produce a 5-gallon mixture containing 28% antifreeze. How much water and antifreeze concentrate is needed? Answer: We need to mix 3 gallons of water with 2 gallons of antifreeze concentrate. Video Solution  || Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Recall that the distance traveled is equal to the average rate times the time traveled at that rate, D = r ⋅ t . These uniform motion problems Applications relating distance, average rate, and time. usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize that data in a chart and then set up a linear system. In this section, you are encouraged to use two variables.   Example 7: An executive traveled a total of 8 hours and 1,930 miles by car and by plane. Driving to the airport by car, she averaged 60 miles per hour. In the air, the plane averaged 350 miles per hour. How long did it take her to drive to the airport? Solution: We are asked to find the time it takes her to drive to the airport; this indicates that time is the unknown quantity. Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. The distance column and the time column of the chart help us to set up the following linear system. Solve. Now back substitute to find the time it took to drive to the airport x: Answer: It took her 3 hours to drive to the airport.   It is not always the case that time is the unknown quantity. Read the problem carefully and identify what you are asked to find; this defines your variables.   Example 8: Flying with the wind, an airplane traveled 1,365 miles in 3 hours. The plane then turned against the wind and traveled another 870 miles in 2 hours. Find the speed of the airplane and the speed of the wind. Solution: There is no obvious relationship between the speed of the plane and the speed of the wind. For this reason, use two variables as follows: Use the following chart to organize the data: With the wind, the airplane’s total speed is x + w . Flying against the wind, the total speed is x − w . Use the rows of the chart along with the formula D = r ⋅ t to construct a linear system that models this problem. Take care to group the quantities that represent the rate in parentheses. If we divide both sides of the first equation by 3 and both sides of the second equation by 2, then we obtain the following equivalent system: Back substitute. Answer: The speed of the airplane is 445 miles per hour and the speed of the wind is 10 miles per hour.   Try this! A boat traveled 24 miles downstream in 2 hours. The return trip, which was against the current, took twice as long. What are the speeds of the boat and of the current? Answer: The speed of the boat is 9 miles per hour and the speed of the current is 3 miles per hour. Video Solution  || 