Finding the Missing Factor in a Proportion Many practical problems can be solved by writing the given information as propor­tions. Such proportions will be composed of three specified numbers and one unknown number. It is customary to let a letter, such as x , represent the unknown number. An example of such a proportion is This proportion is read as " x is to 4 as 20 is to 16." There is a method of solving these proportions that is based on the equality of fractions. Recall that two fractions are equivalent if and only if their cross products are equal. For example, Notice that in a proportion that contains three specified numbers and a letter representing an unknown quantity, that regardless of where the letter appears, the following situation always occurs. We recognize this as a multiplication statement. Specifically, it is a missing factor statement. (See Section 4.7 for a discussion of multiplication statements.) For example, Each of these statements is a multiplication statement. Specifically, each is a missing factor statement. (The letter used here is x , whereas M was used in Section 4.7.) Finding the Missing Factor in a Proportion The missing factor in a missing factor statement can be determined by dividing the product by the known factor, that is, if x represents the missing factor, then x = ( product ) ÷ ( known factor ) Sample Set B Find the unknown number in each proportion. Example 7.13.  . Find the cross product. This mean that , or 5 is to 4 as 20 is to 16. Example 7.14.  . Find the cross product. This means that , or, 5 is to 4 as 20 is to 6. Example 7.15.  Find the cross product. The means that , or, 16 is to 3 as 64 is to 12. Example 7.16.  Find the cross products. Practice Set B Find the unknown number in each proportion. Exercise 7.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.8. (Go to Solution) Finding the Missing Factor in a Proportion Many practical problems can be solved by writing the given information as propor­tions. Such proportions will be composed of three specified numbers and one unknown number. It is customary to let a letter, such as x , represent the unknown number. An example of such a proportion is This proportion is read as " x is to 4 as 20 is to 16." There is a method of solving these proportions that is based on the equality of fractions. Recall that two fractions are equivalent if and only if their cross products are equal. For example, Notice that in a proportion that contains three specified numbers and a letter representing an unknown quantity, that regardless of where the letter appears, the following situation always occurs. We recognize this as a multiplication statement. Specifically, it is a missing factor statement. (See Section 4.7 for a discussion of multiplication statements.) For example, Each of these statements is a multiplication statement. Specifically, each is a missing factor statement. (The letter used here is x , whereas M was used in Section 4.7.) Finding the Missing Factor in a Proportion The missing factor in a missing factor statement can be determined by dividing the product by the known factor, that is, if x represents the missing factor, then x = ( product ) ÷ ( known factor ) Sample Set B Find the unknown number in each proportion. Example 7.13.  . Find the cross product. This mean that , or 5 is to 4 as 20 is to 16. Example 7.14.  . Find the cross product. This means that , or, 5 is to 4 as 20 is to 6. Example 7.15.  Find the cross product. The means that , or, 16 is to 3 as 64 is to 12. Example 7.16.  Find the cross products. Practice Set B Find the unknown number in each proportion. Exercise 7.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.8. (Go to Solution)  || 