Combining Like Terms Terms with the same variable parts are called like terms Constant terms or terms with the same variable parts. , or similar terms Used when referring to like terms. . Furthermore, constant terms are considered to be like terms. If an algebraic expression contains like terms, apply the distributive property as follows: In other words, if the variable parts of terms are exactly the same, then we may add or subtract the coefficients to obtain the coefficient of a single term with the same variable part. This process is called combining like terms Adding or subtracting like terms within an algebraic expression to obtain a single term with the same variable part. . For example, Notice that the variable factors and their exponents do not change. Combining like terms in this manner, so that the expression contains no other similar terms, is called simplifying the expression The process of combining like terms until the expression contains no more similar terms. . Use this idea to simplify algebraic expressions with multiple like terms.   Example 6: Simplify: 3 a + 2 b − 4 a + 9 b . Solution: Identify the like terms and combine them. Answer: − a + 11 b   In the previous example, rearranging the terms is typically performed mentally and is not shown in the presentation of the solution.   Example 7: Simplify: x 2 + 3 x + 2 + 4 x 2 − 5 x − 7 . Solution: Identify the like terms and add the corresponding coefficients. Answer: 5 x 2 − 2 x − 5   Example 8: Simplify: 5 x 2 y − 3 x y 2 + 4 x 2 y − 2 x y 2 . Solution: Remember to leave the variable factors and their exponents unchanged in the resulting combined term. Answer: 9 x 2 y − 5 x y 2   Example 9: Simplify: 1 2 a − 1 3 b + 3 4 a + b . Solution: To add the fractional coefficients, use equivalent coefficients with common denominators for each like term. Answer: 5 4 a + 2 3 b   Example 10: Simplify: − 12 x ( x + y ) 3 + 26 x ( x + y ) 3 . Solution: Consider the variable part to be x ( x + y ) 3 . Then this expression has two like terms with coefficients −12 and 26. Answer: 14 x ( x + y ) 3   Try this! Simplify: − 7 x + 8 y − 2 x − 3 y . Answer: − 9 x + 5 y Video Solution Combining Like Terms Terms with the same variable parts are called like terms Constant terms or terms with the same variable parts. , or similar terms Used when referring to like terms. . Furthermore, constant terms are considered to be like terms. If an algebraic expression contains like terms, apply the distributive property as follows: In other words, if the variable parts of terms are exactly the same, then we may add or subtract the coefficients to obtain the coefficient of a single term with the same variable part. This process is called combining like terms Adding or subtracting like terms within an algebraic expression to obtain a single term with the same variable part. . For example, Notice that the variable factors and their exponents do not change. Combining like terms in this manner, so that the expression contains no other similar terms, is called simplifying the expression The process of combining like terms until the expression contains no more similar terms. . Use this idea to simplify algebraic expressions with multiple like terms.   Example 6: Simplify: 3 a + 2 b − 4 a + 9 b . Solution: Identify the like terms and combine them. Answer: − a + 11 b   In the previous example, rearranging the terms is typically performed mentally and is not shown in the presentation of the solution.   Example 7: Simplify: x 2 + 3 x + 2 + 4 x 2 − 5 x − 7 . Solution: Identify the like terms and add the corresponding coefficients. Answer: 5 x 2 − 2 x − 5   Example 8: Simplify: 5 x 2 y − 3 x y 2 + 4 x 2 y − 2 x y 2 . Solution: Remember to leave the variable factors and their exponents unchanged in the resulting combined term. Answer: 9 x 2 y − 5 x y 2   Example 9: Simplify: 1 2 a − 1 3 b + 3 4 a + b . Solution: To add the fractional coefficients, use equivalent coefficients with common denominators for each like term. Answer: 5 4 a + 2 3 b   Example 10: Simplify: − 12 x ( x + y ) 3 + 26 x ( x + y ) 3 . Solution: Consider the variable part to be x ( x + y ) 3 . Then this expression has two like terms with coefficients −12 and 26. Answer: 14 x ( x + y ) 3   Try this! Simplify: − 7 x + 8 y − 2 x − 3 y . Answer: − 9 x + 5 y Video Solution  || 