 ||  || Positive and Negative Numbers When we studied the number line in Section Section 2.3 we noted that Each point on the number line corresponds to a real number, and each real number is located at a unique point on the number line. Positive and Negative Numbers Each real number has a sign inherently associated with it. A real number is said to be a positive number if it is located to the right of 0 on the number line. It is a negative number if it is located to the left of 0 on the number line. THE NOTATION OF SIGNED NUMBERS A number is denoted as positive if it is directly preceded by a " + " sign or no sign at all.A number is denoted as negative if it is directly preceded by a " − " sign. The " + " and " – " signs now have two meanings: + can denote the operation of addition or a positive number. − can denote the operation of subtraction or a negative number. Read the "-" Sign as "Negative" To avoid any confusion between "sign" and "operation," it is preferable to read the sign of a number as "positive" or "negative."  || Opposites Opposites On the number line, each real number has an image on the opposite side of 0. For this reason we say that each real number has an opposite. Opposites are the same distance from zero but have opposite signs. The opposite of a real number is denoted by placing a negative sign directly in front of the number. Thus, if a is any real number, then − a is its opposite. Notice that the letter a is a variable. Thus, " a " need not be positive, and " − a " need not be negative. If a is a real number, − a is opposite a on the number line and a is opposite − a on the number line. − ( − a ) is opposite − a on the number line. This implies that − ( − a ) = a . This property of opposites suggests the double-negative property for real numbers. THE DOUBLE-NEGATIVE PROPERTY If a is a real number, then − ( − a ) = a  ||  || Geometric Definition of Absolute Value Absolute Value—Geometric Approach The absolute value of a number a , denoted | a | , is the distance from a to 0 on the number line. Absolute value speaks to the question of "how far," and not "which way." The phrase how far implies length, and length is always a nonnegative (zero or positive) quantity. Thus, the absolute value of a number is a nonnegative number. This is shown in the following examples: Example 3.9.  | 4 | = 4 Example 3.10.  | − 4 | = 4 Example 3.11.  | 0 | = 0 Example 3.12.  − | 5 | = − 5 .The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of 5." The absolute value of 5 is 5. Hence, negative the absolute value of 5 is − 5 . Example 3.13.  − | − 3 | = − 3 .The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of − 3 ." The absolute value of − 3 is 3. Hence, negative the absolute value of − 3 is − ( 3 ) = − 3 .  || Algebraic Definition of Absolute Value The problems in the first example may help to suggest the following algebraic definition of absolute value. The definition is interpreted below. Examples follow the interpretation. Absolute Value—Algebraic Approach The absolute value of a number a is The algebraic definition takes into account the fact that the number a could be either positive or zero ( ≥ 0 ) or negative ( < 0 ) . If the number a is positive or zero ( ≥ 0 ) , the first part of the definition applies. The first part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed in the absolute bars is a nonnegative number, the absolute value of the number is the number itself. If the number a is negative ( < 0 ) , the second part of the definition applies. The second part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a negative number, the absolute value of the number is the opposite of the number. The opposite of a negative number is a positive number.  ||  || Addition of Numbers with Like Signs Let us add the two positive numbers 2 and 3. We perform this addition on the number line as follows. We begin at 0, the origin.Since 2 is positive, we move 2 units to the right.Since 3 is positive, we move 3 more units to the right.We are now located at 5.Thus, 2 + 3 = 5 . Summarizing, we have (2 positive units) + (3 positive units) = (5 positive units) Now let us add the two negative numbers − 2 and − 3 . We perform this addition on the number line as follows. We begin at 0, the origin.Since − 2 is negative, we move 2 units to the left.Since − 3 is negative, we move 3 more units to the left.We are now located at − 5 . Thus, ( − 2) + ( − 3) = − 5 . Summarizing, we have (2 negative units) + (3 negative units) = (5 negative units) These two examples suggest that Adding Numbers with the Same Sign To add two real numbers that have the same sign, add the absolute values of the numbers and associate the common sign with the sum.  || Addition with Zero Notice that Addition with 0 The Additive Identity Is 0 Since adding 0 to a real number leaves that number unchanged, 0 is called the additive identity.  || Addition of Numbers with Unlike Signs Now let us perform the addition 2 + ( − 6) . These two numbers have unlike signs. This type of addition can also be illustrated using the number line. We begin at 0, the origin.Since 2 is positive, we move 2 units to the right.Since − 6 is negative, we move, from the 2, 6 units to the left.We are now located at − 4 . A rule for adding two numbers that have unlike signs is suggested by noting that if the signs are disregarded, 4 can be obtained from 2 and 6 by subtracting 2 from 6. But 2 and 6 are precisely the absolute values of 2 and − 6 . Also, notice that the sign of the number with the larger absolute value is negative and that the sign of the resulting sum is negative. Adding Numbers with Unlike Signs To add two real numbers that have unlike signs, subtract the smaller absolute value from the larger absolute value and associate the sign of the number with the larger absolute value with this difference.  ||  || Definition of Subtraction We know from our experience with arithmetic that the subtraction 5 − 2 produces 3, that is, 5 − 2 = 3 . Illustrating this process on the number line suggests a rule for subtracting signed numbers. We begin at 0, the origin. Since 5 is positive, we move 5 units to the right. Then, we move 2 units to the left to get to 3. (This reminds us of addition with a negative number.) This illustration suggests that 5 − 2 is the same as 5 + ( − 2) .This leads us directly to the definition of subtraction. Definition of Subtraction If a and b are real numbers, a − b is the same as a + ( − b) , where − b is the opposite of b .  || Subtraction of Signed Numbers The preceding definition suggests the rule for subtracting signed numbers. Subtraction of Signed Numbers To perform the subtraction a − b , add the opposite of b to a , that is, change the sign of b and add.  ||  || Multiplication of Signed Numbers Let us consider first the product of two positive numbers. Multiply: 3⋅5 . 3⋅5 means 5 + 5 + 5 = 15 . This suggests that (positive number)⋅(positive number) = positive number . More briefly, ( + )( + ) = + . Now consider the product of a positive number and a negative number. Multiply: (3)( − 5) . (3)( − 5) means ( − 5) + ( − 5) + ( − 5) = − 15 . This suggests that (positive number)⋅(negative number) = negative number More briefly, ( + )( – ) = – . By the commutative property of multiplication, we get (negative number)⋅(positive number) = negative number More briefly, ( – )( + ) = – . The sign of the product of two negative numbers can be determined using the following illustration: Multiply − 2 by, respectively, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0,  − 1,  − 2,  − 3,  − 4 . Notice that when the multiplier decreases by 1, the product increases by 2. We have the following rules for multiplying signed numbers. Rules for Multiplying Signed Numbers To multiply two real numbers that have the same sign, multiply their absolute values. The product is positive. opposite signs, multiply their absolute values. The product is negative.  || Division of Signed Numbers We can determine the sign pattern for division by relating division to multiplication. Division is defined in terms of multiplication in the following way. If b⋅c = a , then . For example, since 3⋅4 = 12 , it follows that . Notice the pattern: Since , it follows that The sign pattern for division follows from the sign pattern for multiplication. Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is We have the following rules for dividing signed numbers. Rules for Dividing Signed Numbers To divide two real numbers that have the same sign, divide their absolute values. The quotient is positive. opposite signs, divide their absolute values. The quotient is negative.  ||  || Reciprocals Reciprocals Two real numbers are said to be reciprocals of each other if their product is 1. Every nonzero real number has exactly one reciprocal, as shown in the examples below. Zero has no reciprocal. Example 3.38.  Example 3.39.  Example 3.40.  Example 3.41.  Example 3.42.  Example 3.43.   || Negative Exponents We can use the idea of reciprocals to find a meaning for negative exponents. Consider the product of x 3 and x − 3 . Assume x ≠ 0 . x 3 ⋅x − 3 = x 3 + ( − 3) = x 0 = 1 Thus, since the product of x 3 and x − 3 is 1, x 3 and x − 3 must be reciprocals. We also know that . (See problem 6 above.) Thus, x 3 and are also reciprocals. Then, since x − 3 and are both reciprocals of x 3 and a real number can have only one reciprocal, it must be that . We have used − 3 as the exponent, but the process works as well for all other negative integers. We make the following definition. If n is any natural number and x is any nonzero real number, then  || Working with Negative Exponents The problems of Sample Set A suggest the following rule for working with exponents: Moving Factors Up and Down In a fraction, a factor can be moved from the numerator to the denominator or from the denominator to the numerator by changing the sign of the exponent.  ||  || Standard Form to Scientific Form Very large numbers such as 43,000,000,000,000,000,000 (the number of different possible configurations of Rubik’s cube) and very small numbers such as 0.000000000000000000000340 (the mass of the amino acid tryptophan) are extremely inconvenient to write and read. Such numbers can be expressed more conveniently by writing them as part of a power of 10. To see how this is done, let us start with a somewhat smaller number such as 2480. Notice that Scientific Form The last form is called the scientific form of the number. There is one nonzero digit to the left of the decimal point and the absolute value of the exponent on 10 records the number of places the original decimal point was moved to the left. There is one nonzero digit to the left of the decimal point and the absolute value of the exponent of 10 records the number of places the original decimal point was moved to the right. Scientific Notation Numbers written in scientific form are also said to be written using scientific notation. In scientific notation, a number is written as the product of a number between and including 1 and 10 (1 is included,10 is not) and some power of 10. Writing a Number in Scientific Notation To write a number in scientific notation: Move the decimal point so that there is one nonzero digit to its left. Multiply the result by a power of 10 using an exponent whose absolute value is the number of places the decimal point was moved. Make the exponent positive if the decimal point was moved to the left and negative if the decimal point was moved to the right.  || Scientific Form to Standard Form A number written in scientific notation can be converted to standard form by reversing the process shown in Sample Set A. Converting from Scientific Notation To convert a number written in scientific notation to a number in standard form, move the decimal point the number of places prescribed by the exponent on the 10. Positive Exponent Negative Exponent Move the decimal point to the right when you have a positive exponent, and move the decimal point to the left when you have a negative exponent.  || Working with Numbers in Scientific Notation Multiplying Numbers Using Scientific Notation There are many occasions (particularly in the sciences) when it is necessary to find the product of two numbers written in scientific notation. This is accomplished by using two of the basic rules of algebra. Suppose we wish to find (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) . Since the only operation is multiplication, we can use the commutative property of multiplication to rearrange the numbers. (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) = (a × b)( 10 n × 10 m ) Then, by the rules of exponents, 10 n × 10 m = 10 n + m . Thus, (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) = (a × b) × 10 n + m The product of (a × b) may not be between 1 and 10, so (a × b) × 10 n + m may not be in scientific form. The decimal point in (a × b) may have to be moved. An example of this situation is in Sample Set C, problem 2.  || 