Independent, Inconsistent, and Dependent Systems Independent Systems Systems in which the lines intersect at precisely one point are called independent systems. In applications, independent systems can arise when the collected data are accurate and complete. For example, The sum of two numbers is 10 and the product of the two numbers is 21. Find the numbers. In this application, the data are accurate and complete. The solution is 7 and 3. Inconsistent Systems Systems in which the lines are parallel are called inconsistent systems. In applications, inconsistent systems can arise when the collected data are contradictory. For example, The sum of two even numbers is 30 and the difference of the same two numbers is 0. Find the numbers. The data are contradictory. There is no solution to this application. Dependent Systems Systems in which the lines are coincident are called dependent systems. In applications, dependent systems can arise when the collected data are incomplete. For example. The difference of two numbers is 9 and twice one number is 18 more than twice the other. The data are incomplete. There are infinitely many solutions. Independent, Inconsistent, and Dependent Systems Independent Systems Systems in which the lines intersect at precisely one point are called independent systems. In applications, independent systems can arise when the collected data are accurate and complete. For example, The sum of two numbers is 10 and the product of the two numbers is 21. Find the numbers. In this application, the data are accurate and complete. The solution is 7 and 3. Inconsistent Systems Systems in which the lines are parallel are called inconsistent systems. In applications, inconsistent systems can arise when the collected data are contradictory. For example, The sum of two even numbers is 30 and the difference of the same two numbers is 0. Find the numbers. The data are contradictory. There is no solution to this application. Dependent Systems Systems in which the lines are coincident are called dependent systems. In applications, dependent systems can arise when the collected data are incomplete. For example. The difference of two numbers is 9 and twice one number is 18 more than twice the other. The data are incomplete. There are infinitely many solutions.  || 