Ordering the Real Numbers The real numbers are ordered on the real line in a manner identical to how we ordered the integers on the number line in Section 1 of Chapter 1. Order on the Real Line. Suppose that a and b are real numbers positioned on the real line as shown below. a b • Because a lies to the “left of” b, we say that a is “less than” b, or in mathematical symbols, a < b. The inequality symbol < is read “less than.” • Alternately, b lies to the “right of” a, so we can also say that b is “greater than” a, or in mathematical symbols, b > a. The inequality symbol > is read “greater than.” Here are two more inequality symbols that we will use in this section. Less than or equal to. If we want to say that a lies to the “left of” b, or shares the same position as b, then we say that a is “less than or equal to” b and write a ≤ b. The inequality symbol ≤ is pronounced “less than or equal to.” Greater than or equal to. If we want to say that b lise to the “right of” a, or shares the same position as a, then we say that b is “greater than ore equal to a and write b ≥ a. The inequality symbol ≥ is pronounced “greater than or equal to.” Ordering the Real Numbers The real numbers are ordered on the real line in a manner identical to how we ordered the integers on the number line in Section 1 of Chapter 1. Order on the Real Line. Suppose that a and b are real numbers positioned on the real line as shown below. a b • Because a lies to the “left of” b, we say that a is “less than” b, or in mathematical symbols, a < b. The inequality symbol < is read “less than.” • Alternately, b lies to the “right of” a, so we can also say that b is “greater than” a, or in mathematical symbols, b > a. The inequality symbol > is read “greater than.” Here are two more inequality symbols that we will use in this section. Less than or equal to. If we want to say that a lies to the “left of” b, or shares the same position as b, then we say that a is “less than or equal to” b and write a ≤ b. The inequality symbol ≤ is pronounced “less than or equal to.” Greater than or equal to. If we want to say that b lise to the “right of” a, or shares the same position as a, then we say that b is “greater than ore equal to a and write b ≥ a. The inequality symbol ≥ is pronounced “greater than or equal to.”  || 