 || Algebraic Expressions Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression is a number, a letter, or a collection of numbers and letters along with meaningful signs of operation. Expressions Algebraic expressions are often referred to simply as expressions, as in the following examples: Example 4.1.  x + 4 is an expression. Example 4.2.  7y is an expression. Example 4.3.  is an expression. Example 4.4.  The number 8 is an expression. 8 can be written with explicit signs of operation by writing it as 8 + 0 or 8⋅1 . 3x 2 + 6 = 4x − 1 is not an expression, it is an equation. We will study equations in the next section.  || Terms and Factors Terms In an algebraic expression, the quantities joined by " + " signs are called terms. In some expressions it will appear that terms are joined by " − " signs. We must keep in mind that subtraction is addition of the negative, that is, a − b = a + ( − b) . An important concept that all students of algebra must be aware of is the difference between terms and factors. Factors Any numbers or symbols that are multiplied together are factors of their product. Terms are parts of sums and are therefore joined by addition (or subtraction) signs.Factors are parts of products and are therefore joined by multiplication signs.  || Common Factors Common Factors Sometimes, when we observe an expression carefully, we will notice that some particular factor appears in every term. When we observe this, we say we are observing common factors. We use the phrase common factors since the particular factor we observe is common to all the terms in the expression. The factor appears in each and every term in the expression.  || Coefficients Coefficient In algebra, as we now know, a letter is often used to represent some quantity. Suppose we represent some quantity by the letter x . The notation 5x means x + x + x + x + x . We can now see that we have five of these quantities. In the expression 5x , the number 5 is called the numerical coefficient of the quantity x . Often, the numerical coefficient is just called the coefficient. The coefficient of a quantity records how many of that quantity there are.  || 