The Five-Step Method In Section 7.3 we noted that many practical problems can be solved by writing the given information as proportions. Such proportions will be composed of three specified numbers and one unknown number represented by a letter. The first and most important part of solving a proportion problem is to deter­mine, by careful reading, what the unknown quantity is and to represent it with some letter. The Five-Step Method The five-step method for solving proportion problems: By careful reading, determine what the unknown quantity is and represent it with some letter. There will be only one unknown in a problem. Identify the three specified numbers. Determine which comparisons are to be made and set up the proportion. Solve the proportion (using the methods of Section 7.3). Interpret and write a conclusion in a sentence with the appropriate units of measure. Step 1 is extremely important. Many problems go unsolved because time is not taken to establish what quantity is to be found. When solving an applied problem, always begin by determining the unknown quantity and representing it with a letter. The Five-Step Method In Section 7.3 we noted that many practical problems can be solved by writing the given information as proportions. Such proportions will be composed of three specified numbers and one unknown number represented by a letter. The first and most important part of solving a proportion problem is to deter­mine, by careful reading, what the unknown quantity is and to represent it with some letter. The Five-Step Method The five-step method for solving proportion problems: By careful reading, determine what the unknown quantity is and represent it with some letter. There will be only one unknown in a problem. Identify the three specified numbers. Determine which comparisons are to be made and set up the proportion. Solve the proportion (using the methods of Section 7.3). Interpret and write a conclusion in a sentence with the appropriate units of measure. Step 1 is extremely important. Many problems go unsolved because time is not taken to establish what quantity is to be found. When solving an applied problem, always begin by determining the unknown quantity and representing it with a letter.  || 