The Order of Operations To determine the value of a quantity such as where we have a combination of operations (more than one operation occurs), we must use the accepted order of operations. The Order of Operations: In the order (2), (3), (4) described below, perform all operations inside group­ing symbols: ( ), [ ], ( ),. Work from the innermost set to the outermost set. Perform exponential and root operations. Perform all multiplications and divisions moving left to right. Perform all additions and subtractions moving left to right. Sample Set A Determine the value of each of the following quantities. Example 5.26.  Multiply first. Now perform this addition. Find the LCD. Thus, Example 5.27.  Operate within the parentheses first, . Now we have Perform the multiplication. Now perform the addition. The LCD=80. Thus, Example 5.28.  Work within each set of parentheses individually. Now we have Now multiply. Now subtract. Thus, Example 5.29.  Square . Now we have Perform the multiplication. Now perform the subtraction. Thus, Example 5.30.  Begin by operating inside the parentheses. Now simplify the square root. Now we have Perform the division. Now perform the addition. Thus, Practice Set A Find the value of each of the following quantities. Exercise 5.7.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.8. (Go to Solution) The Order of Operations To determine the value of a quantity such as where we have a combination of operations (more than one operation occurs), we must use the accepted order of operations. The Order of Operations: In the order (2), (3), (4) described below, perform all operations inside group­ing symbols: ( ), [ ], ( ),. Work from the innermost set to the outermost set. Perform exponential and root operations. Perform all multiplications and divisions moving left to right. Perform all additions and subtractions moving left to right. Sample Set A Determine the value of each of the following quantities. Example 5.26.  Multiply first. Now perform this addition. Find the LCD. Thus, Example 5.27.  Operate within the parentheses first, . Now we have Perform the multiplication. Now perform the addition. The LCD=80. Thus, Example 5.28.  Work within each set of parentheses individually. Now we have Now multiply. Now subtract. Thus, Example 5.29.  Square . Now we have Perform the multiplication. Now perform the subtraction. Thus, Example 5.30.  Begin by operating inside the parentheses. Now simplify the square root. Now we have Perform the division. Now perform the addition. Thus, Practice Set A Find the value of each of the following quantities. Exercise 5.7.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.8. (Go to Solution)  || 