 ||  || Rational Expressions, Evaluating, and Restrictions A rational number, or fraction a b , is a real number defined as a quotient of two integers a and b, where b ≠ 0 . Similarly, we define a rational expression The quotient P Q of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0. , or algebraic fraction Term used when referring to a rational expression. P Q , as the quotient of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0 . Some examples of rational expressions follow: The example x + 3 x − 5 consists of linear expressions in both the numerator and denominator. Because the denominator contains a variable, this expression is not defined for all values of x.   Example 1: Evaluate x + 3 x − 5 for the set of x-values {−3, 4, 5}. Solution: Substitute the values in for x. Answer: When x = − 3 , the value of the rational expression is 0; when x = 4 , the value of the rational expression is −7; and when x = 5 , the value of the rational expression is undefined.   This example illustrates that variables are restricted to values that do not make the denominator equal to 0. The domain of a rational expression The set of real numbers for which the rational expression is defined. is the set of real numbers for which it is defined, and restrictions The set of real numbers for which a rational expression is not defined. are the real numbers for which the expression is not defined. We often express the domain of a rational expression in terms of its restrictions.   Example 2: Find the domain of the following: x + 7 2 x 2 + x − 6 . Solution: In this example, the numerator x + 7 is a linear expression and the denominator 2 x 2 + x − 6 is a quadratic expression. If we factor the denominator, then we will obtain an equivalent expression. Because rational expressions are undefined when the denominator is 0, we wish to find the values for x that make it 0. To do this, apply the zero-product property. Set each factor in the denominator equal to 0 and solve. We conclude that the original expression is defined for any real number except 3/2 and −2. These two values are the restrictions to the domain. It is important to note that −7 is not a restriction to the domain because the expression is defined as 0 when the numerator is 0. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ 3 2 and x ≠ − 2 .   We can express the domain of the previous example using notation as follows: The restrictions to the domain of a rational expression are determined by the denominator. Ignore the numerator when finding those restrictions.   Example 3: Determine the domain: x 4 + x 3 − 2 x 2 − x x 2 − 1 . Solution: To find the restrictions to the domain, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve: These two values cause the denominator to be 0. Hence they are restricted from the domain. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ ± 1 .   Example 4: Determine the domain: x 2 − 25 4 . Solution: There is no variable in the denominator and thus no restriction to the domain. Answer: The domain consists of all real numbers, R.  || Simplifying Rational Expressions When simplifying fractions, look for common factors that cancel. For example, We say that the fraction 12/60 is equivalent to 1/5. Fractions are in simplest form if the numerator and denominator share no common factor other than 1. Similarly, when working with rational expressions, look for factors to cancel. For example, The resulting rational expression is equivalent if it shares the same domain. Therefore, we must make note of the restrictions and write In words, x + 4 ( x − 3 ) ( x + 4 ) is equivalent to 1 x − 3 , if x ≠ 3 and x ≠ − 4 . We can verify this by choosing a few values with which to evaluate both expressions to see if the results are the same. Here we choose x = 7 and evaluate as follows: It is important to state the restrictions before simplifying rational expressions because the simplified expression may be defined for restrictions of the original. In this case, the expressions are not equivalent. Here −4 is defined for the simplified equivalent but not for the original, as illustrated below:   Example 5: Simplify and state the restriction: 25 x 2 15 x 3 . Solution: In this example, the expression is undefined when x is 0. Therefore, the domain consists of all real numbers x, where x ≠ 0 . With this understanding, we can cancel common factors. Answer: 5 3 x , where x ≠ 0   Example 6: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x ( x − 5 ) ( 2 x + 1 ) ( x − 5 ) . Solution: To determine the restrictions, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except for −1/2 and 5. Next, we find an equivalent expression by canceling common factors. Answer: 3 x 2 x + 1 , where x ≠ − 1 2 and x ≠ 5   Typically, rational expressions are not given in factored form. If this is the case, factor first and then cancel. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 7: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x + 6 x 2 + x − 2 . Solution: Step 1: Completely factor the numerator and denominator. Step 2: Determine the restrictions to the domain. To do this, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except −2 and 1. Step 3: Cancel common factors, if any. Answer: 3 x − 1 , where x ≠ 1 and x ≠ − 2   Example 8: State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 + 7 x − 30 x 2 − 7 x + 12 . Solution: First, factor the numerator and denominator. Any value of x that results in a value of 0 in the denominator is a restriction. By inspection, we determine that the domain consists of all real numbers except 4 and 3. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: x + 10 x − 4 , where x ≠ 3 and x ≠ 4   It is important to remember that we can only cancel factors of a product. A common mistake is to cancel terms. For example,   Try this! State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 − 16 5 x 2 − 20 x . Answer: x + 4 5 x , where x ≠ 0 and x ≠ 4 Video Solution In some examples, we will make a broad assumption that the denominator is nonzero. When we make that assumption, we do not need to determine the restrictions.   Example 9: Simplify: x y + y 2 − 3 x − 3 y x 2 − y 2 . (Assume all denominators are nonzero.) Solution: Factor the numerator by grouping. Factor the denominator using the formula for a difference of squares. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: y − 3 x − y  || Opposite Binomial Factors Recall that the opposite of the real number a is −a. Similarly, we can define the opposite of a polynomial P to be −P. We first consider the opposite of the binomial a − b : This leads us to the opposite binomial property If given a binomial a − b , then the opposite is − ( a − b ) = b − a . : This is equivalent to factoring out a –1. If a ≠ b , then we can divide both sides by ( a − b ) and obtain the following:   Example 10: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 − x x − 3 . Solution: By inspection, we can see that the denominator is 0 if x = 3 . Therefore, 3 is the restriction to the domain. Apply the opposite binomial property to the numerator and then cancel. Answer: 3 − x x − 3 = − 1 , where x ≠ 3   Since addition is commutative, we have or Take care not to confuse this with the opposite binomial property. Also, it is important to recall that In other words, show a negative fraction by placing the negative sign in the numerator, in front of the fraction bar, or in the denominator. Generally, negative denominators are avoided.   Example 11: Simplify and state the restrictions: 4 − x 2 x 2 + 3 x − 10 . Solution: Begin by factoring the numerator and denominator. Answer: − x + 2 x + 5 , where x ≠ 2 and x ≠ − 5   Try this! Simplify and state the restrictions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 15 25 − x 2 . Answer: − 2 x + 3 x + 5 , where x ≠ ± 5 Video Solution  || Rational Functions Rational functions have the form where p ( x ) and q ( x ) are polynomials and q ( x ) ≠ 0 . The domain of a rational function consists of all real numbers x such that the denominator q ( x ) ≠ 0 .   Example 12: a. Simplify: r ( x ) = 2 x 2 + 5 x − 3 6 x 2 + 18 x . b. State the domain. c. Calculate r ( − 2 ) . Solution: a. To simplify the rational function, first factor and then cancel. b. To determine the restrictions, set the denominator of the original function equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers x, where x ≠ 0 and x ≠ − 3 . c. Since −2 is not a restriction, substitute it for the variable x using the simplified form. Answers: a. r ( x ) = 2 x − 1 6 x b. The domain is all real numbers except 0 and −3. c. r ( − 2 ) = 5 12   If a cost function A function that represents the cost of producing a certain number of units. C ( x ) represents the cost of producing x units, then the average cost The total cost divided by the number of units produced, which can be represented by c ( x ) = C ( x ) x , where C ( x ) is a cost function. c ( x ) is the cost divided by the number of units produced.   Example 13: The cost in dollars of producing t-shirts with a company logo is given by C ( x ) = 7 x + 200 , where x represents the number of shirts produced. Determine the average cost of producing a. 40 t-shirts b. 250 t-shirts c. 1,000 t-shirts Solution: Set up a function representing the average cost. Next, calculate c ( 40 ) , c ( 250 ) , and c ( 1000 ) . Answers: a. If 40 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $12.00. b. If 250 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $7.80. c. If 1,000 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $7.20.  ||  || Multiplying Rational Expressions When multiplying fractions, we can multiply the numerators and denominators together and then reduce, as illustrated: Multiplying rational expressions is performed in a similar manner. For example, In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where Q ≠ 0 and S ≠ 0 , we have In this section, assume that all variable expressions in the denominator are nonzero unless otherwise stated.   Example 1: Multiply: 12 x 2 5 y 3 ⋅ 20 y 4 6 x 3 . Solution: Multiply numerators and denominators and then cancel common factors. Answer: 8 y x   Example 2: Multiply: x − 3 x + 5 ⋅ x + 5 x + 7 . Solution: Leave the product in factored form and cancel the common factors. Answer: x − 3 x + 7   Example 3: Multiply: 15 x 2 y 3 ( 2 x − 1 ) ⋅ x ( 2 x − 1 ) 3 x 2 y ( x + 3 ) . Solution: Leave the polynomials in the numerator and denominator factored so that we can cancel the factors. In other words, do not apply the distributive property. Answer: 5 x y 2 x + 3   Typically, rational expressions will not be given in factored form. In this case, first factor all numerators and denominators completely. Next, multiply and cancel any common factors, if there are any.   Example 4: Multiply: x + 5 x − 5 ⋅ x − 5 x 2 − 25 . Solution: Factor the denominator x 2 − 25 as a difference of squares. Then multiply and cancel. Keep in mind that 1 is always a factor; so when the entire numerator cancels out, make sure to write the factor 1. Answer: 1 x − 5   Example 5: Multiply: x 2 + 3 x + 2 x 2 − 5 x + 6 ⋅ x 2 − 7 x + 12 x 2 + 8 x + 7 . Solution: It is a best practice to leave the final answer in factored form. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x − 4 ) ( x − 2 ) ( x + 7 )   Example 6: Multiply: . Solution: The trinomial in the numerator has a negative leading coefficient. Recall that it is a best practice to first factor out a −1 and then factor the resulting trinomial. Answer:   Example 7: Multiply: . Solution: We replace with so that we can cancel this factor. Answer:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || Dividing Rational Expressions To divide two fractions, we multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor, as illustrated: Dividing rational expressions is performed in a similar manner. For example, In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where , , and , we have   Example 8: Divide: . Solution: First, multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor and then cancel. Answer:   Example 9: Divide: . Solution: After multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor, factor and cancel. Answer:   Example 10: Divide: . Solution: Begin by multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. After doing so, factor and cancel. Answer:   Example 11: Divide: . Solution: Just as we do with fractions, think of the divisor as an algebraic fraction over 1. Answer:   Try this! Divide: . Answer: Video Solution  || Multiplying and Dividing Rational Functions The product and quotient of two rational functions can be simplified using the techniques described in this section. The restrictions to the domain of a product consist of the restrictions of each function.   Example 12: Calculate and determine the restrictions to the domain. Solution: In this case, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 0, and the domain of consists of all real numbers except 1/4. Therefore, the domain of the product consists of all real numbers except 0 and 1/4. Multiply the functions and then simplify the result. Answer: , where   The restrictions to the domain of a quotient will consist of the restrictions of each function as well as the restrictions on the reciprocal of the divisor.   Example 13: Calculate and determine the restrictions. Solution: In this case, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 3 and 8, and the domain of consists all real numbers except 3. In addition, the reciprocal of has a restriction of −8. Therefore, the domain of this quotient consists of all real numbers except 3, 8, and −8. Answer: , where  ||  || Adding and Subtracting with Common Denominators Adding and subtracting rational expressions is similar to adding and subtracting fractions. Recall that if the denominators are the same, we can add or subtract the numerators and write the result over the common denominator. When working with rational expressions, the common denominator will be a polynomial. In general, given polynomials P, Q, and R, where Q ≠ 0 , we have the following: In this section, assume that all variable factors in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 1: Add: 3 y + 7 y . Solution: Add the numerators 3 and 7, and write the result over the common denominator, y. Answer: 10 y   Example 2: Subtract: x − 5 2 x − 1 − 1 2 x − 1 . Solution: Subtract the numerators x − 5 and 1, and write the result over the common denominator, 2 x − 1 . Answer: x − 6 2 x − 1   Example 3: Subtract: 2 x + 7 ( x + 5 ) ( x − 3 ) − x + 10 ( x + 5 ) ( x − 3 ) . Solution: We use parentheses to remind us to subtract the entire numerator of the second rational expression. Answer: 1 x + 5   Example 4: Simplify: 2 x 2 + 10 x + 3 x 2 − 36 − x 2 + 6 x + 5 x 2 − 36 + x − 4 x 2 − 36 . Solution: Subtract and add the numerators. Make use of parentheses and write the result over the common denominator, x 2 − 36 . Answer: x − 1 x − 6   Try this! Subtract: x 2 + 1 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 − x 2 − 2 x 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 . Answer: 1 x − 4 Video Solution  || Adding and Subtracting with Unlike Denominators To add rational expressions with unlike denominators, first find equivalent expressions with common denominators. Do this just as you have with fractions. If the denominators of fractions are relatively prime, then the least common denominator (LCD) is their product. For example, Multiply each fraction by the appropriate form of 1 to obtain equivalent fractions with a common denominator. The process of adding and subtracting rational expressions is similar. In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where Q ≠ 0 and S ≠ 0 , we have the following: In this section, assume that all variable factors in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 5: Add: 1 x + 1 y . Solution: In this example, the L C D = x y . To obtain equivalent terms with this common denominator, multiply the first term by y y and the second term by x x . Answer: y + x x y   Example 6: Subtract: 1 y − 1 y − 3 . Solution: Since the L C D = y ( y − 3 ) , multiply the first term by 1 in the form of ( y − 3 ) ( y − 3 ) and the second term by y y . Answer: − 3 y ( y − 3 )   It is not always the case that the LCD is the product of the given denominators. Typically, the denominators are not relatively prime; thus determining the LCD requires some thought. Begin by factoring all denominators. The LCD is the product of all factors with the highest power. For example, given there are three base factors in the denominator: x , ( x + 2 ) , and ( x − 3 ) . The highest powers of these factors are x 3 , ( x + 2 ) 2 , and ( x − 3 ) 1 . Therefore, The general steps for adding or subtracting rational expressions are illustrated in the following example.   Example 7: Subtract: x x 2 + 4 x + 3 − 3 x 2 − 4 x − 5 . Solution: Step 1: Factor all denominators to determine the LCD. The LCD   is   ( x + 1 ) ( x + 3 ) ( x − 5 ) . Step 2: Multiply by the appropriate factors to obtain equivalent terms with a common denominator. To do this, multiply the first term by and the second term by . Step 3: Add or subtract the numerators and place the result over the common denominator. Step 4: Simplify the resulting algebraic fraction. Answer:   Example 8: Subtract: . Solution: It is best not to factor the numerator, , because we will most likely need to simplify after we subtract. Answer:   Example 9: Subtract: . Solution: First, factor the denominators and determine the LCD. Notice how the opposite binomial property is applied to obtain a more workable denominator. The LCD is . Multiply the second term by 1 in the form of . Now that we have equivalent terms with a common denominator, add the numerators and write the result over the common denominator. Answer:   Example 10: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by factoring the denominator. We can see that the . Find equivalent fractions with this denominator. Next, subtract and add the numerators and place the result over the common denominator. Finish by simplifying the resulting rational expression. Answer:   Try this! Simplify: . Answer: Video Solution Rational expressions are sometimes expressed using negative exponents. In this case, apply the rules for negative exponents before simplifying the expression.   Example 11: Simplify: . Solution: Recall that . We begin by rewriting the negative exponents as rational expressions. Answer:  || Adding and Subtracting Rational Functions We can simplify sums or differences of rational functions using the techniques learned in this section. The restrictions of the result consist of the restrictions to the domains of each function.   Example 12: Calculate , given and , and state the restrictions. Solution: Here the domain of f consists of all real numbers except −3, and the domain of g consists of all real numbers except 2. Therefore, the domain of f + g consists of all real numbers except −3 and 2. Answer: , where   Example 13: Calculate , given and , and state the restrictions to the domain. Solution: The domain of f consists of all real numbers except 5 and −5, and the domain of g consists of all real numbers except 5. Therefore, the domain of f − g consists of all real numbers except −5 and 5. Answer: , where  ||  || Definitions A complex fraction A fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. is a fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. For example, Simplifying such a fraction requires us to find an equivalent fraction with integer numerator and denominator. One way to do this is to divide. Recall that dividing fractions involves multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. An alternative method for simplifying this complex fraction involves multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the LCD of all the given fractions. In this case, the LCD = 4. A complex rational expression A rational expression where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more rational expressions. is defined as a rational expression that contains one or more rational expressions in the numerator or denominator or both. For example, We simplify a complex rational expression by finding an equivalent fraction where the numerator and denominator are polynomials. As illustrated above, there are two methods for simplifying complex rational expressions, and we will outline the steps for both methods. For the sake of clarity, assume that variable expressions used as denominators are nonzero.  || Method 1: Simplify Using Division We begin our discussion on simplifying complex rational expressions using division. Before we can multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor, we must simplify the numerator and denominator separately. The goal is to first obtain single algebraic fractions in the numerator and the denominator. The steps for simplifying a complex algebraic fraction are illustrated in the following example.   Example 1: Simplify: 1 2 + 1 x 1 4 − 1 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Simplify the numerator and denominator. The goal is to obtain a single algebraic fraction divided by another single algebraic fraction. In this example, find equivalent terms with a common denominator in both the numerator and denominator before adding and subtracting. At this point we have a single algebraic fraction divided by a single algebraic fraction. Step 2: Multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the divisor. Step 3: Factor all numerators and denominators completely. Step 4: Cancel all common factors. Answer: 2 x x − 2   Example 2: Simplify: 1 x − 1 x − 2 4 x 2 − 2 x . Solution: Answer: − 1 2   Example 3: Simplify   1 − 4 x − 21 x 2   1 − 2 x − 15 x 2 . Solution: The LCD of the rational expressions in both the numerator and denominator is x 2 . Multiply by the appropriate factors to obtain equivalent terms with this as the denominator and then subtract. We now have a single rational expression divided by another single rational expression. Next, multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the divisor and then factor and cancel. Answer: x − 7 x − 5   Example 4: Simplify:     1 − 1 x 2     1 x − 1 . Solution: Answer: − x + 1 x   Try this! Simplify:   1 81 − 1 x 2   1 9 + 1 x . Answer: x − 9 9 x Video Solution  || Method 2: Simplify Using the LCD An alternative method for simplifying complex rational expressions involves clearing the fractions by multiplying the expression by a special form of 1. In this method, multiply the numerator and denominator by the least common denominator (LCD) of all given fractions.   Example 5: Simplify: 1 2 + 1 x 1 4 − 1 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Determine the LCD of all the fractions in the numerator and denominator. In this case, the denominators of the given fractions are 2, x , 4, and x 2 . Therefore, the L C D  is  4 x 2 . Step 2: Multiply the numerator and denominator by the LCD. This step should clear the fractions in both the numerator and denominator. This leaves us with a single algebraic fraction with a polynomial in the numerator and in the denominator. Step 3: Factor the numerator and denominator completely. Step 4: Cancel all common factors. Answer: 2 x x − 2 Note This was the same problem that we began this section with, and the results here are the same. It is worth taking the time to compare the steps involved using both methods on the same problem.   Example 6: Simplify:   1 − 2 x − 15 x 2     3 − 14 x − 5 x 2 . Solution: Considering all of the denominators, we find that the LCD is  x 2 . Therefore, multiply the numerator and denominator by x 2 : At this point, we have a rational expression that can be simplified by factoring and then canceling the common factors. Answer: x + 3 3 x + 1   It is important to point out that multiplying the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero factor is equivalent to multiplying by 1 and does not change the problem. Because x 2 x 2 = 1 , we can multiply the numerator and denominator by x 2 in the previous example and obtain an equivalent expression.   Example 7: Simplify:   1 x + 1 + 3 x − 3   2 x − 3 − 1 x + 1 . Solution: The LCM of all the denominators is ( x + 1 ) ( x − 3 ) . Begin by multiplying the numerator and denominator by these factors. Answer: 4 x x + 5   Try this! Simplify: 1 y − 1 4 1 16 − 1 y 2 . Answer: − 4 y y + 4 Video Solution  ||  || Solving Rational Equations A rational equation An equation containing at least one rational expression. is an equation containing at least one rational expression. Rational expressions typically contain a variable in the denominator. For this reason, we will take care to ensure that the denominator is not 0 by making note of restrictions and checking our solutions. Solve rational equations by clearing the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD).   Example 1: Solve: 5 x − 1 3 = 1 x . Solution: We first make a note that x ≠ 0 and then multiply both sides by the LCD, 3x: Check your answer by substituting 12 for x to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is 12.   After multiplying both sides of the previous example by the LCD, we were left with a linear equation to solve. This is not always the case; sometimes we will be left with a quadratic equation.   Example 2: Solve: 2 − 1 x ( x + 1 ) = 3 x + 1 . Solution: In this example, there are two restrictions, x ≠ 0 and x ≠ − 1 . Begin by multiplying both sides by the LCD, x ( x + 1 ) . After distributing and dividing out the common factors, a quadratic equation remains. To solve it, rewrite it in standard form, factor, and then set each factor equal to 0. Check to see if these values solve the original equation. Answer: The solutions are −1/2 and 1.   Up to this point, all of the possible solutions have solved the original equation. However, this may not always be the case. Multiplying both sides of an equation by variable factors may lead to extraneous solutions A solution that does not solve the original equation. , which are solutions that do not solve the original equation. A complete list of steps for solving a rational equation is outlined in the following example.   Example 3: Solve: x x + 2 + 2 x 2 + 5 x + 6 = 5 x + 3 . Solution: Step 1: Factor all denominators and determine the LCD. The LCD is  ( x + 2 ) ( x + 3 ) . Step 2: Identify the restrictions. In this case, they are x ≠ − 2 and x ≠ − 3 . Step 3: Multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD. Distribute carefully and then simplify. Step 4: Solve the resulting equation. Here the result is a quadratic equation. Rewrite it in standard form, factor, and then set each factor equal to 0. Step 5: Check for extraneous solutions. Always substitute into the original equation, or the factored equivalent. In this case, choose the factored equivalent to check: Here −2 is an extraneous solution and is not included in the solution set. It is important to note that −2 is a restriction. Answer: The solution is 4.   If this process produces a solution that happens to be a restriction, then disregard it as an extraneous solution.   Try this! Solve: x x − 5 + 3 x + 2 = 7 x x 2 − 3 x − 10 . Answer: −3 Video Solution Sometimes all potential solutions are extraneous, in which case we say that there is no solution to the original equation. In the next two examples, we demonstrate two ways in which a rational equation can have no solutions.   Example 4: Solve: 3 x x 2 − 4 − 2 x + 2 = 1 x + 2 . Solution: To identify the LCD, first factor the denominators. Multiply both sides by the least common denonominator (LCD), ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 ) , distributing carefully. The equation is a contradiction and thus has no solution. Answer: No solution, ∅   Example 5: Solve: x x − 4 − 4 x + 5 = 36 x 2 + x − 20 . Solution: First, factor the denominators. Take note that the restrictions are x ≠ 4 and x ≠ − 5 . To clear the fractions, multiply by the LCD, ( x − 4 ) ( x + 5 ) . Both of these values are restrictions of the original equation; hence both are extraneous. Answer: No solution, ∅   Try this! Solve: 1 x + 1 + x x − 3 = 4 x x 2 − 2 x − 3 . Answer: ∅ Video Solution It is important to point out that this technique for clearing algebraic fractions only works for equations. Do not try to clear algebraic fractions when simplifying expressions. As a reminder, we have Expressions are to be simplified and equations are to be solved. If we multiply the expression by the LCD, x ( 2 x + 1 ) , we obtain another expression that is not equivalent.  || Literal Equations Literal equations, or formulas, are often rational equations. Hence the techniques described in this section can be used to solve for particular variables. Assume that all variable expressions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 6: Solve for x:    z = x − 5 y . Solution: The goal is to isolate x. Assuming that y is nonzero, multiply both sides by y and then add 5 to both sides. Answer: x = y z + 5   Example 7: Solve for c:    1 c = 1 a + 1 b . Solution: In this example, the goal is to isolate c. We begin by multiplying both sides by the LCD, a ⋅ b ⋅ c , distributing carefully. On the right side of the equation, factor out c. Next, divide both sides of the equation by the quantity . Answer:   Try this! Solve for y:    . Answer: Video Solution  ||  || Number Problems Recall that the reciprocal The reciprocal of a nonzero number n is 1/n. of a nonzero number n is 1/n. For example, the reciprocal of 5 is 1/5 and 5 ⋅ 1/5 = 1. In this section, the applications will often involve the key word “reciprocal.” When this is the case, we will see that the algebraic setup results in a rational equation.   Example 1: A positive integer is 4 less than another. The sum of the reciprocals of the two positive integers is 10/21. Find the two integers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the unknowns. Next, use the reciprocals 1 n and 1 n − 4 to translate the sentences into an algebraic equation. We can solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD). In this case, the LCD is 21 n ( n − 4 ) . Solve the resulting quadratic equation. The question calls for integers and the only integer solution is n = 7 . Hence disregard 6/5. Use the expression n − 4 to find the smaller integer. Answer: The two positive integers are 3 and 7. The check is left to the reader.   Example 2: A positive integer is 4 less than another. If the reciprocal of the smaller integer is subtracted from twice the reciprocal of the larger, then the result is 1/30. Find the two integers. Solution: Set up an algebraic equation. Solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides by the LCD. The LCD is 30 n ( n − 4 ) . Here we have two viable possibilities for the larger integer. For this reason, we will we have two solutions to this problem. As a check, perform the operations indicated in the problem. Answer: Two sets of positive integers solve this problem: {6, 10} and {20, 24}.   Try this! The difference between the reciprocals of two consecutive positive odd integers is 2/15. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 3 and 5. Video Solution  || Uniform Motion Problems Uniform motion Described by the formula D = r t , where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. problems, also referred to as distance problems, involve the formula where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. If we divide both sides by the average rate, r, then we obtain the formula For this reason, when the unknown quantity is time, the algebraic setup for distance problems often results in a rational equation. Similarly, when the unknown quantity is the rate, the setup also may result in a rational equation. We begin any uniform motion problem by first organizing our data with a chart. Use this information to set up an algebraic equation that models the application.   Example 5: Mary spent the first 120 miles of her road trip in traffic. When the traffic cleared, she was able to drive twice as fast for the remaining 300 miles. If the total trip took 9 hours, then how fast was she moving in traffic? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. To avoid introducing two more variables for the time column, use the formula t = D r . Here the time for each leg of the trip is calculated as follows: Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 9 hours: We begin solving this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, 2x. Answer: Mary averaged 30 miles per hour in traffic.   Example 6: A passenger train can travel, on average, 20 miles per hour faster than a freight train. If the passenger train covers 390 miles in the same time it takes the freight train to cover 270 miles, then how fast is each train? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantities and organize the data. Next, organize the given data in a chart. Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each train. Because the trains travel the same amount of time, finish the algebraic setup by equating the expressions that represent the times: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, x ( x + 20 ) . Use x + 20 to find the speed of the passenger train. Answer: The speed of the passenger train is 65 miles per hour and the speed of the freight train is 45 miles per hour.   Example 7: Brett lives on the river 8 miles upstream from town. When the current is 2 miles per hour, he can row his boat downstream to town for supplies and back in 3 hours. What is his average rowing speed in still water? Solution: Rowing downstream, the current increases his speed, and his rate is x + 2 miles per hour. Rowing upstream, the current decreases his speed, and his rate is x − 2 miles per hour. Begin by organizing the data in the following chart: Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each leg of the trip. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 3 hours: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 ) . Next, solve the resulting quadratic equation. Use only the positive solution, x = 6 miles per hour. Answer: His rowing speed is 6 miles per hour.   Try this! Dwayne drove 18 miles to the airport to pick up his father and then returned home. On the return trip he was able to drive an average of 15 miles per hour faster than he did on the trip there. If the total driving time was 1 hour, then what was his average speed driving to the airport? Answer: His average speed driving to the airport was 30 miles per hour. Video Solution  || Work-Rate Problems The rate at which a task can be performed is called a work rate The rate at which a task can be performed. . For example, if a painter can paint a room in 8 hours, then the task is to paint the room, and we can write In other words, the painter can complete 1 8 of the task per hour. If he works for less than 8 hours, then he will perform a fraction of the task. For example, Obtain the amount of the task completed by multiplying the work rate by the amount of time the painter works. Typically, work-rate problems involve people working together to complete tasks. When this is the case, we can organize the data in a chart, just as we have done with distance problems. Suppose an apprentice painter can paint the same room by himself in 10 hours. Then we say that he can complete 1 10 of the task per hour. Let t represent the time it takes both of the painters, working together, to paint the room. To complete the chart, multiply the work rate by the time for each person. The portion of the room each can paint adds to a total of 1 task completed. This is represented by the equation obtained from the first column of the chart: This setup results in a rational equation that can be solved for t by multiplying both sides by the LCD, 40. Therefore, the two painters, working together, complete the task in 4 4 9 hours. In general, we have the following work-rate formula 1 t 1 ⋅ t + 1 t 2 ⋅ t = 1 , where 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete the task working together. : Here 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete one task working together. If we factor out the time, t, and then divide both sides by t, we obtain an equivalent work-rate formula: In summary, we have the following equivalent work-rate formulas:   Example 3: Working alone, Billy’s dad can complete the yard work in 3 hours. If Billy helps his dad, then the yard work takes 2 hours. How long would it take Billy working alone to complete the yard work? Solution: The given information tells us that Billy’s dad has an individual work rate of 1 3 task per hour. If we let x represent the time it takes Billy working alone to complete the yard work, then Billy’s individual work rate is 1 x , and we can write Working together, they can complete the task in 2 hours. Multiply the individual work rates by 2 hours to fill in the chart. The amount of the task each completes will total 1 completed task. To solve for x, we first multiply both sides by the LCD, 3x. Answer: It takes Billy 6 hours to complete the yard work alone.   Of course, the unit of time for the work rate need not always be in hours.   Example 4: Working together, two construction crews can build a shed in 5 days. Working separately, the less experienced crew takes twice as long to build a shed than the more experienced crew. Working separately, how long does it take each crew to build a shed? Solution: Working together, the job is completed in 5 days. This gives the following setup: The first column in the chart gives us an algebraic equation that models the problem: Solve the equation by multiplying both sides by 2x. To determine the time it takes the less experienced crew, we use 2x: Answer: Working separately, the experienced crew takes 7½ days to build a shed, and the less experienced crew takes 15 days to build a shed.   Try this! Joe’s garden hose fills the pool in 12 hours. His neighbor has a thinner hose that fills the pool in 15 hours. How long will it take to fill the pool using both hoses? Answer: It will take both hoses 6 2 3 hours to fill the pool. Video Solution  ||  || Direct Variation Consider a freight train moving at a constant speed of 30 miles per hour. The equation that expresses the distance traveled at that speed in terms of time is given by After 1 hour the train has traveled 30 miles, after 2 hours the train has traveled 60 miles, and so on. We can construct a chart and graph this relation. In this example, we can see that the distance varies over time as the product of the constant rate, 30 miles per hour, and the variable, t. This relationship is described as direct variation Describes two quantities x and y that are constant multiples of each other: y = k x . and 30 is called the variation constant. In addition, if we divide both sides of D = 30 t by t we have In this form, it is reasonable to say that D is proportional to t, where 30 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies directly as x” y = k x “y is directly proportional Used when referring to direct variation. to x” “y is proportional to x” Here k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation The nonzero multiple k, when quantities vary directly or inversely. or the constant of proportionality Used when referring to the constant of variation. .   Example 1: The circumference of a circle is directly proportional to its diameter, and the constant of proportionality is π . If the circumference is measured to be 20 inches, then what is the radius of the circle? Solution: Use the fact that “the circumference is directly proportional to the diameter” to write an equation that relates the two variables. We are given that “the constant of proportionality is π ,” or k = π . Therefore, we write Now use this formula to find d when the circumference is 20 inches. The radius of the circle, r, is one-half of its diameter. Answer: The radius is 10 π inches, or approximately 3.18 inches.   Typically, we will not be given the constant of variation. Instead, we will be given information from which it can be determined.   Example 2: An object’s weight on earth varies directly to its weight on the moon. If a man weighs 180 pounds on earth, then he will weigh 30 pounds on the moon. Set up an algebraic equation that expresses the weight on earth in terms of the weight on the moon and use it to determine the weight of a woman on the moon if she weighs 120 pounds on earth. Solution: We are given that the “weight on earth varies directly to the weight on the moon.” To find the constant of variation k, use the given information. A 180-pound man on earth weighs 30 pounds on the moon, or y = 180 when x = 30 . Solve for k. Next, set up a formula that models the given information. This implies that a person’s weight on earth is 6 times her weight on the moon. To answer the question, use the woman’s weight on earth, y = 120   pounds , and solve for x. Answer: The woman weighs 20 pounds on the moon.  || Inverse Variation Next, consider the relationship between time and rate, If we wish to travel a fixed distance, then we can determine the average speed required to travel that distance in a given amount of time. For example, if we wish to drive 240 miles in 4 hours, we can determine the required average speed as follows: The average speed required to drive 240 miles in 4 hours is 60 miles per hour. If we wish to drive the 240 miles in 5 hours, then determine the required speed using a similar equation: In this case, we would only have to average 48 miles per hour. We can make a chart and view this relationship on a graph. This is an example of an inverse relationship. We say that r is inversely proportional to the time t, where 240 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies inversely Describes two quantities x and y, where one variable is directly proportional to the reciprocal of the other: y = k x . as x” y = k x “y is inversely proportional Used when referring to inverse variation. to x” Again, k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation or the constant of proportionality.   Example 3: If y varies inversely as x and y = 5 when x = 2 , then find the constant of proportionality and an equation that relates the two variables. Solution: If we let k represent the constant of proportionality, then the statement “y varies inversely as x” can be written as follows: Use the given information, y = 5 when x = 2 , to find k. Solve for k. Therefore, the formula that models the problem is Answer: The constant of proportionality is 10, and the equation is y = 10 x .   Example 4: The weight of an object varies inversely as the square of its distance from the center of earth. If an object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth (approximately 4,000 miles from the center), then how much will it weigh at 1,000 miles above earth’s surface? Solution: Since “w varies inversely as the square of d,” we can write Use the given information to find k. An object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth, approximately 4,000 miles from the center. In other words, w = 100 when d = 4,000: Solve for k. Therefore, we can model the problem with the following formula: To use the formula to find the weight, we need the distance from the center of earth. Since the object is 1,000 miles above the surface, find the distance from the center of earth by adding 4,000 miles: To answer the question, use the formula with d = 5,000. Answer: The object will weigh 64 pounds at a distance 1,000 miles above the surface of earth.  || Joint Variation Lastly, we define relationships between multiple variables. In general, we have Vocabulary Translation “y varies jointly Describes a quantity y that varies directly as the product of two other quantities x and z: y = k x z . as x and z” y = k x z “y is jointly proportional Used when referring to joint variation. to x and z” Here k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation or the constant of proportionality.   Example 5: The area of an ellipse varies jointly as a, half of the ellipse’s major axis, and b, half of the ellipse’s minor axis. If the area of an ellipse is 300 π   cm 2 , where a = 10   cm and b = 30   cm , then what is the constant of proportionality? Give a formula for the area of an ellipse. Solution: If we let A represent the area of an ellipse, then we can use the statement “area varies jointly as a and b” to write To find the constant of variation, k, use the fact that the area is 300 π when a = 10 and b = 30 . Therefore, the formula for the area of an ellipse is Answer: The constant of proportionality is π , and the formula for the area is A = a b π .   Try this! Given that y varies directly as the square of x and inversely to z, where y = 2 when x = 3 and z = 27, find y when x = 2 and z = 16. Answer: 3/2 Video Solution  || 