 ||  || More Numbers on the Number Line In Chapters Section 1.1, Section 2.1, and Section 3.1, we studied the whole numbers and methods of combining them. We noted that we could visually display the whole numbers by drawing a number line and placing closed circles at whole number locations. By observing this number line, we can see that the whole numbers do not account for every point on the line. What numbers, if any, can be associated with these points? In this section we will see that many of the points on the number line, including the points already associated with whole numbers, can be associated with numbers called fractions.  || Fractions of Whole Numbers The Nature of the Positive Fractions We can extend our collection of numbers, which now contains only the whole numbers, by including fractions of whole numbers. We can determine the nature of these fractions using the number line. If we place a pencil at some whole number and proceed to travel to the right to the next whole number, we see that our journey can be broken into different types of equal parts as shown in the following examples. 1 part. 2 equal parts. 3 equal parts. 4 equal parts. The Latin Word Fractio Notice that the number of parts, 2, 3, and 4, that we are breaking the original quantity into is always a nonzero whole number. The idea of breaking up a whole quantity gives us the word fraction. The word fraction comes from the Latin word "fractio" which means a breaking, or fracture. Suppose we break up the interval from some whole number to the next whole number into five equal parts. After starting to move from one whole number to the next, we decide to stop after covering only two parts. We have covered 2 parts of 5 equal parts. This situation is described by writing . Positive Fraction A number such as is called a positive fraction, or more simply, a fraction.  || The Parts of a Fraction A fraction has three parts. The fraction bar . Fraction Bar The fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol. It separates a quantity into individual groups. These groups have names, as noted in 2 and 3 below. The nonzero number below the fraction bar. Denominator This number is called the denominator of the fraction, and it indicates the number of parts the whole quantity has been divided into. Notice that the denominator must be a nonzero whole number since the least number of parts any quantity can have is one. The number above the fraction bar. Numerator This number is called the numerator of the fraction, and it indicates how many of the specified parts are being considered. Notice that the numerator can be any whole number (including zero) since any number of the specified parts can be considered. Sample Set A The diagrams in the following problems are illustrations of fractions. Example 4.1.  Figure 4.1.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 3 equal parts (c) 1 of the 3 equal parts The fraction is read as "one third." Example 4.2.  Figure 4.2.  (a) A whole rectangle (b) The whole rectangle divided into 5 equal parts (c) 3 of the 5 equal parts The fraction "is read as "three fifths." Example 4.3.  Figure 4.3.  (a) The number line between 0 and 1 (b) The number line between 0 and 1 divided into 7 equal parts (c) 6 of the 7 equal parts The fraction is read as "six sevenths." Example 4.4.  Figure 4.4.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 4 equal parts (c) 4 of the 4 equal parts When the numerator and denominator are equal, the fraction represents the entire quantity, and its value is 1. Practice Set A Specify the numerator and denominator of the following fractions. Exercise 4.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.5. (Go to Solution)  || Reading and Writing Fractions In order to properly translate fractions from word form to number form, or from number form to word form, it is necessary to understand the use of the hyphen. Use of the Hyphen One of the main uses of the hyphen is to tell the reader that two words not ordinarily joined are to be taken in combination as a unit. Hyphens are always used for numbers between and including 21 and 99 (except those ending in zero). Sample Set B Write each fraction using whole numbers. Example 4.5.  Fifty three-hundredths. The hyphen joins the words three and hundredths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty three-hundredths translates as Example 4.6.  Fifty-three hundredths. The hyphen joins the numbers fifty and three and tells us to con­sider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty-three hundredths translates as Example 4.7.  Four hundred seven-thousandths. The hyphen joins the words seven and thousandths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, four hundred seven-thousandths translates as Example 4.8.  Four hundred seven thousandths. The absence of hyphens indicates that the words seven and thousandths are to be considered individually. four hundred seven thousandths translates as Write each fraction using words. Example 4.9.  translates as twenty-one eighty-fifths. Example 4.10.  translates as two hundred three-thousandths. A hyphen is needed between the words three and thousandths to tell the reader that these words are to be considered as a single unit. Example 4.11.  translates as two hundred three thousandths. Practice Set B Write the following fractions using whole numbers. Exercise 4.2.6. (Go to Solution) one tenth Exercise 4.2.7. (Go to Solution) eleven fourteenths Exercise 4.2.8. (Go to Solution) sixteen thirty-fifths Exercise 4.2.9. (Go to Solution) eight hundred seven-thousandths Write the following using words. Exercise 4.2.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.13. (Go to Solution) Name the fraction that describes each shaded portion. Exercise 4.2.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.15. (Go to Solution) In the following 2 problems, state the numerator and denominator, and write each fraction in words. Exercise 4.2.16. (Go to Solution) The number is used in converting from Fahrenheit to Celsius. Exercise 4.2.17. (Go to Solution) A dime is of a dollar.  ||  || Positive Proper Fractions Positive Proper Fraction Fractions in which the whole number in the numerator is strictly less than the whole number in the denominator are called positive proper fractions. On the number line, proper fractions are located in the interval from 0 to 1. Positive proper fractions are always less than one. The closed circle at 0 indicates that 0 is included, while the open circle at 1 indicates that 1 is not included. Some examples of positive proper fractions are , , , and Note that 1 < 2, 3 < 5, 20 < 27, and 106 < 225.  || Positive Improper Fractions Positive Improper Fractions Fractions in which the whole number in the numerator is greater than or equal to the whole number in the denominator are called positive improper fractions. On the number line, improper fractions lie to the right of (and including) 1. Positive improper fractions are always greater than or equal to 1. Some examples of positive improper fractions are , , , and Note that 3 ≥ 2, 8 ≥ 5, 4 ≥ 4, and 105 ≥ 16.  || Positive Mixed Numbers Positive Mixed Numbers A number of the form nonzero whole number + proper fraction is called a positive mixed number. For example, is a mixed number. On the number line, mixed numbers are located in the interval to the right of (and includ­ing) 1. Mixed numbers are always greater than or equal to 1.  || Relating Positive Improper Fractions and Positive Mixed Numbers A relationship between improper fractions and mixed numbers is suggested by two facts. The first is that improper fractions and mixed numbers are located in the same interval on the number line. The second fact, that mixed numbers are the sum of a natural number and a fraction, can be seen by making the following observa­tions. Divide a whole quantity into 3 equal parts. Now, consider the following examples by observing the respective shaded areas. In the shaded region, there are 2 one thirds, or . There are 3 one thirds, or , or 1. Thus, Improper fraction = whole number. There are 4 one thirds, or , or 1 and . or The terms 1 and can be represented as or Thus, . Improper fraction = mixed number. There are 5 one thirds, or , or 1 and . The terms 1 and can be represented as or . Thus, . Improper fraction = mixed number. There are 6 one thirds, or , or 2. Thus, Improper fraction = whole number. The following important fact is illustrated in the preceding examples. Mixed Number = Natural Number + Proper Fraction Mixed numbers are the sum of a natural number and a proper fraction. Mixed number = (natural number) + (proper fraction) For example can be expressed as The fraction can be expressed as . It is important to note that a number such as does not indicate multiplication. To indicate multiplication, we would need to use a multiplication symbol (such as ⋅) Note means and not , which means 5 times or 5 multiplied by . Thus, mixed numbers may be represented by improper fractions, and improper fractions may be represented by mixed numbers.  || Converting Improper Fractions to Mixed Numbers To understand how we might convert an improper fraction to a mixed number, let's consider the fraction, . Thus, . We can illustrate a procedure for converting an improper fraction to a mixed number using this example. However, the conversion is more easily accomplished by dividing the numerator by the denominator and using the result to write the mixed number. Converting an Improper Fraction to a Mixed Number To convert an improper fraction to a mixed number, divide the numerator by the denominator. The whole number part of the mixed number is the quotient. The fractional part of the mixed number is the remainder written over the divisor (the denominator of the improper fraction). Sample Set A Convert each improper fraction to its corresponding mixed number. Example 4.12.  Divide 5 by 3. The improper fraction . Example 4.13.  . Divide 46 by 9. The improper fraction . Example 4.14.  . Divide 83 by 11. The improper fraction . Example 4.15.  Divide 104 by 4. The improper fraction . Practice Set A Convert each improper fraction to its corresponding mixed number. Exercise 4.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.6. (Go to Solution)  || Converting Mixed Numbers to Improper Fractions To understand how to convert a mixed number to an improper fraction, we'll recall mixed number = (natural number) + (proper fraction) and consider the following diagram. Recall that multiplication describes repeated addition. Notice that can be obtained from using multiplication in the following way. Multiply: 3⋅1 = 3 Add: 3 + 2 = 5. Place the 5 over the 3: The procedure for converting a mixed number to an improper fraction is illustrated in this example. Converting a Mixed Number to an Improper Fraction To convert a mixed number to an improper fraction, Multiply the denominator of the fractional part of the mixed number by the whole number part. To this product, add the numerator of the fractional part. Place this result over the denominator of the fractional part. Sample Set B Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. Example 4.16.  Multiply: 8⋅5 = 40. Add: 40 + 7 = 47. Place 47 over 8: . Thus, . Example 4.17.  Multiply: 3 ⋅ 16 = 48. Add: 48 + 2 = 50. Place 50 over 3: Thus, Practice Set B Convert each mixed number to its corresponding improper fraction. Exercise 4.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.10. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Equivalent Fractions Let's examine the following two diagrams. Notice that both and represent the same part of the whole, that is, they represent the same number. Equivalent Fractions Fractions that have the same value are called equivalent fractions. Equiva­lent fractions may look different, but they are still the same point on the number line. There is an interesting property that equivalent fractions satisfy. A Test for Equivalent Fractions Using the Cross Product These pairs of products are called cross products. If the cross products are equal, the fractions are equivalent. If the cross products are not equal, the fractions are not equivalent. Thus, and are equivalent, that is, . Sample Set A Determine if the following pairs of fractions are equivalent. Example 4.18.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are equals. The fractions and are equivalent, so . Example 4.19.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are not equal. The fractions and are not equivalent. Practice Set A Determine if the pairs of fractions are equivalent. Exercise 4.4.1. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.2. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.3. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.4. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.5. (Go to Solution) ,  || Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms It is often very useful to convert one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. We can suggest a method for doing so by considering the equivalent fractions and . First, divide both the numerator and denominator of by 3. The fractions and are equivalent. (Can you prove this?) So, . We wish to convert to . Now divide the numerator and denominator of by 3, and see what happens. The fraction is converted to . A natural question is "Why did we choose to divide by 3?" Notice that We can see that the factor 3 is common to both the numerator and denominator. Reducing a Fraction From these observations we can suggest the following method for converting one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. The method is called reducing a fraction. A fraction can be reduced by dividing both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero whole number. Consider the collection of equivalent fractions , , , , Reduced to Lowest Terms Notice that each of the first four fractions can be reduced to the last fraction, , by dividing both the numerator and denominator by, respectively, 5, 4, 3, and 2. When a fraction is converted to the fraction that has the smallest numerator and denomi­nator in its collection of equivalent fractions, it is said to be reduced to lowest terms. The fractions , , , and are all reduced to lowest terms. Observe a very important property of a fraction that has been reduced to lowest terms. The only whole number that divides both the numerator and denominator without a remainder is the number 1. When 1 is the only whole number that divides two whole numbers, the two whole numbers are said to be relatively prime. Relatively Prime A fraction is reduced to lowest terms if its numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Methods of Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms Method 1: Dividing Out Common Primes Write the numerator and denominator as a product of primes. Divide the numerator and denominator by each of the common prime factors. We often indicate this division by drawing a slanted line through each divided out factor. This process is also called cancelling common factors. The product of the remaining factors in the numerator and the product of remaining factors of the denominator are relatively prime, and this fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Sample Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.20.  1 and 3 are relatively prime. Example 4.21.  4 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.22.  7 and 13 are relatively prime (and also truly prime) Example 4.23.  15 and 16 are relatively prime. Example 4.24.  No common prime factors, so 8 and 15 are relatively prime. The fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Practice Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.11. (Go to Solution) Method 2: Dividing Out Common Factors Mentally divide the numerator and the denominator by a factor that is com­mon to each. Write the quotient above the original number. Continue this process until the numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Sample Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.25.  . 5 divides into both 25 and 30. 5 and 6 are relatively prime. Example 4.26.  . Both numbers are even so we can divide by 2. Now, both 9 and 12 are divisible by 3. 3 and 4 are relatively prime. Example 4.27.  . 7 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.28.  . 3 and 8 are relatively prime. Practice Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.17. (Go to Solution)  || Methods of Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms Method 1: Dividing Out Common Primes Write the numerator and denominator as a product of primes. Divide the numerator and denominator by each of the common prime factors. We often indicate this division by drawing a slanted line through each divided out factor. This process is also called cancelling common factors. The product of the remaining factors in the numerator and the product of remaining factors of the denominator are relatively prime, and this fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Sample Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.20.  1 and 3 are relatively prime. Example 4.21.  4 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.22.  7 and 13 are relatively prime (and also truly prime) Example 4.23.  15 and 16 are relatively prime. Example 4.24.  No common prime factors, so 8 and 15 are relatively prime. The fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Practice Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.11. (Go to Solution) Method 2: Dividing Out Common Factors Mentally divide the numerator and the denominator by a factor that is com­mon to each. Write the quotient above the original number. Continue this process until the numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Sample Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.25.  . 5 divides into both 25 and 30. 5 and 6 are relatively prime. Example 4.26.  . Both numbers are even so we can divide by 2. Now, both 9 and 12 are divisible by 3. 3 and 4 are relatively prime. Example 4.27.  . 7 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.28.  . 3 and 8 are relatively prime. Practice Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.17. (Go to Solution)  || Raising Fractions to Higher Terms Equally as important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator than the original fraction. The fractions and are equivalent, that is, . Notice also, Notice that and that . We are not changing the value of . From these observations we can suggest the following method for converting one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. This method is called raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to an equivalent fraction that has higher terms in the numerator and denominator by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero whole number. The fraction can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8. Most often, we will want to convert a given fraction to an equivalent fraction with a higher specified denominator. For example, we may wish to convert to an equivalent fraction that has denominator 32, that is, This is possible to do because we know the process. We must multiply both the numerator and denominator of by the same nonzero whole number in order to 8 obtain an equivalent fraction. We have some information. The denominator 8 was raised to 32 by multiplying it by some nonzero whole number. Division will give us the proper factor. Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 32 ÷ 8 = 4 Now, multiply the numerator 5 by 4. 5 ⋅ 4 = 20 Thus, So, Sample Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Example 4.29.  . Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 35 ÷ 7 = 5 The quotient is 5. Multiply the original numerator by 5. The missing numerator is 15. Example 4.30.  . Divide the original numerator into the new numerator. 45 ÷ 5 = 9 The quotient is 9. Multiply the original denominator by 9. The missing denominator is 45. Practice Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Exercise 4.4.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.20. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.22. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Fractions of Fractions We know that a fraction represents a part of a whole quantity. For example, two fifths of one unit can be represented by of the whole is shaded. A natural question is, what is a fractional part of a fractional quantity, or, what is a fraction of a fraction? For example, what of ? We can suggest an answer to this question by using a picture to examine of . First, let’s represent . of the whole is shaded. Then divide each of the parts into 3 equal parts. Each part is of the whole. Now we’ll take of the unit. of is , which reduces to .  || Multiplication of Fractions Now we ask, what arithmetic operation (+, –, ×, ÷) will produce from of ? Notice that, if in the fractions and , we multiply the numerators together and the denominators together, we get precisely . This reduces to as before. Using this observation, we can suggest the following: The Word "OF" Indicates Multiplication: The word "of" translates to the arithmetic operation "times." The Method of Multiplying Fractions: To multiply two or more fractions, multiply the numerators together and then multiply the denominators together. Reduce if necessary. Sample Set A Perform the following multiplications. Example 4.31.  Thus This means that of is , that is, of of a unit is of the original unit. Example 4.32.  . Write 4 as a fraction by writing This means that of 4 whole units is of one whole unit. Example 4.33.  This means that of of of a whole unit is of the original unit. Practice Set A Perform the following multiplications. Exercise 4.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.9. (Go to Solution)  || Multiplying Fractions by Dividing Out Common Factors We have seen that to multiply two fractions together, we multiply numerators together, then denominators together, then reduce to lowest terms, if necessary. The reduction can be tedious if the numbers in the fractions are large. For example, We avoid the process of reducing if we divide out common factors before we multi­ply. Divide 3 into 9 and 21, and divide 2 into 10 and 16. The product is a fraction that is reduced to lowest terms. The Process of Multiplication by Dividing Out Common Factors To multiply fractions by dividing out common factors, divide out factors that are common to both a numerator and a denominator. The factor being divided out can appear in any numerator and any denominator. Sample Set B Perform the following multiplications. Example 4.34.  Divide 4 and 6 by 2 Divide 5 and 5 by 5 Example 4.35.  Divide 8 and 10 by 2. Divide 8 and 12 by 4. Example 4.36.  Example 4.37.  Example 4.38.  Practice Set B Perform the following multiplications. Exercise 4.5.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.16. (Go to Solution)  || Multiplication of Mixed Numbers Multiplying Mixed Numbers To perform a multiplication in which there are mixed numbers, it is convenient to first convert each mixed number to an improper fraction, then multiply. Sample Set C Perform the following multiplications. Convert improper fractions to mixed numbers. Example 4.39.  Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. Example 4.40.  Convert to an improper fraction. . There are no common factors to divide out. Example 4.41.  Convert to improper fractions. Example 4.42.  Practice Set C Perform the following multiplications. Convert improper fractions to mixed numbers. Exercise 4.5.17. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.20. (Go to Solution)  || Powers and Roots of Fractions Sample Set D Find the value of each of the following. Example 4.43.  Example 4.44.  . We’re looking for a number, call it ?, such that when it is squared, is produced. We know that 32 = 9 and 102 = 100 We’ll try . Since Example 4.45.  Practice Set D Find the value of each of the following. Exercise 4.5.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.22. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.23. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.24. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.25. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.26. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.27. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Reciprocals Reciprocals Two numbers whose product is 1 are called reciprocals of each other. Sample Set A The following pairs of numbers are reciprocals. Example 4.46.  Example 4.47.  Example 4.48.  Notice that we can find the reciprocal of a nonzero number in fractional form by inverting it (exchanging positions of the numerator and denominator). Practice Set A Find the reciprocal of each number. Exercise 4.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.5. (Go to Solution) Hint Write this number as an improper fraction first. Exercise 4.6.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.7. (Go to Solution)  || Dividing Fractions Our concept of division is that it indicates how many times one quantity is con­tained in another quantity. For example, using the diagram we can see that there are 6 one-thirds in 2. There are 6 one-thirds in 2. Since 2 contains six 's we express this as Using these observations, we can suggest the following method for dividing a number by a fraction. Dividing One Fraction by Another Fraction To divide a first fraction by a second, nonzero fraction, multiply the first traction by the reciprocal of the second fraction. Invert and Multiply This method is commonly referred to as "invert the divisor and multiply." Sample Set B Perform the following divisions. Example 4.49.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.50.  The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.51.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.52.  . Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. . . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.53.  . First conveniently write 8 as . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.54.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Example 4.55.  How many -inch-wide packages can be placed in a box 19 inches wide? The problem is to determine how many two and three eighths are contained in 19, that is, what is ? Convert the divisor to an improper fraction. Write the dividend 19 as . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Thus, 8 packages will fit into the box. Practice Set B Perform the following divisions. Exercise 4.6.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.15. (Go to Solution) A container will hold 106 ounces of grape juice. How many -ounce glasses of grape juice can be served from this container? Determine each of the following quotients and then write a rule for this type of division. Exercise 4.6.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.17. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.20. (Go to Solution) When dividing 1 by a fraction, the quotient is the ________________________________________.  ||  || Multiplication Statements Statement, Multiplication Statement A statement is a sentence that is either true or false. A mathematical statement of the form product = (factor 1) ⋅ (factor 2) is a multiplication statement. Depending on the numbers that are used, it can be either true or false. Omitting exactly one of the three numbers in the statement will produce exactly one of the following three problems. For convenience, we'll represent the omitted (or missing) number with the letter M (M for Missing). M = (factor 1) ⋅ (factor 2) Missing product statement. M ⋅ (factor 2) = product Missing factor statement. (factor 1) ⋅ M = product Missing factor statement. We are interested in developing and working with methods to determine the missing number that makes the statement true. Fundamental to these methods is the ability to translate two words to mathematical symbols. The word of translates to times is translates to equals  || Missing Products Statements The equation M = 8 ⋅ 4 is a missing product statement. We can find the value of M that makes this statement true by multiplying the known factors. Missing product statements can be used to determine the answer to a question such as, "What number is fraction 1 of fraction 2? Sample Set A Find of . We are being asked the question, "What number is of ?" We must translate from words to mathematical symbols. Thus, of is . Thus, 18 is of 24. Practice Set A Exercise 4.7.1. (Go to Solution) Find of . Exercise 4.7.2. (Go to Solution) What number is of ? Exercise 4.7.3. (Go to Solution) of is what number?  || Missing Factor Statements The equation 8 ⋅ M = 32 is a missing factor statement. We can find the value of M that makes this statement true by dividing (since we know that 32 ÷ 8 = 4). Finding the Missing Factor To find the missing factor in a missing factor statement, divide the product by the known factor. missing factor = (product) ÷ (known factor) Missing factor statements can be used to answer such questions as of what number is ? What part of is ? Sample Set B Now, using missing factor = (product) ÷ (known factor) We get Thus, of 6 is . For convenience, let's convert the mixed numbers to improper fractions. Now, using missing factor = (product)÷(known factor) we get Thus, of is . Practice Set B Exercise 4.7.4. (Go to Solution) of what number is ? Exercise 4.7.5. (Go to Solution) of what number is ? Exercise 4.7.6. (Go to Solution) What part of is ? Exercise 4.7.7. (Go to Solution) What part of is ?  || 