 || Exponential Notation In Section Section 2.4 we were reminded that multiplication is a description for repeated addition. A natural question is “Is there a description for repeated multiplication?” The answer is yes. The notation that describes repeated multiplication is exponential notation. Factors In multiplication, the numbers being multiplied together are called factors. In repeated multiplication, all the factors are the same. In nonrepeated multiplication, none of the factors are the same. For example, Example 2.52.  Exponential notation is used to show repeated multiplication of the same factor. The notation consists of using a superscript on the factor that is repeated. The superscript is called an exponent. Exponential Notation If x is any real number and n is a natural number, thenAn exponent records the number of identical factors in a multiplication. Note that the definition for exponential notation only has meaning for natural number exponents. We will extend this notation to include other numbers as exponents later.  || Reading Exponential Notation In x n , Base x is the base Exponent n is the exponent Power The number represented by x n is called a power. x to the n th Power The term x n is read as " x to the n th power," or more simply as " x to the n th." x Squared and x Cubed The symbol x 2 is often read as " x squared," and x 3 is often read as " x cubed." A natural question is "Why are geometric terms appearing in the exponent expression?" The answer for x 3 is this: x 3 means x⋅x⋅x . In geometry, the volume of a rectangular box is found by multiplying the length by the width by the depth. A cube has the same length on each side. If we represent this length by the letter x then the volume of the cube is x⋅x⋅x , which, of course, is described by x 3 . (Can you think of why x 2 is read as x squared?) Cube withlength = x width = x depth = x Volume = x x x = x 3  || The Order of Operations In Section Section 2.2 we were introduced to the order of operations. It was noted that we would insert another operation before multiplication and division. We can do that now. The Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols beginning with the innermost set. Perform all exponential operations as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all multiplications and divisions as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all additions and subtractions as you come to them, moving left-to-right.  || 