Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We now have the techniques needed to solve linear systems. For this reason, we are no longer limited to using one variable when setting up equations that model applications. If we translate an application to a mathematical setup using two variables, then we need to form a linear system with two equations.   Example 1: The sum of two numbers is 40 and their difference is 8. Find the numbers. Solution: Identify variables. Set up equations: When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first key phrase, “the sum of the two numbers is 40,” translates as follows: And the second key phrase, “the difference is 8,” leads us to the second equation: Therefore, our algebraic setup consists of the following system: Solve: We can solve the resulting system using any method of our choosing. Here we choose to solve by elimination. Adding the equations together eliminates the variable y. Once we have x, back substitute to find y. Check: The sum of the two numbers should be 42 and their difference 8. Answer: The two numbers are 24 and 16.   Example 2: The sum of 9 times a larger number and twice a smaller is 6. The difference of 3 times the larger and the smaller is 7. Find the numbers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the larger and smaller number. The first sentence describes a sum and the second sentence describes a difference. This leads to the following system: Solve using the elimination method. Multiply the second equation by 2 and add. Back substitute to find y. Answer: The larger number is 4/3 and the smaller number is −3.   Try this! The sum of two numbers is 3. When twice the smaller number is subtracted from 6 times the larger the result is 22. Find the numbers. Answer: The two numbers are −1/2 and 7/2. Video Solution Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We now have the techniques needed to solve linear systems. For this reason, we are no longer limited to using one variable when setting up equations that model applications. If we translate an application to a mathematical setup using two variables, then we need to form a linear system with two equations.   Example 1: The sum of two numbers is 40 and their difference is 8. Find the numbers. Solution: Identify variables. Set up equations: When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first key phrase, “the sum of the two numbers is 40,” translates as follows: And the second key phrase, “the difference is 8,” leads us to the second equation: Therefore, our algebraic setup consists of the following system: Solve: We can solve the resulting system using any method of our choosing. Here we choose to solve by elimination. Adding the equations together eliminates the variable y. Once we have x, back substitute to find y. Check: The sum of the two numbers should be 42 and their difference 8. Answer: The two numbers are 24 and 16.   Example 2: The sum of 9 times a larger number and twice a smaller is 6. The difference of 3 times the larger and the smaller is 7. Find the numbers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the larger and smaller number. The first sentence describes a sum and the second sentence describes a difference. This leads to the following system: Solve using the elimination method. Multiply the second equation by 2 and add. Back substitute to find y. Answer: The larger number is 4/3 and the smaller number is −3.   Try this! The sum of two numbers is 3. When twice the smaller number is subtracted from 6 times the larger the result is 22. Find the numbers. Answer: The two numbers are −1/2 and 7/2. Video Solution  || 