Definitions A set Any collection of objects. is a collection of objects, typically grouped within braces { }, where each object is called an element An object within a set. . For example, {red, green, blue} is a set of colors. A subset A set consisting of elements that belong to a given set. is a set consisting of elements that belong to a given set. For example, {green, blue} is a subset of the color set above. A set with no elements is called the empty set A subset with no elements, denoted ∅ or { }. and has its own special notation, { } or ∅. When studying mathematics, we focus on special sets of numbers. The set of natural (or counting) numbers The set of counting numbers {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, …}. , denoted N, is The three periods (…) is called an ellipsis and indicates that the numbers continue without bound. The set of whole numbers The set of natural numbers combined with zero {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, …}. , denoted W , is the set of natural numbers combined with zero. The set of integers The set of positive and negative whole numbers combined with zero {…, −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, …}. , denoted Z, consists of both positive and negative whole numbers, as well as zero. Notice that the sets of natural and whole numbers are both subsets of the set of integers. Rational numbers Numbers of the form a b , where a and b are integers and b is nonzero. , denoted Q, are defined as any number of the form a b , where a and b are integers and b is nonzero. Decimals that repeat or terminate are rational. For example, The set of integers is a subset of the set of rational numbers because every integer can be expressed as a ratio of the integer and 1. In other words, any integer can be written over 1 and can be considered a rational number. For example, Irrational numbers Numbers that cannot be written as a ratio of two integers. are defined as any number that cannot be written as a ratio of two integers. Nonterminating decimals that do not repeat are irrational. For example, The set of real numbers The set of all rational and irrational numbers. , denoted R, is defined as the set of all rational numbers combined with the set of all irrational numbers. Therefore, all the numbers defined so far are subsets of the set of real numbers. In summary, Definitions A set Any collection of objects. is a collection of objects, typically grouped within braces { }, where each object is called an element An object within a set. . For example, {red, green, blue} is a set of colors. A subset A set consisting of elements that belong to a given set. is a set consisting of elements that belong to a given set. For example, {green, blue} is a subset of the color set above. A set with no elements is called the empty set A subset with no elements, denoted ∅ or { }. and has its own special notation, { } or ∅. When studying mathematics, we focus on special sets of numbers. The set of natural (or counting) numbers The set of counting numbers {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, …}. , denoted N, is The three periods (…) is called an ellipsis and indicates that the numbers continue without bound. The set of whole numbers The set of natural numbers combined with zero {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, …}. , denoted W , is the set of natural numbers combined with zero. The set of integers The set of positive and negative whole numbers combined with zero {…, −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, …}. , denoted Z, consists of both positive and negative whole numbers, as well as zero. Notice that the sets of natural and whole numbers are both subsets of the set of integers. Rational numbers Numbers of the form a b , where a and b are integers and b is nonzero. , denoted Q, are defined as any number of the form a b , where a and b are integers and b is nonzero. Decimals that repeat or terminate are rational. For example, The set of integers is a subset of the set of rational numbers because every integer can be expressed as a ratio of the integer and 1. In other words, any integer can be written over 1 and can be considered a rational number. For example, Irrational numbers Numbers that cannot be written as a ratio of two integers. are defined as any number that cannot be written as a ratio of two integers. Nonterminating decimals that do not repeat are irrational. For example, The set of real numbers The set of all rational and irrational numbers. , denoted R, is defined as the set of all rational numbers combined with the set of all irrational numbers. Therefore, all the numbers defined so far are subsets of the set of real numbers. In summary,  || 