Finding Intercepts Given the Graph The x- and y-intercepts are important points on any graph. This chapter will focus on the graphs of linear equations. However, at this point, we can use these ideas to determine intercepts of nonlinear graphs. Remember that intercepts are ordered pairs that indicate where the graph intersects the axes.   Example 6: Find the x- and y-intercepts given the following graph: Solution: We see that the graph intersects the x-axis in two places. This graph has two x-intercepts, namely, (−4, 0) and (2, 0). Furthermore, the graph intersects the y-axis in one place. The only y-intercept is (0, −3). Answer: x-intercepts: (−4, 0), (2, 0); y-intercept: (0, −3)   In our study of algebra, we will see that some graphs have many intercepts. Also, we will see that some graphs do not have any.   Example 7: Given the following graph, find the x- and y-intercepts: Solution: This is a graph of a circle; we can see that it does not intersect either axis. Therefore, this graph does not have any intercepts. Answer: None Finding Intercepts Given the Graph The x- and y-intercepts are important points on any graph. This chapter will focus on the graphs of linear equations. However, at this point, we can use these ideas to determine intercepts of nonlinear graphs. Remember that intercepts are ordered pairs that indicate where the graph intersects the axes.   Example 6: Find the x- and y-intercepts given the following graph: Solution: We see that the graph intersects the x-axis in two places. This graph has two x-intercepts, namely, (−4, 0) and (2, 0). Furthermore, the graph intersects the y-axis in one place. The only y-intercept is (0, −3). Answer: x-intercepts: (−4, 0), (2, 0); y-intercept: (0, −3)   In our study of algebra, we will see that some graphs have many intercepts. Also, we will see that some graphs do not have any.   Example 7: Given the following graph, find the x- and y-intercepts: Solution: This is a graph of a circle; we can see that it does not intersect either axis. Therefore, this graph does not have any intercepts. Answer: None  || 