Work-Rate Problems The rate at which a task can be performed is called a work rate The rate at which a task can be performed. . For example, if a painter can paint a room in 8 hours, then the task is to paint the room, and we can write In other words, the painter can complete 1 8 of the task per hour. If he works for less than 8 hours, then he will perform a fraction of the task. For example, Obtain the amount of the task completed by multiplying the work rate by the amount of time the painter works. Typically, work-rate problems involve people working together to complete tasks. When this is the case, we can organize the data in a chart, just as we have done with distance problems. Suppose an apprentice painter can paint the same room by himself in 10 hours. Then we say that he can complete 1 10 of the task per hour. Let t represent the time it takes both of the painters, working together, to paint the room. To complete the chart, multiply the work rate by the time for each person. The portion of the room each can paint adds to a total of 1 task completed. This is represented by the equation obtained from the first column of the chart: This setup results in a rational equation that can be solved for t by multiplying both sides by the LCD, 40. Therefore, the two painters, working together, complete the task in 4 4 9 hours. In general, we have the following work-rate formula 1 t 1 ⋅ t + 1 t 2 ⋅ t = 1 , where 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete the task working together. : Here 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete one task working together. If we factor out the time, t, and then divide both sides by t, we obtain an equivalent work-rate formula: In summary, we have the following equivalent work-rate formulas:   Example 3: Working alone, Billy’s dad can complete the yard work in 3 hours. If Billy helps his dad, then the yard work takes 2 hours. How long would it take Billy working alone to complete the yard work? Solution: The given information tells us that Billy’s dad has an individual work rate of 1 3 task per hour. If we let x represent the time it takes Billy working alone to complete the yard work, then Billy’s individual work rate is 1 x , and we can write Working together, they can complete the task in 2 hours. Multiply the individual work rates by 2 hours to fill in the chart. The amount of the task each completes will total 1 completed task. To solve for x, we first multiply both sides by the LCD, 3x. Answer: It takes Billy 6 hours to complete the yard work alone.   Of course, the unit of time for the work rate need not always be in hours.   Example 4: Working together, two construction crews can build a shed in 5 days. Working separately, the less experienced crew takes twice as long to build a shed than the more experienced crew. Working separately, how long does it take each crew to build a shed? Solution: Working together, the job is completed in 5 days. This gives the following setup: The first column in the chart gives us an algebraic equation that models the problem: Solve the equation by multiplying both sides by 2x. To determine the time it takes the less experienced crew, we use 2x: Answer: Working separately, the experienced crew takes 7½ days to build a shed, and the less experienced crew takes 15 days to build a shed.   Try this! Joe’s garden hose fills the pool in 12 hours. His neighbor has a thinner hose that fills the pool in 15 hours. How long will it take to fill the pool using both hoses? Answer: It will take both hoses 6 2 3 hours to fill the pool. Video Solution Work-Rate Problems The rate at which a task can be performed is called a work rate The rate at which a task can be performed. . For example, if a painter can paint a room in 8 hours, then the task is to paint the room, and we can write In other words, the painter can complete 1 8 of the task per hour. If he works for less than 8 hours, then he will perform a fraction of the task. For example, Obtain the amount of the task completed by multiplying the work rate by the amount of time the painter works. Typically, work-rate problems involve people working together to complete tasks. When this is the case, we can organize the data in a chart, just as we have done with distance problems. Suppose an apprentice painter can paint the same room by himself in 10 hours. Then we say that he can complete 1 10 of the task per hour. Let t represent the time it takes both of the painters, working together, to paint the room. To complete the chart, multiply the work rate by the time for each person. The portion of the room each can paint adds to a total of 1 task completed. This is represented by the equation obtained from the first column of the chart: This setup results in a rational equation that can be solved for t by multiplying both sides by the LCD, 40. Therefore, the two painters, working together, complete the task in 4 4 9 hours. In general, we have the following work-rate formula 1 t 1 ⋅ t + 1 t 2 ⋅ t = 1 , where 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete the task working together. : Here 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete one task working together. If we factor out the time, t, and then divide both sides by t, we obtain an equivalent work-rate formula: In summary, we have the following equivalent work-rate formulas:   Example 3: Working alone, Billy’s dad can complete the yard work in 3 hours. If Billy helps his dad, then the yard work takes 2 hours. How long would it take Billy working alone to complete the yard work? Solution: The given information tells us that Billy’s dad has an individual work rate of 1 3 task per hour. If we let x represent the time it takes Billy working alone to complete the yard work, then Billy’s individual work rate is 1 x , and we can write Working together, they can complete the task in 2 hours. Multiply the individual work rates by 2 hours to fill in the chart. The amount of the task each completes will total 1 completed task. To solve for x, we first multiply both sides by the LCD, 3x. Answer: It takes Billy 6 hours to complete the yard work alone.   Of course, the unit of time for the work rate need not always be in hours.   Example 4: Working together, two construction crews can build a shed in 5 days. Working separately, the less experienced crew takes twice as long to build a shed than the more experienced crew. Working separately, how long does it take each crew to build a shed? Solution: Working together, the job is completed in 5 days. This gives the following setup: The first column in the chart gives us an algebraic equation that models the problem: Solve the equation by multiplying both sides by 2x. To determine the time it takes the less experienced crew, we use 2x: Answer: Working separately, the experienced crew takes 7½ days to build a shed, and the less experienced crew takes 15 days to build a shed.   Try this! Joe’s garden hose fills the pool in 12 hours. His neighbor has a thinner hose that fills the pool in 15 hours. How long will it take to fill the pool using both hoses? Answer: It will take both hoses 6 2 3 hours to fill the pool. Video Solution  || 