Solving Polynomial Equations by Factoring The zero-product property is true for any number of factors that make up an equation. If an expression is equal to zero and can be factored into linear factors, then we will be able to set each factor equal to zero and solve for each equation.   Example 13: Solve: 3 x ( x − 5 ) ( 3 x − 2 ) = 0 . Solution: Set each variable factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are 0, 5, and 2/3.   Of course, we cannot expect the equation to be given in factored form.   Example 14: Solve: x 3 + 2 x 2 − 9 x − 18 = 0 . Solution: Begin by factoring the left side completely. Set each factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are −2, −3, and 3.   Notice that the degree of the polynomial is 3 and we obtained three solutions. In general, for any polynomial equation with one variable of degree n, the fundamental theorem of algebra Guarantees that there will be as many (or fewer) real solutions to a polynomial with one variable as its degree. guarantees n real solutions or fewer. We have seen that many polynomials do not factor. This does not imply that equations involving these unfactorable polynomials do not have real solutions. In fact, many polynomial equations that do not factor do have real solutions. We will learn how to solve these types of equations as we continue in our study of algebra.   Try this! Solve: − 10 x 3 − 18 x 2 + 4 x = 0 . Answer: −2, 0, 1/5 Video Solution Solving Polynomial Equations by Factoring The zero-product property is true for any number of factors that make up an equation. If an expression is equal to zero and can be factored into linear factors, then we will be able to set each factor equal to zero and solve for each equation.   Example 13: Solve: 3 x ( x − 5 ) ( 3 x − 2 ) = 0 . Solution: Set each variable factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are 0, 5, and 2/3.   Of course, we cannot expect the equation to be given in factored form.   Example 14: Solve: x 3 + 2 x 2 − 9 x − 18 = 0 . Solution: Begin by factoring the left side completely. Set each factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are −2, −3, and 3.   Notice that the degree of the polynomial is 3 and we obtained three solutions. In general, for any polynomial equation with one variable of degree n, the fundamental theorem of algebra Guarantees that there will be as many (or fewer) real solutions to a polynomial with one variable as its degree. guarantees n real solutions or fewer. We have seen that many polynomials do not factor. This does not imply that equations involving these unfactorable polynomials do not have real solutions. In fact, many polynomial equations that do not factor do have real solutions. We will learn how to solve these types of equations as we continue in our study of algebra.   Try this! Solve: − 10 x 3 − 18 x 2 + 4 x = 0 . Answer: −2, 0, 1/5 Video Solution  || 