Simplifying Radical Expressions An algebraic expression that contains radicals is called a radical expression An algebraic expression that contains radicals. . We use the product and quotient rules to simplify them.   Example 1: Simplify: 8 y 3 − − − √ 3 . Solution: Use the fact that a n − − √ n = a when n is odd. Answer: 2 y   Example 2: Simplify: 9 x 2 − − − √ . Solution: The square root has index 2; use the fact that a n − − √ n = | a | when n is even. Since x is a variable, it may represent a negative number. Thus we need to ensure that the result is positive by including the absolute value operator. Answer: 3 | x | Important Note Typically, at this point beginning algebra texts note that all variables are assumed to be positive. If this is the case, then x in the previous example is positive and the absolute value operator is not needed. The example can be simplified as follows: In this section, we will assume that all variables are positive. This allows us to focus on calculating nth roots without the technicalities associated with the principal nth root problem. For this reason, we will use the following property for the rest of the section: When simplifying radical expressions, look for factors with powers that match the index.   Example 3: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the square factors of 18, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 4: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the square factors of 4, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 5: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the cubic factors of 80, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 6: Simplify . Solution: The coefficient and thus does not have any perfect cube factors. It will be left as the only remaining radicand because all of the other factors are cubes, as illustrated below: Replace the variables with these equivalents, apply the product and quotient rule for radicals, and then simplify. Answer:   Example 7: Simplify: . Solution: Determine all factors that can be written as perfect powers of 4. Here it is important to see that . Hence the factor will be left inside the radical. Answer:   Example 8: Simplify: . Solution: Notice that the variable factor x cannot be written as a power of 5 and thus will be left inside the radical. In addition, for ; the factor y will be left inside the radical as well. Answer:   Try this! Simplify: . (Assume all variables are positive.) Answer: Video Solution Tip To easily simplify an nth root, we can divide the powers by the index. If the index does not divide into the power evenly, then we can use the quotient and remainder to simplify. For example, The quotient is the exponent of the factor outside of the radical, and the remainder is the exponent of the factor left inside the radical. Simplifying Radical Expressions An algebraic expression that contains radicals is called a radical expression An algebraic expression that contains radicals. . We use the product and quotient rules to simplify them.   Example 1: Simplify: 8 y 3 − − − √ 3 . Solution: Use the fact that a n − − √ n = a when n is odd. Answer: 2 y   Example 2: Simplify: 9 x 2 − − − √ . Solution: The square root has index 2; use the fact that a n − − √ n = | a | when n is even. Since x is a variable, it may represent a negative number. Thus we need to ensure that the result is positive by including the absolute value operator. Answer: 3 | x | Important Note Typically, at this point beginning algebra texts note that all variables are assumed to be positive. If this is the case, then x in the previous example is positive and the absolute value operator is not needed. The example can be simplified as follows: In this section, we will assume that all variables are positive. This allows us to focus on calculating nth roots without the technicalities associated with the principal nth root problem. For this reason, we will use the following property for the rest of the section: When simplifying radical expressions, look for factors with powers that match the index.   Example 3: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the square factors of 18, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 4: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the square factors of 4, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 5: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the cubic factors of 80, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 6: Simplify . Solution: The coefficient and thus does not have any perfect cube factors. It will be left as the only remaining radicand because all of the other factors are cubes, as illustrated below: Replace the variables with these equivalents, apply the product and quotient rule for radicals, and then simplify. Answer:   Example 7: Simplify: . Solution: Determine all factors that can be written as perfect powers of 4. Here it is important to see that . Hence the factor will be left inside the radical. Answer:   Example 8: Simplify: . Solution: Notice that the variable factor x cannot be written as a power of 5 and thus will be left inside the radical. In addition, for ; the factor y will be left inside the radical as well. Answer:   Try this! Simplify: . (Assume all variables are positive.) Answer: Video Solution Tip To easily simplify an nth root, we can divide the powers by the index. If the index does not divide into the power evenly, then we can use the quotient and remainder to simplify. For example, The quotient is the exponent of the factor outside of the radical, and the remainder is the exponent of the factor left inside the radical.  || 