The Plane Ordered Pairs We are now interested in studying graphs of linear equations in two variables. We know that solutions to equations in two variables consist of a pair of values, one value for each variable. We have called these pairs of values ordered pairs. Since we have a pair of values to graph, we must have a pair of axes (number lines) upon which the values can be located. Origin We draw the axes so they are perpendicular to each other and so that they intersect each other at their 0 ' s . This point is called the origin. Rectangular Coordinate System These two lines form what is called a rectangular coordinate system. They also determine a plane. x y-plane   A plane is a flat surface, and a result from geometry states that through any two intersecting lines (the axes) exactly one plane (flat surface) may be passed. If we are dealing with a linear equation in the two variables x and y , we sometimes say we are graphing the equation using a rectangular coordinate system, or that we are graphing the equation in the x y-plane . Quadrant Notice that the two intersecting coordinate axes divide the plane into four equal regions. Since there are four regions, we call each one a quadrant and number them counterclockwise using Roman numerals. Recall that when we first studied the number line we observed the following: For each real number there exists a unique point on the number line, and for each point on the number line we can associate a unique real number. We have a similar situation for the plane. For each ordered pair (a, b) , there exists a unique point in the plane, and to each point in the plane we can associate a unique ordered pair (a, b) of real numbers. The Plane Ordered Pairs We are now interested in studying graphs of linear equations in two variables. We know that solutions to equations in two variables consist of a pair of values, one value for each variable. We have called these pairs of values ordered pairs. Since we have a pair of values to graph, we must have a pair of axes (number lines) upon which the values can be located. Origin We draw the axes so they are perpendicular to each other and so that they intersect each other at their 0 ' s . This point is called the origin. Rectangular Coordinate System These two lines form what is called a rectangular coordinate system. They also determine a plane. x y-plane   A plane is a flat surface, and a result from geometry states that through any two intersecting lines (the axes) exactly one plane (flat surface) may be passed. If we are dealing with a linear equation in the two variables x and y , we sometimes say we are graphing the equation using a rectangular coordinate system, or that we are graphing the equation in the x y-plane . Quadrant Notice that the two intersecting coordinate axes divide the plane into four equal regions. Since there are four regions, we call each one a quadrant and number them counterclockwise using Roman numerals. Recall that when we first studied the number line we observed the following: For each real number there exists a unique point on the number line, and for each point on the number line we can associate a unique real number. We have a similar situation for the plane. For each ordered pair (a, b) , there exists a unique point in the plane, and to each point in the plane we can associate a unique ordered pair (a, b) of real numbers.  || 