 || Addition of Numbers with Like Signs Let us add the two positive numbers 2 and 3. We perform this addition on the number line as follows. We begin at 0, the origin.Since 2 is positive, we move 2 units to the right.Since 3 is positive, we move 3 more units to the right.We are now located at 5.Thus, 2 + 3 = 5 . Summarizing, we have (2 positive units) + (3 positive units) = (5 positive units) Now let us add the two negative numbers − 2 and − 3 . We perform this addition on the number line as follows. We begin at 0, the origin.Since − 2 is negative, we move 2 units to the left.Since − 3 is negative, we move 3 more units to the left.We are now located at − 5 . Thus, ( − 2) + ( − 3) = − 5 . Summarizing, we have (2 negative units) + (3 negative units) = (5 negative units) These two examples suggest that Adding Numbers with the Same Sign To add two real numbers that have the same sign, add the absolute values of the numbers and associate the common sign with the sum.  || Addition with Zero Notice that Addition with 0 The Additive Identity Is 0 Since adding 0 to a real number leaves that number unchanged, 0 is called the additive identity.  || Addition of Numbers with Unlike Signs Now let us perform the addition 2 + ( − 6) . These two numbers have unlike signs. This type of addition can also be illustrated using the number line. We begin at 0, the origin.Since 2 is positive, we move 2 units to the right.Since − 6 is negative, we move, from the 2, 6 units to the left.We are now located at − 4 . A rule for adding two numbers that have unlike signs is suggested by noting that if the signs are disregarded, 4 can be obtained from 2 and 6 by subtracting 2 from 6. But 2 and 6 are precisely the absolute values of 2 and − 6 . Also, notice that the sign of the number with the larger absolute value is negative and that the sign of the resulting sum is negative. Adding Numbers with Unlike Signs To add two real numbers that have unlike signs, subtract the smaller absolute value from the larger absolute value and associate the sign of the number with the larger absolute value with this difference.  || 