Using the Slope and Intercept to Graph a Line When a linear equation is given in the general form, a x + b y = c , we observed that an efficient graphical approach was the intercept method. We let x = 0 and computed the corresponding value of y , then let y = 0 and computed the corresponding value of x . When an equation is written in the slope-intercept form, y = m x + b , there are also efficient ways of constructing the graph. One way, but less efficient, is to choose two or three x-values and compute to find the corresponding y-values . However, computations are tedious, time consuming, and can lead to errors. Another way, the method listed below, makes use of the slope and the y-intercept for graphing the line. It is quick, simple, and involves no computations. Graphing Method Plot the y-intercept (0, b) . Determine another point by using the slope m . Draw a line through the two points. Recall that we defined the slope m as the ratio . The numerator y 2 − y 1 represents the number of units that y changes and the denominator x 2 − x 1 represents the number of units that x changes. Suppose . Then p is the number of units that y changes and q is the number of units that x changes. Since these changes occur simultaneously, start with your pencil at the y-intercept , move p units in the appropriate vertical direction, and then move q units in the appropriate horizontal direction. Mark a point at this location. Using the Slope and Intercept to Graph a Line When a linear equation is given in the general form, a x + b y = c , we observed that an efficient graphical approach was the intercept method. We let x = 0 and computed the corresponding value of y , then let y = 0 and computed the corresponding value of x . When an equation is written in the slope-intercept form, y = m x + b , there are also efficient ways of constructing the graph. One way, but less efficient, is to choose two or three x-values and compute to find the corresponding y-values . However, computations are tedious, time consuming, and can lead to errors. Another way, the method listed below, makes use of the slope and the y-intercept for graphing the line. It is quick, simple, and involves no computations. Graphing Method Plot the y-intercept (0, b) . Determine another point by using the slope m . Draw a line through the two points. Recall that we defined the slope m as the ratio . The numerator y 2 − y 1 represents the number of units that y changes and the denominator x 2 − x 1 represents the number of units that x changes. Suppose . Then p is the number of units that y changes and q is the number of units that x changes. Since these changes occur simultaneously, start with your pencil at the y-intercept , move p units in the appropriate vertical direction, and then move q units in the appropriate horizontal direction. Mark a point at this location.  || 