 ||  || Variables and Constants A basic characteristic of algebra is the use of symbols (usually letters) to represent numbers. Variable A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. Constant A letter or symbol that represents a specific number, known or unknown is called a constant. In the following examples, the letter x is a variable since it can be any member of the collection of numbers {35, 25, 10} . The letter h is a constant since it can assume only the value 5890. Example 2.1.  Suppose that the streets on your way from home to school have speed limits of 35 mph, 25 mph, and 10 mph. In algebra we can let the letter x represent our speed as we travel from home to school. The maximum value of x depends on what section of street we are on. The letter x can assume any one of the various values 35,25,10. Example 2.2.  Suppose that in writing a term paper for a geography class we need to specify the height of Mount Kilimanjaro. If we do not happen to know the height of the mountain, we can represent it (at least temporarily) on our paper with the letter h . Later, we look up the height in a reference book and find it to be 5890 meters. The letter h can assume only the one value, 5890, and no others. The value of h is constant.  || Symbols of Operation, Equality, and Inequality Binary Operation A binary operation on a collection of numbers is a process that assigns a number to two given numbers in the collection. The binary operations used in algebra are addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Symbols of Operation If we let x and y each represent a number, we have the following notations:  || Grouping Symbols Grouping symbols are used to indicate that a particular collection of numbers and meaningful operations are to be grouped together and considered as one number. The grouping symbols commonly used in algebra are In a computation in which more than one operation is involved, grouping symbols help tell us which operations to perform first. If possible, we perform operations inside grouping symbols first.  || The Order of Operations Suppose we wish to find the value of 16 + 4⋅9 . We could add 16 and 4, then multiply this sum by 9. 16 + 4⋅9 = 20⋅9 = 180 multiply 4 and 9, then add 16 to this product. 16 + 4⋅9 = 16 + 36 = 52 We now have two values for one number. To determine the correct value we must use the standard order of operations. Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols, beginning with the innermost set. Perform all multiplications and divisions, as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all additions and subtractions, as you come to them, moving left-to-right. As we proceed in our study of algebra, we will come upon another operation, exponentiation, that will need to be inserted before multiplication and division. (See Section Section 2.5.)  ||  || The Real Number Line Real Number Line In our study of algebra, we will use several collections of numbers. The real number line allows us to visually display the numbers in which we are interested. A line is composed of infinitely many points. To each point we can associate a unique number, and with each number we can associate a particular point. Coordinate The number associated with a point on the number line is called the coordinate of the point. Graph The point on a line that is associated with a particular number is called the graph of that number. We construct the real number line as follows: Construction of the Real Number Line Draw a horizontal line. Choose any point on the line and label it 0. This point is called the origin. Choose a convenient length. This length is called "1 unit." Starting at 0, mark this length off in both directions, being careful to have the lengths look like they are about the same. We now define a real number. Real Number A real number is any number that is the coordinate of a point on the real number line. Positive and Negative Real Numbers The collection of these infinitely many numbers is called the collection of real numbers. The real numbers whose graphs are to the right of 0 are called the positive real numbers. The real numbers whose graphs appear to the left of 0 are called the negative real numbers. The number 0 is neither positive nor negative.  || The Real Numbers The collection of real numbers has many subcollections. The subcollections that are of most interest to us are listed below along with their notations and graphs. Natural Numbers The natural numbers (N) :   {1, 2,3, …} Whole Numbers The whole numbers (W) :   {0, 1, 2,3, …} Notice that every natural number is a whole number. Integers The integers (Z) :   {…,  − 3, −  2, − 1,0,1, 2, 3, …} Notice that every whole number is an integer. Rational Numbers The rational numbers (Q) : Rational numbers are real numbers that can be written in the form a / b , where a and b are integers, and b ≠ 0 . Fractions Rational numbers are commonly called fractions. Division by 1 Since b can equal 1, every integer is a rational number: . Division by 0 Recall that 10 / 2 = 5 since 2⋅5 = 10 . However, if 10 / 0 = x , then 0⋅x = 10 . But 0⋅x = 0 , not 10. This suggests that no quotient exists. Now consider 0 / 0 = x . If 0 / 0 = x , then 0⋅x = 0 . But this means that x could be any number, that is, 0 / 0 = 4 since 0⋅4 = 0 , or 0 / 0 = 28 since 0⋅28 = 0 . This suggests that the quotient is indeterminant. x / 0 Is Undefined or Indeterminant Division by 0 is undefined or indeterminant.Do not divide by 0. Rational numbers have decimal representations that either terminate or do not terminate but contain a repeating block of digits. Some examples are: Some rational numbers are graphed below. Irrational Numbers The irrational numbers (I r) : Irrational numbers are numbers that cannot be written as the quotient of two integers. They are numbers whose decimal representations are nonterminating and nonrepeating. Some examples are Notice that the collections of rational numbers and irrational numbers have no numbers in common. When graphed on the number line, the rational and irrational numbers account for every point on the number line. Thus each point on the number line has a coordinate that is either a rational or an irrational number. In summary, we have  || Ordering the Real Numbers Ordering the Real Numbers A real number b is said to be greater than a real number a , denoted b > a , if the graph of b is to the right of the graph of a on the number line.  ||  || The Closure Properties The Closure Properties If a and b are real numbers, then a + b is a unique real number, and a⋅b is a unique real number. For example, 3 and 11 are real numbers; 3 + 11 = 14 and 3⋅11 = 33, and both 14 and 33 are real numbers. Although this property seems obvious, some collections are not closed under certain operations. For example, Example 2.34.  The real numbers are not closed under division since, although 5 and 0 are real numbers, 5 / 0 and 0 / 0 are not real numbers. Example 2.35.  The natural numbers are not closed under subtraction since, although 8 is a natural number, 8 − 8 is not. ( 8 − 8 = 0 and 0 is not a natural number.)  || The Commutative Properties Let a and b represent real numbers. The Commutative Properties The commutative properties tell us that two numbers can be added or multiplied in any order without affecting the result.  || The Associative Properties Let a,b, and c represent real numbers. The Associative Properties The associative properties tell us that we may group together the quantities as we please without affecting the result.  || The Distributive Properties When we were first introduced to multiplication we saw that it was developed as a description for repeated addition. 4 + 4 + 4 = 3⋅4 Notice that there are three 4’s, that is, 4 appears 3 times. Hence, 3 times 4.We know that algebra is generalized arithmetic. We can now make an important generalization. When a number a is added repeatedly n times, we have Then, using multiplication as a description for repeated addition, we can replace For example: Example 2.47.  x + x + x + x can be written as 4x since x is repeatedly added 4 times. x + x + x + x = 4x Example 2.48.  r + r can be written as 2r since r is repeatedly added 2 times. r + r = 2r The distributive property involves both multiplication and addition. Let’s rewrite 4(a + b). We proceed by reading 4(a + b) as a multiplication: 4 times the quantity (a + b) . This directs us to write Now we use the commutative property of addition to collect all the a ' s together and all the b ' s together. Now, using multiplication as a description for repeated addition, we have We have distributed the 4 over the sum to both a and b . The Distributive Property The distributive property is useful when we cannot or do not wish to perform operations inside parentheses.  || The Identity Properties Additive Identity The number 0 is called the additive identity since when it is added to any real number, it preserves the identity of that number. Zero is the only additive identity.For example, 6 + 0 = 6 . Multiplicative Identity The number 1 is called the multiplicative identity since when it multiplies any real number, it preserves the identity of that number. One is the only multiplicative identity.For example 6⋅1 = 6 . We summarize the identity properties as follows.  || The Inverse Properties Additive Inverses When two numbers are added together and the result is the additive identity, 0, the numbers are called additive inverses of each other. For example, when 3 is added to − 3 the result is 0, that is, 3 + ( − 3) = 0 . The numbers 3 and − 3 are additive inverses of each other. Multiplicative Inverses When two numbers are multiplied together and the result is the multiplicative identity, 1, the numbers are called multiplicative inverses of each other. For example, when 6 and are multiplied together, the result is 1, that is, . The numbers 6 and are multiplicative inverses of each other. We summarize the inverse properties as follows. The Inverse Properties If a is any real number, then there is a unique real number − a , such that The numbers a and − a are called additive inverses of each other. If a is any nonzero real number, then there is a unique real number such that The numbers a and are called multiplicative inverses of each other. Expanding Quantities When we perform operations such as 6(a + 3) = 6a + 18 , we say we are expanding the quantity 6(a + 3) .  ||  || Exponential Notation In Section Section 2.4 we were reminded that multiplication is a description for repeated addition. A natural question is “Is there a description for repeated multiplication?” The answer is yes. The notation that describes repeated multiplication is exponential notation. Factors In multiplication, the numbers being multiplied together are called factors. In repeated multiplication, all the factors are the same. In nonrepeated multiplication, none of the factors are the same. For example, Example 2.52.  Exponential notation is used to show repeated multiplication of the same factor. The notation consists of using a superscript on the factor that is repeated. The superscript is called an exponent. Exponential Notation If x is any real number and n is a natural number, thenAn exponent records the number of identical factors in a multiplication. Note that the definition for exponential notation only has meaning for natural number exponents. We will extend this notation to include other numbers as exponents later.  || Reading Exponential Notation In x n , Base x is the base Exponent n is the exponent Power The number represented by x n is called a power. x to the n th Power The term x n is read as " x to the n th power," or more simply as " x to the n th." x Squared and x Cubed The symbol x 2 is often read as " x squared," and x 3 is often read as " x cubed." A natural question is "Why are geometric terms appearing in the exponent expression?" The answer for x 3 is this: x 3 means x⋅x⋅x . In geometry, the volume of a rectangular box is found by multiplying the length by the width by the depth. A cube has the same length on each side. If we represent this length by the letter x then the volume of the cube is x⋅x⋅x , which, of course, is described by x 3 . (Can you think of why x 2 is read as x squared?) Cube withlength = x width = x depth = x Volume = x x x = x 3  || The Order of Operations In Section Section 2.2 we were introduced to the order of operations. It was noted that we would insert another operation before multiplication and division. We can do that now. The Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols beginning with the innermost set. Perform all exponential operations as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all multiplications and divisions as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all additions and subtractions as you come to them, moving left-to-right.  ||  || The Product Rule for Exponents The first rule we wish to develop is the rule for multiplying two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. The following examples suggest this rule: Example 2.70.  Example 2.71.  PRODUCT RULE FOR EXPONENTS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers, x n x m = x n + m To multiply two exponential quantities having the same base, add the exponents. Keep in mind that the exponential quantities being multiplied must have the same base for this rule to apply.  || The Quotient Rule for Exponents The second rule we wish to develop is the rule for dividing two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. The following examples suggest a rule for dividing two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. Example 2.83.  Example 2.84.  QUOTIENT RULE FOR EXPONENTS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers,.To divide two exponential quantities having the same nonzero base, subtract the exponent of the denominator from the exponent of the numerator. Keep in mind that the exponential quantities being divided must have the same base for this rule to apply.  || Zero as an Exponent In Sample Set C, the exponents of the numerators were greater than the exponents of the denominators. Let’s study the case when the exponents are the same.When the exponents are the same, say n , the subtraction n − n produces 0.Thus, by the second rule of exponents, .But what real number, if any, does x 0 represent? Let’s think for a moment about our experience with division in arithmetic. We know that any nonzero number divided by itself is one. Since the letter x represents some nonzero real number, so does x n . Thus, represents some nonzero real number divided by itself. Then .But we have also established that if . We now have that and . This implies that x 0 = 1,x ≠ 0 .Exponents can now be natural numbers and zero. We have enlarged our collection of numbers that can be used as exponents from the collection of natural numbers to the collection of whole numbers. ZERO AS AN EXPONENT If Any number, other than 0, raised to the power of 0, is 1. 00 has no meaning (it does not represent a number).  ||  || The Power Rule for Powers The following examples suggest a rule for raising a power to a power: Example 2.95.  (a 2 ) 3 = a 2  ⋅ ​a 2  ⋅ a 2 Using the product rule we get Example 2.96.  POWER RULE FOR POWERS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers, (x n ) m = x n⋅m To raise a power to a power, multiply the exponents.  || The Power Rule for Products The following examples suggest a rule for raising a product to a power: Example 2.101.  Example 2.102.  Example 2.103.  POWER RULE FOR PRODUCTS If x and y are real numbers and n is a natural number, (x y) n = x n y n To raise a product to a power, apply the exponent to each and every factor.  || The Power Rule for Quotients The following example suggests a rule for raising a quotient to a power. Example 2.112.  POWER RULE FOR QUOTIENTS If x and y are real numbers and n is a natural number, To raise a quotient to a power, distribute the exponent to both the numerator and denominator.  || 