 || Addition of Fraction With Like Denominators Let's examine the following diagram. 2 one-fifths and 1 one fifth is shaded. It is shown in the shaded regions of the diagram that (2 one-fifths) + (1 one-fifth) = (3 one-fifths) That is, From this observation, we can suggest the following rule. Method of Adding Fractions Having Like Denominators To add two or more fractions that have the same denominators, add the numer­ators and place the resulting sum over the common denominator. Reduce, if necessary. Sample Set A Find the following sums. Example 5.1.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place that sum over 7. Example 5.2.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 8. Reduce. Example 5.3.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 9. Example 5.4.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 8. Example 5.5.  To see what happens if we mistakenly add the denominators as well as the numerators, let's add Adding the numerators and mistakenly adding the denominators produces This means that two 's is the same as one . Preposterous! We do not add denominators. Practice Set A Find the following sums. Exercise 5.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.5. (Go to Solution) Show why adding both the numerators and denominators is preposterous by adding and and examining the result.  || Subtraction of Fractions With Like Denominators We can picture the concept of subtraction of fractions in much the same way we pictured addition. From this observation, we can suggest the following rule for subtracting fractions having like denominators: Subtraction of Fractions with Like Denominators To subtract two fractions that have like denominators, subtract the numerators and place the resulting difference over the common denominator. Reduce, if possible. Sample Set B Find the following differences. Example 5.6.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 5. Example 5.7.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 6. Example 5.8.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract numerators and place the difference over 9. Example 5.9.  To see what happens if we mistakenly subtract the denominators, let's consider We get division by zero, which is undefined. We do not subtract denominators. Practice Set B Find the following differences. Exercise 5.2.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.10. (Go to Solution) Show why subtracting both the numerators and the denominators is in error by performing the subtraction .  || 