Exponential Notation and Positive Integer Exponents If a number is repeated as a factor numerous times, then we can write the product in a more compact form using exponential notation The compact notation a x 2 + b x + c = 0. used when a factor is repeated multiple times. . For example, The base The factor a in the exponential notation a n . is the factor, and the positive integer exponent The positive integer n in the exponential notation a n that indicates the number of times the base is used as a factor. indicates the number of times the base is repeated as a factor. In the above example, the base is 5 and the exponent is 4. In general, if a is the base that is repeated as a factor n times, then When the exponent is 2, we call the result a square The result when the exponent of any real number is 2. . For example, The number 3 is the base and the integer 2 is the exponent. The notation 3 2 can be read two ways: “three squared” or “3 raised to the second power.” The base can be any real number. It is important to study the difference between the ways the last two examples are calculated. In the example ( − 7 ) 2 , the base is −7 as indicated by the parentheses. In the example − 5 2 , the base is 5, not −5, so only the 5 is squared and the result remains negative. To illustrate this, write This subtle distinction is very important because it determines the sign of the result. The textual notation for exponents is usually denoted using the caret The symbol ^ that indicates exponents on many calculators, a n = a ^ n . (^) symbol as follows: The square of an integer is called a perfect square The result of squaring an integer. . The ability to recognize perfect squares is useful in our study of algebra. The squares of the integers from 1 to 15 should be memorized. A partial list of perfect squares follows:   Try this! Simplify ( − 12 ) 2 . Answer: 144 Video Solution When the exponent is 3 we call the result a cube The result when the exponent of any real number is 3. . For example, The notation 3 3 can be read two ways: “three cubed” or “3 raised to the third power.” As before, the base can be any real number. Note that the result of cubing a negative number is negative. The cube of an integer is called a perfect cube The result of cubing an integer. . The ability to recognize perfect cubes is useful in our study of algebra. The cubes of the integers from 1 to 10 should be memorized. A partial list of perfect cubes follows:   Try this! Simplify ( − 2 ) 3 . Answer: −8 Video Solution If the exponent is greater than 3, then the notation a n is read “a raised to the nth power.” Notice that the result of a negative base with an even exponent is positive. The result of a negative base with an odd exponent is negative. These facts are often confused when negative numbers are involved. Study the following four examples carefully: The base is (−2) The base is 2 ( − 2 ) 4 = ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) = + 16 ( − 2 ) 3 = ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) = − 8 − 2 4 = − 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = − 16 − 2 3 = − 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = − 8 The parentheses indicate that the negative number is to be used as the base.   Example 1: Calculate: a. ( − 1 3 ) 3 b. ( − 1 3 ) 4 Solution: The base is − 1 3 for both problems. a. Use the base as a factor three times. b. Use the base as a factor four times. Answers: a. − 1 27 ; b. 1 81   Try this! Simplify: − 10 4 and ( − 10 ) 4 . Answers: − 10,000 and 10,000 Video Solution Exponential Notation and Positive Integer Exponents If a number is repeated as a factor numerous times, then we can write the product in a more compact form using exponential notation The compact notation a x 2 + b x + c = 0. used when a factor is repeated multiple times. . For example, The base The factor a in the exponential notation a n . is the factor, and the positive integer exponent The positive integer n in the exponential notation a n that indicates the number of times the base is used as a factor. indicates the number of times the base is repeated as a factor. In the above example, the base is 5 and the exponent is 4. In general, if a is the base that is repeated as a factor n times, then When the exponent is 2, we call the result a square The result when the exponent of any real number is 2. . For example, The number 3 is the base and the integer 2 is the exponent. The notation 3 2 can be read two ways: “three squared” or “3 raised to the second power.” The base can be any real number. It is important to study the difference between the ways the last two examples are calculated. In the example ( − 7 ) 2 , the base is −7 as indicated by the parentheses. In the example − 5 2 , the base is 5, not −5, so only the 5 is squared and the result remains negative. To illustrate this, write This subtle distinction is very important because it determines the sign of the result. The textual notation for exponents is usually denoted using the caret The symbol ^ that indicates exponents on many calculators, a n = a ^ n . (^) symbol as follows: The square of an integer is called a perfect square The result of squaring an integer. . The ability to recognize perfect squares is useful in our study of algebra. The squares of the integers from 1 to 15 should be memorized. A partial list of perfect squares follows:   Try this! Simplify ( − 12 ) 2 . Answer: 144 Video Solution When the exponent is 3 we call the result a cube The result when the exponent of any real number is 3. . For example, The notation 3 3 can be read two ways: “three cubed” or “3 raised to the third power.” As before, the base can be any real number. Note that the result of cubing a negative number is negative. The cube of an integer is called a perfect cube The result of cubing an integer. . The ability to recognize perfect cubes is useful in our study of algebra. The cubes of the integers from 1 to 10 should be memorized. A partial list of perfect cubes follows:   Try this! Simplify ( − 2 ) 3 . Answer: −8 Video Solution If the exponent is greater than 3, then the notation a n is read “a raised to the nth power.” Notice that the result of a negative base with an even exponent is positive. The result of a negative base with an odd exponent is negative. These facts are often confused when negative numbers are involved. Study the following four examples carefully: The base is (−2) The base is 2 ( − 2 ) 4 = ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) = + 16 ( − 2 ) 3 = ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) = − 8 − 2 4 = − 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = − 16 − 2 3 = − 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = − 8 The parentheses indicate that the negative number is to be used as the base.   Example 1: Calculate: a. ( − 1 3 ) 3 b. ( − 1 3 ) 4 Solution: The base is − 1 3 for both problems. a. Use the base as a factor three times. b. Use the base as a factor four times. Answers: a. − 1 27 ; b. 1 81   Try this! Simplify: − 10 4 and ( − 10 ) 4 . Answers: − 10,000 and 10,000 Video Solution  || 