Equivalent Inequalities Like equations, two inequalities are equivalent if they have the same solution sets. 140 CHAPTER 2. SOLVING LINEAR EQUATIONS AND INEQUALITIES Adding or Subtracting the Same Quantity from Both Sides of an Inequality. Let a and b be real numbers with a < b, If c is any real number, then a+ c < b+ c and a− c < b− c. That is, adding or subtracting the same amount from both sides of an inequality produces an equivalent inequality (does not change the solution). You Try It! EXAMPLE 3. Solve for x: x− 2 ≤ 7. Sketch the solution on the real line,Use interval notation to describe the solution of: x− 7 < −8 then use set-builder and interval notation to describe your solution. Solution: To “undo” subtracting 2, we add 2 to both sides of the inequality. x− 2 ≤ 7 Original inequality. x− 2 + 2 ≤ 7 + 2 Add 2 to both sides. x ≤ 9 Simplify both sides. To shade the real numbers less than or equal to 9, we shade the number 9 and all real numbers to the left of 9. 9 Using set-builder notation, the solution is {x : x ≤ 9}. Using interval notation, the solution is (−∞, 9].Answer: (−∞,−1) ! If we multiply or divide both sides of an inequality by a positive number, we have an equivalent inequality. Multiplying or Dividing by a Positive Number. Let a and b be real numbers with a < b. If c is a real positive number, then ac < bc and a c < b c . 2.6. INEQUALITIES 141 You Try It! EXAMPLE 4. Solve for x: 3x ≤ −9 Sketch the solution on the real line, Use interval notation to describe the solution of: 2x > −8 then use set-builder and interval notation to describe your solution. Solution: To “undo” multiplying by 3, divide both sides of the inequality by 3. Because we are dividing both sides by a positive number, we do not reverse the inequality sign. 3x ≤ −9 Original inequality. 3x 3 ≤ −9 3 Divide both sides by 3. x ≤ −3 Simplify both sides. Shade the real numbers less than or equal to −3. −3 Using set-builder notation, the solution is {x : x ≤ −3}. Using interval nota- tion, the solution is (−∞,−3]. Answer: (−4,∞) ! Equivalent Inequalities Like equations, two inequalities are equivalent if they have the same solution sets. 140 CHAPTER 2. SOLVING LINEAR EQUATIONS AND INEQUALITIES Adding or Subtracting the Same Quantity from Both Sides of an Inequality. Let a and b be real numbers with a < b, If c is any real number, then a+ c < b+ c and a− c < b− c. That is, adding or subtracting the same amount from both sides of an inequality produces an equivalent inequality (does not change the solution). You Try It! EXAMPLE 3. Solve for x: x− 2 ≤ 7. Sketch the solution on the real line,Use interval notation to describe the solution of: x− 7 < −8 then use set-builder and interval notation to describe your solution. Solution: To “undo” subtracting 2, we add 2 to both sides of the inequality. x− 2 ≤ 7 Original inequality. x− 2 + 2 ≤ 7 + 2 Add 2 to both sides. x ≤ 9 Simplify both sides. To shade the real numbers less than or equal to 9, we shade the number 9 and all real numbers to the left of 9. 9 Using set-builder notation, the solution is {x : x ≤ 9}. Using interval notation, the solution is (−∞, 9].Answer: (−∞,−1) ! If we multiply or divide both sides of an inequality by a positive number, we have an equivalent inequality. Multiplying or Dividing by a Positive Number. Let a and b be real numbers with a < b. If c is a real positive number, then ac < bc and a c < b c . 2.6. INEQUALITIES 141 You Try It! EXAMPLE 4. Solve for x: 3x ≤ −9 Sketch the solution on the real line, Use interval notation to describe the solution of: 2x > −8 then use set-builder and interval notation to describe your solution. Solution: To “undo” multiplying by 3, divide both sides of the inequality by 3. Because we are dividing both sides by a positive number, we do not reverse the inequality sign. 3x ≤ −9 Original inequality. 3x 3 ≤ −9 3 Divide both sides by 3. x ≤ −3 Simplify both sides. Shade the real numbers less than or equal to −3. −3 Using set-builder notation, the solution is {x : x ≤ −3}. Using interval nota- tion, the solution is (−∞,−3]. Answer: (−4,∞) !  || 