Finding Equations Using Slope-Intercept Form Given the algebraic equation of a line, we are able to graph it in a number of ways. In this section, we will be given a geometric description of a line and be asked to find the algebraic equation. Finding the equation of a line can be accomplished in a number of ways, the first of which makes use of slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . If we know the slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0, b), we can construct the equation.   Example 1: Find the equation of a line with slope m = − 5 8 and y-intercept (0, 1). Solution: The given y-intercept implies that b = 1 . Substitute the slope m and the y-value of the y-intercept b into the equation y = m x + b . Answer: y = − 5 8 x + 1   Finding a linear equation is very straightforward if the slope and y-intercept are given. This is certainly not always the case; however, the example demonstrates that the algebraic equation of a line depends on these two pieces of information. If the graph is given, then we can often read it to determine the y-intercept and slope.   Example 2: Find the equation of the line given the graph: Solution: By reading the graph, we can see that the y-intercept is (0, 4), and thus Furthermore, from the points (0, 4) to (4, 2), we can see that the rise is −2 units and the run is 4 units. Now substitute m and b into slope-intercept form: Answer: y = − 1 2 x + 4   Often the y-intercept and slope will not be given or are not easily discernible from the graph. For this reason, we will develop some algebraic techniques that allow us to calculate these quantities.   Example 3: Find the equation of the line with slope m = − 2 3 passing through (−6, 3). Solution: Begin by substituting the given slope into slope-intercept form. For the ordered pair (−6, 3) to be a solution, it must solve the equation. Therefore, we can use it to find b. Substitute the appropriate x- and y-values as follows: After substituting the appropriate values, solve for the only remaining variable, b. Once we have b, we can then complete the equation: As a check, verify that (−6, 3) solves this linear equation as follows: Answer: y = − 2 3 x − 1   Example 4: Find the equation of the line given the graph: Solution: Use the graph to determine the slope. From the points (−5, 2) to (−1, 0), we can see that the rise between the points is −2 units and the run is 4 units. Therefore, we calculate the slope as follows: Substitute the slope into slope-intercept form. Now substitute the coordinates of one of the given points to find b. It does not matter which one you choose. Here choose (−1, 0): Next, put it all together. Answer: y = − 1 2 x − 1 2   As an exercise, substitute the coordinates of the point (−5, 2) to see that b will turn out to be the same value. In fact, you can substitute any ordered pair solution of the line to find b. We next outline an algebraic technique for finding the equation of a nonvertical line passing through two given points.   Example 5: Find the equation of the line passing through (−4, −2) and (1, 3). Solution: When finding a linear equation using slope-intercept form y = m x + b , the goal is to find m and then b. Step 1: Find the slope m. In this case, given two points, use the slope formula. Substitute m = 1 into slope-intercept form. Step 2: Find b. To do this, substitute the coordinates of any given ordered pair solution. Use (1, 3): Step 3: Finish building the equation by substituting in the value for b. In this case, we use b = 2 . Answer: y = x + 2   These three steps outline the process for finding the equation of any nonvertical line in slope-intercept form. This is a completely algebraic method, but always keep in mind the geometry behind the technique. Note that the line has a y-intercept at (0, 2), with slope m = 1 .   Example 6: Find the equation of the line passing through (−1, 3) and (5, 1). Solution: First, find m, the slope. Given two points, use the slope formula as follows: Substitute m = − 1 3 into slope-intercept form. Next, find b. Substitute the coordinates of the point (−1, 3). Finally, substitute b = 8 3 into the equation. Answer: y = − 1 3 x + 8 3   Try this! Find the equation of the line passing through (−3, 4) and (6, −2). Answer: y = − 2 3 x + 2 Video Solution Finding Equations Using Slope-Intercept Form Given the algebraic equation of a line, we are able to graph it in a number of ways. In this section, we will be given a geometric description of a line and be asked to find the algebraic equation. Finding the equation of a line can be accomplished in a number of ways, the first of which makes use of slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . If we know the slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0, b), we can construct the equation.   Example 1: Find the equation of a line with slope m = − 5 8 and y-intercept (0, 1). Solution: The given y-intercept implies that b = 1 . Substitute the slope m and the y-value of the y-intercept b into the equation y = m x + b . Answer: y = − 5 8 x + 1   Finding a linear equation is very straightforward if the slope and y-intercept are given. This is certainly not always the case; however, the example demonstrates that the algebraic equation of a line depends on these two pieces of information. If the graph is given, then we can often read it to determine the y-intercept and slope.   Example 2: Find the equation of the line given the graph: Solution: By reading the graph, we can see that the y-intercept is (0, 4), and thus Furthermore, from the points (0, 4) to (4, 2), we can see that the rise is −2 units and the run is 4 units. Now substitute m and b into slope-intercept form: Answer: y = − 1 2 x + 4   Often the y-intercept and slope will not be given or are not easily discernible from the graph. For this reason, we will develop some algebraic techniques that allow us to calculate these quantities.   Example 3: Find the equation of the line with slope m = − 2 3 passing through (−6, 3). Solution: Begin by substituting the given slope into slope-intercept form. For the ordered pair (−6, 3) to be a solution, it must solve the equation. Therefore, we can use it to find b. Substitute the appropriate x- and y-values as follows: After substituting the appropriate values, solve for the only remaining variable, b. Once we have b, we can then complete the equation: As a check, verify that (−6, 3) solves this linear equation as follows: Answer: y = − 2 3 x − 1   Example 4: Find the equation of the line given the graph: Solution: Use the graph to determine the slope. From the points (−5, 2) to (−1, 0), we can see that the rise between the points is −2 units and the run is 4 units. Therefore, we calculate the slope as follows: Substitute the slope into slope-intercept form. Now substitute the coordinates of one of the given points to find b. It does not matter which one you choose. Here choose (−1, 0): Next, put it all together. Answer: y = − 1 2 x − 1 2   As an exercise, substitute the coordinates of the point (−5, 2) to see that b will turn out to be the same value. In fact, you can substitute any ordered pair solution of the line to find b. We next outline an algebraic technique for finding the equation of a nonvertical line passing through two given points.   Example 5: Find the equation of the line passing through (−4, −2) and (1, 3). Solution: When finding a linear equation using slope-intercept form y = m x + b , the goal is to find m and then b. Step 1: Find the slope m. In this case, given two points, use the slope formula. Substitute m = 1 into slope-intercept form. Step 2: Find b. To do this, substitute the coordinates of any given ordered pair solution. Use (1, 3): Step 3: Finish building the equation by substituting in the value for b. In this case, we use b = 2 . Answer: y = x + 2   These three steps outline the process for finding the equation of any nonvertical line in slope-intercept form. This is a completely algebraic method, but always keep in mind the geometry behind the technique. Note that the line has a y-intercept at (0, 2), with slope m = 1 .   Example 6: Find the equation of the line passing through (−1, 3) and (5, 1). Solution: First, find m, the slope. Given two points, use the slope formula as follows: Substitute m = − 1 3 into slope-intercept form. Next, find b. Substitute the coordinates of the point (−1, 3). Finally, substitute b = 8 3 into the equation. Answer: y = − 1 3 x + 8 3   Try this! Find the equation of the line passing through (−3, 4) and (6, −2). Answer: y = − 2 3 x + 2 Video Solution  || 