Introduction to Complex Numbers Up to this point, the square root of a negative number has been left undefined. For example, we know that − 9 − − − √ is not a real a number. There is no real number that when squared results in a negative number. We begin the resolution of this issue by defining the imaginary unit Defined as i = − 1 − − − √ and i 2 = − 1 . , i, as the square root of −1. To express a square root of a negative number in terms of the imaginary unit i, we use the following property, where a represents any nonnegative real number: With this we can write If − 9 − − − √ = 3 i , then we would expect that 3i squared equals −9: Therefore, the square root of any negative real number can be written in terms of the imaginary unit. Such numbers are often called imaginary numbers The square roots of any negative real numbers. .   Example 1: Rewrite in terms of the imaginary unit i. a. − 4 − − − √ b. − 5 − − − √ c. − 8 − − − √ Solution: a. − 4 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 4 − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 4 √ = i ⋅ 2 = 2 i b. − 5 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 5 − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 5 √ = i 5 √ c. − 8 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 2 − − − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 4 √ ⋅ 2 √ = i ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 √ = 2 i 2 √ Notation Note When an imaginary number involves a radical, place i in front of the radical. Consider the following: 2 i 2 √ = 2 2 √ i Since multiplication is commutative, these numbers are equivalent. However, in the form 2 2 √ i , the imaginary unit i is often misinterpreted to be part of the radicand. To avoid this confusion, it is a best practice to place the i in front of the radical and use 2 i 2 √ . A complex number Numbers of the form a + b i , where a and b are real numbers. is any number of the form where a and b are real numbers. Here a is called the real part The real number a of a complex number a + b i . and b is called the imaginary part The real number b of a complex number a + b i . . For example, 3 − 4 i is a complex number with a real part, 3, and an imaginary part, −4. It is important to note that any real number is also a complex number. For example, the real number 5 is also a complex number because it can be written as 5 + 0 i with a real part of 5 and an imaginary part of 0. Hence the set of real numbers, denoted R, is a subset of the set of complex numbers, denoted C. Adding and subtracting complex numbers is similar to adding and subtracting like terms. Add or subtract the real parts and then the imaginary parts.   Example 2: Add: ( 3 − 4 i ) + ( 2 + 5 i ) . Solution: Add the real parts and then add the imaginary parts. Answer:   To subtract complex numbers, subtract the real parts and subtract the imaginary parts. This is consistent with the use of the distributive property.   Example 3: Subtract: . Solution: Distribute the negative one and then combine like terms. Answer:   The distributive property also applies when multiplying complex numbers. Make use of the fact that to resolve the result into standard form: .   Example 4: Multiply: . Solution: Begin by applying the distributive property. Answer:   Example 5: Multiply: . Solution: Answer:   Given a complex number , its complex conjugate Two complex numbers whose real parts are the same and imaginary parts are opposite. If given , then its complex conjugate is . is . We next explore the product of complex conjugates.   Example 6: Multiply: . Solution: Answer: 25   In general, the product of complex conjugates The real number that results from multiplying complex conjugates: follows: Note that the result does not involve the imaginary unit; hence the result is real. This leads us to the very useful property: To divide complex numbers, we apply the technique used to rationalize the denominator. Multiply the numerator and denominator (dividend and divisor) by the conjugate of the denominator. The result can then be resolved into standard form, .   Example 7: Divide: . Solution: In this example, the conjugate of the denominator is . Multiply by 1 in the form . To express this complex number in standard form, write each term over the common denominator 5. Answer:   Example 8: Divide: . Solution: Answer:   Try this! Divide: . Answer: Video Solution Introduction to Complex Numbers Up to this point, the square root of a negative number has been left undefined. For example, we know that − 9 − − − √ is not a real a number. There is no real number that when squared results in a negative number. We begin the resolution of this issue by defining the imaginary unit Defined as i = − 1 − − − √ and i 2 = − 1 . , i, as the square root of −1. To express a square root of a negative number in terms of the imaginary unit i, we use the following property, where a represents any nonnegative real number: With this we can write If − 9 − − − √ = 3 i , then we would expect that 3i squared equals −9: Therefore, the square root of any negative real number can be written in terms of the imaginary unit. Such numbers are often called imaginary numbers The square roots of any negative real numbers. .   Example 1: Rewrite in terms of the imaginary unit i. a. − 4 − − − √ b. − 5 − − − √ c. − 8 − − − √ Solution: a. − 4 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 4 − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 4 √ = i ⋅ 2 = 2 i b. − 5 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 5 − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 5 √ = i 5 √ c. − 8 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 2 − − − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 4 √ ⋅ 2 √ = i ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 √ = 2 i 2 √ Notation Note When an imaginary number involves a radical, place i in front of the radical. Consider the following: 2 i 2 √ = 2 2 √ i Since multiplication is commutative, these numbers are equivalent. However, in the form 2 2 √ i , the imaginary unit i is often misinterpreted to be part of the radicand. To avoid this confusion, it is a best practice to place the i in front of the radical and use 2 i 2 √ . A complex number Numbers of the form a + b i , where a and b are real numbers. is any number of the form where a and b are real numbers. Here a is called the real part The real number a of a complex number a + b i . and b is called the imaginary part The real number b of a complex number a + b i . . For example, 3 − 4 i is a complex number with a real part, 3, and an imaginary part, −4. It is important to note that any real number is also a complex number. For example, the real number 5 is also a complex number because it can be written as 5 + 0 i with a real part of 5 and an imaginary part of 0. Hence the set of real numbers, denoted R, is a subset of the set of complex numbers, denoted C. Adding and subtracting complex numbers is similar to adding and subtracting like terms. Add or subtract the real parts and then the imaginary parts.   Example 2: Add: ( 3 − 4 i ) + ( 2 + 5 i ) . Solution: Add the real parts and then add the imaginary parts. Answer:   To subtract complex numbers, subtract the real parts and subtract the imaginary parts. This is consistent with the use of the distributive property.   Example 3: Subtract: . Solution: Distribute the negative one and then combine like terms. Answer:   The distributive property also applies when multiplying complex numbers. Make use of the fact that to resolve the result into standard form: .   Example 4: Multiply: . Solution: Begin by applying the distributive property. Answer:   Example 5: Multiply: . Solution: Answer:   Given a complex number , its complex conjugate Two complex numbers whose real parts are the same and imaginary parts are opposite. If given , then its complex conjugate is . is . We next explore the product of complex conjugates.   Example 6: Multiply: . Solution: Answer: 25   In general, the product of complex conjugates The real number that results from multiplying complex conjugates: follows: Note that the result does not involve the imaginary unit; hence the result is real. This leads us to the very useful property: To divide complex numbers, we apply the technique used to rationalize the denominator. Multiply the numerator and denominator (dividend and divisor) by the conjugate of the denominator. The result can then be resolved into standard form, .   Example 7: Divide: . Solution: In this example, the conjugate of the denominator is . Multiply by 1 in the form . To express this complex number in standard form, write each term over the common denominator 5. Answer:   Example 8: Divide: . Solution: Answer:   Try this! Divide: . Answer: Video Solution  || 