Square Roots The square root is the inverse function of squaring (strictly speaking only for positive numbers, because sign information can be lost) Principal Root Every positive number has two square roots, one positive and one negative Example:  2 is a square root of 4 because 2 ´ 2 = 4, but –2 is also a square root of 4 because (–2) ´ (–2) = 4 To avoid confusion between the two we define the symbol (this symbol is called a radical) to mean the principal or positive square root. The convention is: For any positive number x,  is the positive root, and  is the negative root. If you mean the negative root, use a minus sign in front of the radical. Example:  Properties  for all non-negative numbers x   for all non-negative numbers x   However, if x happens to be negative, then squaring it will produce a positive number, which will have a positive square root, so   for all real numbers x ·        You don’t need the absolute value sign if you already know that x is positive. For example, , and saying anything about the absolute value of 2 would be superfluous. You only need the absolute value signs when you are taking the square root of a square of a variable, which may be positive or negative. ·        The square root of a negative number is undefined, because anything times itself will give a positive (or zero) result.  (your calculator will probably say ERROR) ·        Note: Zero has only one square root (itself). Zero is considered neither positive nor negative. WARNING: Do not attempt to do something like the distributive law with radicals:    (WRONG) or  (WRONG). This is a violation of the order of operations. The radical operates on the result of everything inside of it, not individual terms. Try it with numbers to see:   (CORRECT) But if we (incorrectly) do the square roots first, we get  (WRONG) However, radicals do distribute over products:   and provided that both a and b are non-negative (otherwise you would have the square root of a negative number). Square Roots The square root is the inverse function of squaring (strictly speaking only for positive numbers, because sign information can be lost) Principal Root Every positive number has two square roots, one positive and one negative Example:  2 is a square root of 4 because 2 ´ 2 = 4, but –2 is also a square root of 4 because (–2) ´ (–2) = 4 To avoid confusion between the two we define the symbol (this symbol is called a radical) to mean the principal or positive square root. The convention is: For any positive number x,  is the positive root, and  is the negative root. If you mean the negative root, use a minus sign in front of the radical. Example:  Properties  for all non-negative numbers x   for all non-negative numbers x   However, if x happens to be negative, then squaring it will produce a positive number, which will have a positive square root, so   for all real numbers x ·        You don’t need the absolute value sign if you already know that x is positive. For example, , and saying anything about the absolute value of 2 would be superfluous. You only need the absolute value signs when you are taking the square root of a square of a variable, which may be positive or negative. ·        The square root of a negative number is undefined, because anything times itself will give a positive (or zero) result.  (your calculator will probably say ERROR) ·        Note: Zero has only one square root (itself). Zero is considered neither positive nor negative. WARNING: Do not attempt to do something like the distributive law with radicals:    (WRONG) or  (WRONG). This is a violation of the order of operations. The radical operates on the result of everything inside of it, not individual terms. Try it with numbers to see:   (CORRECT) But if we (incorrectly) do the square roots first, we get  (WRONG) However, radicals do distribute over products:   and provided that both a and b are non-negative (otherwise you would have the square root of a negative number).  || 