 || Solutions and Lines We know that solutions to linear equations in two variables can be expressed as ordered pairs. Hence, the solutions can be represented by point in the plane. We also know that the phrase “graph the equation” means to locate the solution to the given equation in the plane. Consider the equation y − 2x = − 3 . We’ll graph six solutions (ordered pairs) to this equation on the coordinates system below. We’ll find the solutions by choosing x-values (from − 1 to  + 4 ), substituting them into the equation y − 2x = − 3 , and then solving to obtain the corresponding y-values . We can keep track of the ordered pairs by using a table. y − 2x = − 3 Table 7.8. If x = Then y = Ordered Pairs − 1 − 5 ( − 1,  − 5 ) 0 − 3 ( 0,  − 3 ) 1 − 1 ( 1,  − 1 ) 2 1 ( 2, 1 ) 3 3 ( 3, 3 ) 4 5 ( 4, 5 ) We have plotted only six solutions to the equation y − 2x = − 3 . There are, as we know, infinitely many solutions. By observing the six points we have plotted, we can speculate as to the location of all the other points. The six points we plotted seem to lie on a straight line. This would lead us to believe that all the other points (solutions) also lie on that same line. Indeed, this is true. In fact, this is precisely why first-degree equations are called linear equations. Linear Equations Produce Straight Lines  || General Form of a Linear Equation General Form of a Linear Equation in Two Variables There is a standard form in which linear equations in two variables are written. Suppose that a , b , and c are any real numbers and that a and b cannot both be zero at the same time. Then, the linear equation in two variables a x + b y = c is said to be in general form. We must stipulate that a and b cannot both equal zero at the same time, for if they were we would have 0x + 0y = c 0 = c This statement is true only if c = 0 . If c were to be any other number, we would get a false statement. Now, we have the following: The graphing of all ordered pairs that solve a linear equation in two variables produces a straight line. This implies, The graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line. From these statements we can conclude, If an ordered pair is a solution to a linear equations in two variables, then it lies on the graph of the equation. Also, Any point (ordered pairs) that lies on the graph of a linear equation in two variables is a solution to that equation.  || The Intercept Method of Graphing When we want to graph a linear equation, it is certainly impractical to graph infinitely many points. Since a straight line is determined by only two points, we need only find two solutions to the equation (although a third point is helpful as a check). Intercepts When a linear equation in two variables is given in general from, a x + b y = c , often the two most convenient points (solutions) to fine are called the Intercepts: these are the points at which the line intercepts the coordinate axes. Of course, a horizontal or vertical line intercepts only one axis, so this method does not apply. Horizontal and vertical lines are easily recognized as they contain only one variable. (See Sample Set C .) y-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the y-axis is called the y-intercept . The x-value at this point is zero (since the point is neither to the left nor right of the origin). x-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the x-axis is called the x-intercept  and the y-value at that point is zero. The y-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for x into the equation and solving for y . The x-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for y into the equation and solving for x . Intercept Method Since we are graphing an equation by finding the intercepts, we call this method the intercept method  || Graphing Using any Two or More Points The graphs we have constructed so far have been done by finding two particular points, the intercepts. Actually, any two points will do. We chose to use the intercepts because they are usually the easiest to work with. In the next example, we will graph two equations using points other than the intercepts. We’ll use three points, the extra point serving as a check.  || Slanted, Horizontal, and Vertical Lines In all the graphs we have observed so far, the lines have been slanted. This will always be the case when both variables appear in the equation. If only one variable appears in the equation, then the line will be either vertical or horizontal. To see why, let’s consider a specific case: Using the general form of a line, a x + b y = c , we can produce an equation with exactly one variable by choosing a = 0 , b = 5 , and c = 15 . The equation a x + b y = c then becomes 0x + 5y = 15 Since 0⋅( any number ) = 0 , the term 0x is 0 for any number that is chosen for x . Thus, 0x + 5y = 15 becomes 0 + 5y = 15 But, 0 is the additive identity and 0 + 5y = 5y . 5y = 15 Then, solving for y we get y = 3 This is an equation in which exactly one variable appears. This means that regardless of which number we choose for x , the corresponding y-value is 3. Since the y-value is always the same as we move from left-to-right through the x-values , the height of the line above the x-axis is always the same (in this case, 3 units). This type of line must be horizontal. An argument similar to the one above will show that if the only variable that appears is x , we can expect to get a vertical line.  || Calculator Problems Exercise 7.4.33. (Go to Solution) 2.53x + 4.77y = 8.45 Exercise 7.4.34. 1.96x + 2.05y = 6.55 Exercise 7.4.35. (Go to Solution) 4.1x − 6.6y = 15.5 Exercise 7.4.36. 626.01x − 506.73y = 2443.50  || 