Variables and Constants A basic distinction between algebra and arithmetic is the use of symbols (usually letters) in algebra to represent numbers. So, algebra is a generalization of arithme­tic. Let us look at two examples of situations in which letters are substituted for numbers: Suppose that a student is taking four college classes, and each class can have at most 1 exam per week. In any 1-week period, the student may have 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 exams. In algebra, we can let the letter x represent the number of exams this student may have in a 1-week period. The letter x may assume any of the various values 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. Suppose that in writing a term paper for a biology class a student needs to specify the average lifetime, in days, of a male housefly. If she does not know this number off the top of her head, she might represent it (at least temporarily) on her paper with the letter t (which reminds her of time). Later, she could look up the average time in a reference book and find it to be 17 days. The letter t can assume only the one value, 17, and no other values. The value t is constant. Variable, Constant A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. A letter or symbol that represents one specific number, known or unknown, is called a constant. In example 1, the letter x is a variable since it can represent any of the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. The letter t example 2 is a constant since it can only have the value 17. Variables and Constants A basic distinction between algebra and arithmetic is the use of symbols (usually letters) in algebra to represent numbers. So, algebra is a generalization of arithme­tic. Let us look at two examples of situations in which letters are substituted for numbers: Suppose that a student is taking four college classes, and each class can have at most 1 exam per week. In any 1-week period, the student may have 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 exams. In algebra, we can let the letter x represent the number of exams this student may have in a 1-week period. The letter x may assume any of the various values 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. Suppose that in writing a term paper for a biology class a student needs to specify the average lifetime, in days, of a male housefly. If she does not know this number off the top of her head, she might represent it (at least temporarily) on her paper with the letter t (which reminds her of time). Later, she could look up the average time in a reference book and find it to be 17 days. The letter t can assume only the one value, 17, and no other values. The value t is constant. Variable, Constant A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. A letter or symbol that represents one specific number, known or unknown, is called a constant. In example 1, the letter x is a variable since it can represent any of the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. The letter t example 2 is a constant since it can only have the value 17.  || 