Converting Improper Fractions to Mixed Numbers To understand how we might convert an improper fraction to a mixed number, let's consider the fraction, . Thus, . We can illustrate a procedure for converting an improper fraction to a mixed number using this example. However, the conversion is more easily accomplished by dividing the numerator by the denominator and using the result to write the mixed number. Converting an Improper Fraction to a Mixed Number To convert an improper fraction to a mixed number, divide the numerator by the denominator. The whole number part of the mixed number is the quotient. The fractional part of the mixed number is the remainder written over the divisor (the denominator of the improper fraction). Sample Set A Convert each improper fraction to its corresponding mixed number. Example 4.12.  Divide 5 by 3. The improper fraction . Example 4.13.  . Divide 46 by 9. The improper fraction . Example 4.14.  . Divide 83 by 11. The improper fraction . Example 4.15.  Divide 104 by 4. The improper fraction . Practice Set A Convert each improper fraction to its corresponding mixed number. Exercise 4.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.6. (Go to Solution) Converting Improper Fractions to Mixed Numbers To understand how we might convert an improper fraction to a mixed number, let's consider the fraction, . Thus, . We can illustrate a procedure for converting an improper fraction to a mixed number using this example. However, the conversion is more easily accomplished by dividing the numerator by the denominator and using the result to write the mixed number. Converting an Improper Fraction to a Mixed Number To convert an improper fraction to a mixed number, divide the numerator by the denominator. The whole number part of the mixed number is the quotient. The fractional part of the mixed number is the remainder written over the divisor (the denominator of the improper fraction). Sample Set A Convert each improper fraction to its corresponding mixed number. Example 4.12.  Divide 5 by 3. The improper fraction . Example 4.13.  . Divide 46 by 9. The improper fraction . Example 4.14.  . Divide 83 by 11. The improper fraction . Example 4.15.  Divide 104 by 4. The improper fraction . Practice Set A Convert each improper fraction to its corresponding mixed number. Exercise 4.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.6. (Go to Solution)  || 