Combining Techniques in Equation Solving Having examined solving equations using the addition/subtraction and the multi­plication/division principles of equality, we can combine these techniques to solve more complicated equations. When beginning to solve an equation such as , it is helpful to know which property of equality to use first, addition/subtraction or multiplication/di­vision. Recalling that in equation solving we are trying to isolate the variable (disas­sociate numbers from it), it is helpful to note the following. To associate numbers and letters, we use the order of operations. Multiply/divide Add/subtract To undo an association between numbers and letters, we use the order of opera­tions in reverse. Add/subtract Multiply/divide Sample Set B Solve each equation. (In these example problems, we will not show the checks.) Example 11.31.  -4 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 4 to both sides. 6 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6 Example 11.32.  3 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 3 from both sides. -8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by -8. Example 11.33.  Begin by solving this equation by combining like terms. Choose a side on which to isolate m. Since 7 is greater than 1, we'll isolate m on the right side. Subtract m from both sides. 8 is associated with m by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 8 to both sides. 6 is associated with m by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6. Reduce. Notice that if we had chosen to isolate m on the left side of the equation rather than the right side, we would have proceeded as follows: Subtract from both sides. Add 6 to both sides, Divide both sides by -6. This is the same result as with the previous approach. Example 11.34.  7 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by 7. 8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 8. Practice Set B Solve each equation. Be sure to check each solution. Exercise 11.5.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.12. (Go to Solution) Combining Techniques in Equation Solving Having examined solving equations using the addition/subtraction and the multi­plication/division principles of equality, we can combine these techniques to solve more complicated equations. When beginning to solve an equation such as , it is helpful to know which property of equality to use first, addition/subtraction or multiplication/di­vision. Recalling that in equation solving we are trying to isolate the variable (disas­sociate numbers from it), it is helpful to note the following. To associate numbers and letters, we use the order of operations. Multiply/divide Add/subtract To undo an association between numbers and letters, we use the order of opera­tions in reverse. Add/subtract Multiply/divide Sample Set B Solve each equation. (In these example problems, we will not show the checks.) Example 11.31.  -4 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 4 to both sides. 6 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6 Example 11.32.  3 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 3 from both sides. -8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by -8. Example 11.33.  Begin by solving this equation by combining like terms. Choose a side on which to isolate m. Since 7 is greater than 1, we'll isolate m on the right side. Subtract m from both sides. 8 is associated with m by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 8 to both sides. 6 is associated with m by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6. Reduce. Notice that if we had chosen to isolate m on the left side of the equation rather than the right side, we would have proceeded as follows: Subtract from both sides. Add 6 to both sides, Divide both sides by -6. This is the same result as with the previous approach. Example 11.34.  7 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by 7. 8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 8. Practice Set B Solve each equation. Be sure to check each solution. Exercise 11.5.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.12. (Go to Solution)  || 