Simplifying Rational Expressions When simplifying fractions, look for common factors that cancel. For example, We say that the fraction 12/60 is equivalent to 1/5. Fractions are in simplest form if the numerator and denominator share no common factor other than 1. Similarly, when working with rational expressions, look for factors to cancel. For example, The resulting rational expression is equivalent if it shares the same domain. Therefore, we must make note of the restrictions and write In words, x + 4 ( x − 3 ) ( x + 4 ) is equivalent to 1 x − 3 , if x ≠ 3 and x ≠ − 4 . We can verify this by choosing a few values with which to evaluate both expressions to see if the results are the same. Here we choose x = 7 and evaluate as follows: It is important to state the restrictions before simplifying rational expressions because the simplified expression may be defined for restrictions of the original. In this case, the expressions are not equivalent. Here −4 is defined for the simplified equivalent but not for the original, as illustrated below:   Example 5: Simplify and state the restriction: 25 x 2 15 x 3 . Solution: In this example, the expression is undefined when x is 0. Therefore, the domain consists of all real numbers x, where x ≠ 0 . With this understanding, we can cancel common factors. Answer: 5 3 x , where x ≠ 0   Example 6: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x ( x − 5 ) ( 2 x + 1 ) ( x − 5 ) . Solution: To determine the restrictions, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except for −1/2 and 5. Next, we find an equivalent expression by canceling common factors. Answer: 3 x 2 x + 1 , where x ≠ − 1 2 and x ≠ 5   Typically, rational expressions are not given in factored form. If this is the case, factor first and then cancel. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 7: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x + 6 x 2 + x − 2 . Solution: Step 1: Completely factor the numerator and denominator. Step 2: Determine the restrictions to the domain. To do this, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except −2 and 1. Step 3: Cancel common factors, if any. Answer: 3 x − 1 , where x ≠ 1 and x ≠ − 2   Example 8: State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 + 7 x − 30 x 2 − 7 x + 12 . Solution: First, factor the numerator and denominator. Any value of x that results in a value of 0 in the denominator is a restriction. By inspection, we determine that the domain consists of all real numbers except 4 and 3. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: x + 10 x − 4 , where x ≠ 3 and x ≠ 4   It is important to remember that we can only cancel factors of a product. A common mistake is to cancel terms. For example,   Try this! State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 − 16 5 x 2 − 20 x . Answer: x + 4 5 x , where x ≠ 0 and x ≠ 4 Video Solution In some examples, we will make a broad assumption that the denominator is nonzero. When we make that assumption, we do not need to determine the restrictions.   Example 9: Simplify: x y + y 2 − 3 x − 3 y x 2 − y 2 . (Assume all denominators are nonzero.) Solution: Factor the numerator by grouping. Factor the denominator using the formula for a difference of squares. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: y − 3 x − y Simplifying Rational Expressions When simplifying fractions, look for common factors that cancel. For example, We say that the fraction 12/60 is equivalent to 1/5. Fractions are in simplest form if the numerator and denominator share no common factor other than 1. Similarly, when working with rational expressions, look for factors to cancel. For example, The resulting rational expression is equivalent if it shares the same domain. Therefore, we must make note of the restrictions and write In words, x + 4 ( x − 3 ) ( x + 4 ) is equivalent to 1 x − 3 , if x ≠ 3 and x ≠ − 4 . We can verify this by choosing a few values with which to evaluate both expressions to see if the results are the same. Here we choose x = 7 and evaluate as follows: It is important to state the restrictions before simplifying rational expressions because the simplified expression may be defined for restrictions of the original. In this case, the expressions are not equivalent. Here −4 is defined for the simplified equivalent but not for the original, as illustrated below:   Example 5: Simplify and state the restriction: 25 x 2 15 x 3 . Solution: In this example, the expression is undefined when x is 0. Therefore, the domain consists of all real numbers x, where x ≠ 0 . With this understanding, we can cancel common factors. Answer: 5 3 x , where x ≠ 0   Example 6: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x ( x − 5 ) ( 2 x + 1 ) ( x − 5 ) . Solution: To determine the restrictions, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except for −1/2 and 5. Next, we find an equivalent expression by canceling common factors. Answer: 3 x 2 x + 1 , where x ≠ − 1 2 and x ≠ 5   Typically, rational expressions are not given in factored form. If this is the case, factor first and then cancel. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 7: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x + 6 x 2 + x − 2 . Solution: Step 1: Completely factor the numerator and denominator. Step 2: Determine the restrictions to the domain. To do this, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except −2 and 1. Step 3: Cancel common factors, if any. Answer: 3 x − 1 , where x ≠ 1 and x ≠ − 2   Example 8: State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 + 7 x − 30 x 2 − 7 x + 12 . Solution: First, factor the numerator and denominator. Any value of x that results in a value of 0 in the denominator is a restriction. By inspection, we determine that the domain consists of all real numbers except 4 and 3. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: x + 10 x − 4 , where x ≠ 3 and x ≠ 4   It is important to remember that we can only cancel factors of a product. A common mistake is to cancel terms. For example,   Try this! State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 − 16 5 x 2 − 20 x . Answer: x + 4 5 x , where x ≠ 0 and x ≠ 4 Video Solution In some examples, we will make a broad assumption that the denominator is nonzero. When we make that assumption, we do not need to determine the restrictions.   Example 9: Simplify: x y + y 2 − 3 x − 3 y x 2 − y 2 . (Assume all denominators are nonzero.) Solution: Factor the numerator by grouping. Factor the denominator using the formula for a difference of squares. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: y − 3 x − y  || 