Measurement There are two major systems of measurement in use today. They are the United States system and the metric system. Before we describe these systems, let's gain a clear understanding of the concept of measurement. Measurement Measurement is comparison to some standard. Standard Unit of Measure The concept of measurement is based on the idea of direct comparison. This means that measurement is the result of the comparison of two quantities. The quantity that is used for comparison is called the standard unit of measure. Over the years, standards have changed. Quite some time in the past, the stan足dard unit of measure was determined by a king. For example, 1 inch was the distance between the tip of the thumb and the knuckle of the king. 1 inch was also the length of 16 barley grains placed end to end. Today, standard units of measure rarely change. Standard units of measure are the responsibility of the Bureau of Standards in Washington D.C. Some desirable properties of a standard are the following: Accessibility. We should have access to the standard so we can make comparisons. Invariance. We should be confident that the standard is not subject to change. Reproducibility. We should be able to reproduce the standard so that measure足ments are convenient and accessible to many people. Measurement There are two major systems of measurement in use today. They are the United States system and the metric system. Before we describe these systems, let's gain a clear understanding of the concept of measurement. Measurement Measurement is comparison to some standard. Standard Unit of Measure The concept of measurement is based on the idea of direct comparison. This means that measurement is the result of the comparison of two quantities. The quantity that is used for comparison is called the standard unit of measure. Over the years, standards have changed. Quite some time in the past, the stan足dard unit of measure was determined by a king. For example, 1 inch was the distance between the tip of the thumb and the knuckle of the king. 1 inch was also the length of 16 barley grains placed end to end. Today, standard units of measure rarely change. Standard units of measure are the responsibility of the Bureau of Standards in Washington D.C. Some desirable properties of a standard are the following: Accessibility. We should have access to the standard so we can make comparisons. Invariance. We should be confident that the standard is not subject to change. Reproducibility. We should be able to reproduce the standard so that measure足ments are convenient and accessible to many people.  || 