 ||  || Extracting Square Roots Recall that a quadratic equation is in standard form Any quadratic equation in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . if it is equal to 0: where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . A solution to such an equation is called a root A solution to a quadratic equation in standard form. . Quadratic equations can have two real solutions, one real solution, or no real solution. If the quadratic expression on the left factors, then we can solve it by factoring. A review of the steps used to solve by factoring follow: Step 1: Express the quadratic equation in standard form. Step 2: Factor the quadratic expression. Step 3: Apply the zero-product property and set each variable factor equal to 0. Step 4: Solve the resulting linear equations. For example, we can solve x 2 − 4 = 0 by factoring as follows: The two solutions are −2 and 2. The goal in this section is to develop an alternative method that can be used to easily solve equations where b = 0, giving the form The equation x 2 − 4 = 0 is in this form and can be solved by first isolating x 2 . If we take the square root of both sides of this equation, we obtain the following: Here we see that x = − 2 and x = 2 are solutions to the resulting equation. In general, this describes the square root property For any real number k, if x 2 = k , then x = ± k √ . ; for any real number k, The notation “±” is read “plus or minus” and is used as compact notation that indicates two solutions. Hence the statement x = ± k √ indicates that x = − k √ or x = k √ . Applying the square root property as a means of solving a quadratic equation is called extracting the roots Applying the square root property as a means of solving a quadratic equation. .   Example 1: Solve: x 2 − 25 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square. Next, apply the square root property. Answer: The solutions are −5 and 5. The check is left to the reader.   Certainly, the previous example could have been solved just as easily by factoring. However, it demonstrates a technique that can be used to solve equations in this form that do not factor.   Example 2: Solve: x 2 − 5 = 0 . Solution: Notice that the quadratic expression on the left does not factor. We can extract the roots if we first isolate the leading term, x 2 . Apply the square root property. For completeness, check that these two real solutions solve the original quadratic equation. Generally, the check is optional. Answer: The solutions are − 5 √ and 5 √ .   Example 3: Solve: 4 x 2 − 45 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating x 2 . Apply the square root property and then simplify. Answer: The solutions are − 3 5 √ 2 and 3 5 √ 2 .   Sometimes quadratic equations have no real solution.   Example 4: Solve: x 2 + 9 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating x 2 . After applying the square root property, we are left with the square root of a negative number. Therefore, there is no real solution to this equation. Answer: No real solution   Reverse this process to find equations with given solutions of the form ±k.   Example 5: Find an equation with solutions − 2 3 √ and 2 3 √ . Solution: Begin by squaring both sides of the following equation: Lastly, subtract 12 from both sides and present the equation in standard form. Answer: x 2 − 12 = 0   Try this! Solve: 9 x 2 − 8 = 0 . Answer: x = − 2 2 √ 3 or x = 2 2 √ 3 Video Solution Consider solving the following equation: To solve this equation by factoring, first square x + 2 and then put it in standard form, equal to zero, by subtracting 25 from both sides. Factor and then apply the zero-product property. The two solutions are −7 and 3. When an equation is in this form, we can obtain the solutions in fewer steps by extracting the roots.   Example 6: Solve: ( x + 2 ) 2 = 25 . Solution: Solve by extracting the roots. At this point, separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and simplify each individually. Answer: The solutions are −7 and 3.   In addition to fewer steps, this method allows us to solve equations that do not factor.   Example 7: Solve: ( 3 x + 3 ) 2 − 27 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square. Next, extract the roots and simplify. Solve for x. Answer: The solutions are − 1 − 3 √ and − 1 + 3 √ .   Example 8: Solve: 9 ( 2 x − 1 ) 2 − 8 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square factor. Apply the square root property and solve. Answer: The solutions are 3 − 2 2 √ 6 and 3 + 2 2 √ 6 .   Try this! Solve: 3 ( x − 5 ) 2 − 2 = 0 . Answer: 15 ± 6 √ 3 Video Solution   Example 9: The length of a rectangle is twice its width. If the diagonal measures 2 feet, then find the dimensions of the rectangle. Solution: The diagonal of any rectangle forms two right triangles. Thus the Pythagorean theorem applies. The sum of the squares of the legs of a right triangle is equal to the square of the hypotenuse: Solve. Here we obtain two solutions, w = − 2 5 √ and w = 2 5 √ . Since the problem asked for a length of a rectangle, we disregard the negative answer. Furthermore, we will rationalize the denominator and present our solutions without any radicals in the denominator. Back substitute to find the length. Answer: The length of the rectangle is 4 5 √ 5 feet and the width is 2 5 √ 5 feet.  ||  || Completing the Square In this section, we will devise a method for rewriting any quadratic equation of the form in the form This process is called completing the square The process of rewriting a quadratic equation in the form ( x − p ) 2 = q . . As we have seen, quadratic equations in this form can easily be solved by extracting roots. We begin by examining perfect square trinomials: The last term, 9, is the square of one-half of the coefficient of x. In general, this is true for any perfect square trinomial of the form x 2 + b x + c . In other words, any trinomial of the form x 2 + b x + c will be a perfect square trinomial if Note It is important to point out that the leading coefficient must be equal to 1 for this to be true.   Example 1: Complete the square: x 2 + 8 x +       ?     = ( x +     ?   ) 2 . Solution: In this example, the coefficient of the middle term b = 8, so find the value that completes the square as follows: The value that completes the square is 16. Answer: x 2 + 8 x + 16 = ( x + 4 ) 2   Example 2: Complete the square: x 2 + 3 x +       ?     = ( x +     ?   ) 2 . Solution: Here b = 3, so find the value that will complete the square as follows: The value 9/4 completes the square: Answer: x 2 + 3 x + 9 4 = ( x + 3 2 ) 2   We can use this technique to solve quadratic equations. The idea is to take any quadratic equation in standard form and complete the square so that we can solve it by extracting roots. The following are general steps for solving a quadratic equation with a leading coefficient of 1 in standard form by completing the square.   Example 3: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 14 x + 46 = 0 . Solution: Step 1: Add or subtract the constant term to obtain the equation in the form x 2 + b x       = c . In this example, subtract 46 to move it to the right side of the equation. Step 2: Use ( b 2 ) 2 to determine the value that completes the square. Here b = 14: Step 3: Add ( b 2 ) 2 to both sides of the equation and complete the square. Step 4: Solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 7 − 3 √ or − 7 + 3 √ . The check is optional.   Example 4: Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 18 x + 72 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 72 from both sides. Next, find the value that completes the square using b = −18. To complete the square, add 81 to both sides, complete the square, and then solve by extracting the roots. At this point, separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and solve each. Answer: The solutions are 6 and 12.   Note that in the previous example the solutions are integers. If this is the case, then the original equation will factor. If it factors, we can solve it by factoring. However, not all quadratic equations will factor.   Example 5: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 10 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 1 from both sides of the equation. Here b = 10, and we determine the value that completes the square as follows: To complete the square, add 25 to both sides of the equation. Factor and then solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 5 − 2 6 √ and − 5 + 2 6 √ .   Sometimes quadratic equations do not have real solutions.   Example 6: Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 2 x + 3 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 3 from both sides of the equation. Here b = −2, and we have Therefore, At this point we see that extracting the root leads to the square root of a negative number. Answer: No real solution   Try this! Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 2 x − 27 = 0 . Answer: x = 1 ± 2 7 √ Video Solution The coefficient of x is not always divisible by 2.   Example 7: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 3 x − 2 = 0 . Solution: Begin by adding 2 to both sides. Use b = 3 to find the value that completes the square: To complete the square, add 9/4 to both sides of the equation. Solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 3 ± 17 √ 2 .   So far, all of the examples have had a leading coefficient of 1. The formula ( b 2 ) 2 determines the value that completes the square only if the leading coefficient is 1. If this is not the case, then simply divide both sides by the leading coefficient.   Example 8: Solve by completing the square: 2 x 2 + 5 x − 1 = 0 . Solution: Notice that the leading coefficient is 2. Therefore, divide both sides by 2 before beginning the steps required to solve by completing the square. Begin by adding 1/2 to both sides of the equation. Here b = 5/2, and we can find the value that completes the square as follows: To complete the square, add 25/16 to both sides of the equation. Next, solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 5 ± 33 √ 4 .   Try this! Solve: 2 x 2 − 2 x − 3 = 0 . Answer: x = 1 ± 7 √ 2 Video Solution  ||  || The Quadratic Formula In this section, we will develop a formula that gives the solutions to any quadratic equation in standard form. To do this, we begin with a general quadratic equation in standard form and solve for x by completing the square. Here a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 : Determine the constant that completes the square: take the coefficient of x, divide it by 2, and then square it. Add this to both sides of the equation and factor. Solve by extracting roots. This derivation gives us a formula that solves any quadratic equation in standard form. Given a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then the solutions can be calculated using the quadratic formula The formula x = − b ± b 2 − 4 a c √ 2 a , which gives the solutions to any quadratic equation in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . : Consider the quadratic equation 2 x 2 − 7 x + 3 = 0 . It can be solved by factoring as follows: The solutions are 1/2 and 3. The following example shows that we can obtain the same results using the quadratic formula.   Example 1: Solve using the quadratic formula: 2 x 2 − 7 x + 3 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c as the coefficients of each term. Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and simplify each individually. Answer: The solutions are 1/2 and 3.   Of course, if the quadratic factors, then it is a best practice to solve it by factoring. However, not all quadratic polynomials factor; nevertheless, the quadratic formula provides us with a means to solve such equations.   Example 2: Solve using the quadratic formula: 5 x 2 + 2 x − 1 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c. Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are − 1 ± 6 √ 5 .   Often terms are missing. When this is the case, use 0 as the coefficient.   Example 3: Solve using the quadratic formula: x 2 − 18 = 0 . Solution: Think of this equation with the following coefficients: Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are ± 3 2 √ .   Since the coefficient of x was 0, we could have solved the equation by extracting the roots. As an exercise, solve the previous example using this method and verify that the results are the same.   Example 4: Solve using the quadratic formula: 9 x 2 − 12 x + 4 = 0 . Solution: In this case, Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. In this example, notice that the radicand of the square root is 0. This results in only one solution to this quadratic equation. Normally, we expect two solutions. When we find only one solution, the solution is called a double root. If we solve this equation by factoring, then the solution appears twice. Answer: 2/3, double root   Example 5: Solve using the quadratic formula: x 2 + x + 1 = 0 . Solution: In this case, Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. The solution involves the square root of a negative number; hence the solutions are not real. This quadratic equation has two nonreal solutions and will be discussed in further detail as we continue in our study of algebra. For now, simply state that the equation does not have real solutions. Answer: No real solutions   Try this! Solve: x 2 − 2 x − 2 = 0 . Answer: 1 ± 3 √ Video Solution It is important to place the quadratic equation in standard form before using the quadratic formula.   Example 6: Solve using the quadratic formula: ( 2 x + 1 ) ( 2 x − 1 ) = 24 x + 8 . Solution: Begin by using the distributive property to expand the left side and combining like terms to obtain an equation in standard form, equal to 0. Once the equation is in standard form, identify a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Answer: The solutions are 6 ± 3 5 √ 2 .   Try this! Solve: 3 x ( x − 2 ) = 1 . Answer: 3 ± 2 3 √ 3 Video Solution  ||  || Discriminant If given a quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then the solutions can be calculated using the quadratic formula: The solutions are rational, irrational, or not real. We can determine the type and number of solutions by studying the discriminant The expression inside the radical of the quadratic formula, b 2 − 4 a c . , the expression inside the radical, b 2 − 4 a c . If the value of this expression is negative, then the equation has no real solutions. If the discriminant is positive, then we have two real solutions. And if the discriminant is 0, then we have one real solution.   Example 1: Determine the type and number of solutions: x 2 − 10 x + 30 = 0 . Solution: We begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is negative, we conclude that there are no real solutions. Answer: No real solution   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a negative radicand stops the process of simplification and shows that there is no real solution. Note We will study quadratic equations with no real solutions as we progress in our study of algebra.   Example 2: Determine the type and number of solutions: 7 x 2 − 10 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here Substitute these values into the discriminant: Since the discriminant is positive, we can conclude that there are two real solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a positive radicand in the quadratic formula leads to two real solutions. The two real solutions are 5 − 3 2 √ 7 and 5 + 3 2 √ 7 . Note that these solutions are irrational; we can approximate the values on a calculator.   Example 3: Determine the type and number of solutions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 = 0 . Solution: In this example, Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is positive, we conclude that there are two real solutions. Furthermore, since the discriminant is a perfect square, we obtain two rational solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   We could solve the previous quadratic equation using the quadratic formula as follows: Note that if the discriminant is a perfect square, then we could have factored the original equation. Given the special condition where the discriminant is 0, we obtain only one solution, a double root.   Example 4: Determine the type and number of solutions: 9 x 2 − 6 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here a = 9 , b = − 6 , and c = 1 , and we have Since the discriminant is 0, we conclude that there is only one real solution, a double root. Answer: One real solution   Since 0 is a perfect square, we can solve the equation above by factoring. Here 1/3 is a solution that occurs twice; it is a double root. In summary, if given any quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then we have the following: Positive discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c > 0 Two real solutions Zero discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c = 0 One real solution Negative discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c < 0 No real solution As we will see, knowing the number and type of solutions ahead of time helps us determine which method is best for solving a quadratic equation.   Try this! Determine the number and type of solutions: 3 x 2 − 5 x + 4 = 0 . Answer: No real solution Video Solution  || General Guidelines for Solving Quadratic Equations Use the coefficients of a quadratic equation to help decide which method is most appropriate for solving it. While the quadratic formula always works, it is sometimes not the most efficient method. Given any quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , general guidelines for determining the method for solving it follow: If c = 0, then factor out the GCF and solve by factoring. If b = 0, then solve by extracting the roots. If a, b, and c are all nonzero, then determine the value for the discriminant, b 2 − 4 a c : If the discriminant is a perfect square, then solve by factoring. If the discriminant is not a perfect square, then solve using the quadratic formula. If the discriminant is positive, we obtain two real solutions. If the discriminant is negative, then there is no real solution.   Example 5: Solve: 15 x 2 − 5 x = 0 . Solution: In this case, c = 0 and we can solve by factoring out the GCF. Answer: The solutions are 0 and 1/3.   Example 6: Solve: 3 x 2 − 5 = 0 . Solution: In this case, b = 0 and we can solve by extracting the roots. Answer: The solutions are ± 15 √ 3 .   Example 7: Solve: 9 x 2 − 6 x − 7 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c as the coefficients of each term. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and then simplify. Since the discriminant is positive and not a perfect square, use the quadratic formula and expect two real solutions. Answer: The solutions are 1 ± 2 2 √ 3 .   Example 8: Solve: 4 x ( x − 2 ) = − 7 . Solution: Begin by rewriting the quadratic equation in standard form. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and then simplify. Since the discriminant is negative, the solutions are not real numbers. Answer: No real solution   Example 9: Solve: ( 3 x + 5 ) ( 3 x + 7 ) = 6 x + 10 . Solution: Begin by rewriting the quadratic equation in standard form. Substitute a = 9, b = 30, and c = 25 into the discriminant. Since the discriminant is 0, solve by factoring and expect one real solution, a double root. Answer: The solution is −5/3.   Try this! Solve: 5 x 2 + 2 x − 7 = 2 x − 3 . Answer: ± 2 5 √ 5 Video Solution  || Applications Involving Quadratic Equations In this section, the algebraic setups usually consist of a quadratic equation where the solutions may not be integers.   Example 10: The height of a triangle is 2 inches less than twice the length of its base. If the total area of the triangle is 11 square inches, then find the lengths of the base and height. Round answers to the nearest hundredth. Solution: Use the formula A = 1 2 b h and the fact that the area is 11 square inches to set up an algebraic equation. To rewrite this quadratic equation in standard form, first distribute 1 2 x . Use the coefficients, a = 1, b = −1, and c = −11, to determine the type of solutions. Since the discriminant is positive, expect two real solutions. In this problem, disregard the negative solution and consider only the positive solution. Back substitute to find the height. Answer: The base measures 1 + 3 5 √ 2 ≈ 3.85 inches and the height is − 1 + 3 5 √ ≈ 5.71 inches.   Example 11: The sum of the squares of two consecutive positive integers is 481. Find the integers. Solution: The algebraic setup follows: Rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form. When the coefficients are large, sometimes it is less work to use the quadratic formula instead of trying to factor it. In this case, a = 1 , b = 1 , and c = − 240 . Substitute into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Since the problem calls for positive integers, disregard the negative solution and choose n = 15. Answer: The positive integers are 15 and 16.  ||  || The Graph of a Quadratic Equation We know that any linear equation with two variables can be written in the form y = m x + b and that its graph is a line. In this section, we will see that any quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c has a curved graph called a parabola The graph of any quadratic equation y = a x 2 + b x + c , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . . Two points determine any line. However, since a parabola is curved, we should find more than two points. In this text, we will determine at least five points as a means to produce an acceptable sketch. To begin, we graph our first parabola by plotting points. Given a quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c , x is the independent variable and y is the dependent variable. Choose some values for x and then determine the corresponding y-values. Then plot the points and sketch the graph.   Example 1: Graph by plotting points: y = x 2 − 2 x − 3 . Solution: In this example, choose the x-values {−2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4} and calculate the corresponding y-values. Plot these points and determine the shape of the graph. Answer: When graphing, we want to include certain special points in the graph. The y-intercept is the point where the graph intersects the y-axis. The x-intercepts are the points where the graph intersects the x-axis. The vertex The point that defines the minimum or maximum of a parabola. is the point that defines the minimum or maximum of the graph. Lastly, the line of symmetry The vertical line through the vertex, x = − b 2 a , about which the parabola is symmetric. (also called the axis of symmetry A term used when referencing the line of symmetry. ) is the vertical line through the vertex, about which the parabola is symmetric. For any parabola, we will find the vertex and y-intercept. In addition, if the x-intercepts exist, then we will want to determine those as well. Guessing at the x-values of these special points is not practical; therefore, we will develop techniques that will facilitate finding them. Many of these techniques will be used extensively as we progress in our study of algebra. Given a quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c , find the y-intercept by setting x = 0 and solving. In general, y = a ( 0 ) 2 + b ( 0 ) + c = c , and we have Next, recall that the x-intercepts, if they exist, can be found by setting y = 0 . Doing this, we have 0 = a 2 + b x + c , which has general solutions given by the quadratic formula, x = − b ± b 2 − 4 a c √ 2 a . Therefore, the x-intercepts have this general form: Using the fact that a parabola is symmetric, we can determine the vertical line of symmetry using the x-intercepts. To do this, we find the x-value midway between the x-intercepts by taking an average as follows: Therefore, the line of symmetry is the vertical line: We can use the line of symmetry to find the x-value of the vertex. The steps for graphing a parabola are outlined in the following example.   Example 2: Graph: y = − x 2 − 2 x + 3 . Solution: Step 1: Determine the y-intercept. To do this, set x = 0 and solve for y. The y-intercept is (0, 3). Step 2: Determine the x-intercepts. To do this, set y = 0 and solve for x. Here when y = 0, we obtain two solutions. There are two x-intercepts, (−3, 0) and (1, 0). Step 3: Determine the vertex. One way to do this is to use the equation for the line of symmetry, x = − b 2 a , to find the x-value of the vertex. In this example, a = −1 and b = −2: Substitute −1 into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (−1, 4). Step 4: Determine extra points so that we have at least five points to plot. In this example, one other point will suffice. Choose x = −2 and find the corresponding y-value. Our fifth point is (−2, 3). Step 5: Plot the points and sketch the graph. To recap, the points that we have found are y-intercept: (0, 3) x-intercept: (−3, 0) and (1, 0) Vertex: (−1, 4) Extra point: (−2, 3) Answer: The parabola opens downward. In general, use the leading coefficient to determine whether the parabola opens upward or downward. If the leading coefficient is negative, as in the previous example, then the parabola opens downward. If the leading coefficient is positive, then the parabola opens upward. All quadratic equations of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c have parabolic graphs with y-intercept (0, c). However, not all parabolas have x intercepts.   Example 3: Graph: y = 2 x 2 + 4 x + 5 . Solution: Because the leading coefficient 2 is positive, note that the parabola opens upward. Here c = 5 and the y-intercept is (0, 5). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. In this case, a = 2, b = 4, and c = 5. Use the discriminant to determine the number and type of solutions. Since the discriminant is negative, we conclude that there are no real solutions. Because there are no real solutions, there are no x-intercepts. Next, we determine the x-value of the vertex. Given that the x-value of the vertex is −1, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (−1, 3). So far, we have only two points. To determine three more, choose some x-values on either side of the line of symmetry, x = −1. Here we choose x-values −3, −2, and 1. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, 5) x-intercepts: None Vertex: (−1, 3) Extra points: (−3, 11), (−2, 5), (1, 11) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Example 4: Graph: y = − 2 x 2 + 12 x − 18 . Solution: Note that a = −2: the parabola opens downward. Since c = −18, the y-intercept is (0, −18). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. Solve by factoring. Here x = 3 is a double root, so there is only one x-intercept, (3, 0). From the original equation, a = −2, b = 12, and c = −18. The x-value of the vertex can be calculated as follows: Given that the x-value of the vertex is 3, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. Therefore, the vertex is (3, 0), which happens to be the same point as the x-intercept. So far, we have only two points. To determine three more, choose some x-values on either side of the line of symmetry, x = 3 in this case. Choose x-values 1, 5, and 6. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, −18) x-intercept: (3, 0) Vertex: (3, 0) Extra points: (1, −8), (5, −8), (6, −18) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Example 5: Graph: y = x 2 − 2 x − 1 . Solution: Since a = 1, the parabola opens upward. Furthermore, c = −1, so the y-intercept is (0, −1). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. In this case, solve using the quadratic formula with a = 1, b = −2, and c = −1. Here we obtain two real solutions for x, and thus there are two x-intercepts: Approximate values using a calculator: Use the approximate answers to place the ordered pair on the graph. However, we will present the exact x-intercepts on the graph. Next, find the vertex. Given that the x-value of the vertex is 1, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (1, −2). We need one more point. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, −1) x-intercepts: ( 1 − 2 √ , 0) and ( 1 + 2 √ , 0) Vertex: (1, −2) Extra point: (2, −1) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Try this! Graph: y = 9 x 2 − 5 . Answer: Video Solution  || Finding the Maximum and Minimum It is often useful to find the maximum and/or minimum values of functions that model real-life applications. To find these important values given a quadratic function, we use the vertex. If the leading coefficient a is positive, then the parabola opens upward and there will be a minimum y-value. If the leading coefficient a is negative, then the parabola opens downward and there will be a maximum y-value.   Example 6: Determine the maximum or minimum: y = − 4 x 2 + 24 x − 35 . Solution: Since a = −4, we know that the parabola opens downward and there will be a maximum y-value. To find it, we first find the x-value of the vertex. The x-value of the vertex is 3. Substitute this value into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (3, 1). Therefore, the maximum y-value is 1, which occurs when x = 3, as illustrated below: Note The graph is not required to answer this question. Answer: The maximum is 1.   Example 7: Determine the maximum or minimum: y = 4 x 2 − 32 x + 62 . Solution: Since a = +4, the parabola opens upward and there is a minimum y-value. Begin by finding the x-value of the vertex. Substitute x = 4 into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (4, −2). Therefore, the minimum y-value of −2 occurs when x = 4, as illustrated below: Answer: The minimum is −2.   Try this! Determine the maximum or minimum: y = ( x − 3 ) 2 − 9 . Answer: The minimum is −9. Video Solution A parabola, opening upward or downward (as opposed to sideways), defines a function and extends indefinitely to the right and left as indicated by the arrows. Therefore, the domain (the set of x-values) consists of all real numbers. However, the range (the set of y-values) is bounded by the y-value of the vertex.   Example 8: Determine the domain and range: y = x 2 − 4 x + 3 . Solution: First, note that since a = 1 is positive, the parabola opens upward. Hence there will be a minimum y-value. To find that value, find the x-value of the vertex: Then substitute into the equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (2, −1). The range consists of the set of y-values greater than or equal to the minimum y-value −1. Answer: Domain: R = (−∞, ∞); range: [−1, ∞)   Example 9: The height in feet of a projectile is given by the function h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 72 t , where t represents the time in seconds after launch. What is the maximum height reached by the projectile? Solution: Here a = − 16 , and the parabola opens downward. Therefore, the y-value of the vertex determines the maximum height. Begin by finding the x-value of the vertex: The maximum height will occur in 9/4 = 2¼ seconds. Substitute this time into the function to determine the height attained. Answer: The maximum height of the projectile is 81 feet.  || Finding the Vertex by Completing the Square In this section, we demonstrate an alternate approach for finding the vertex. Any quadratic equation y = a x 2 + b x + c can be rewritten in the form In this form, the vertex is (h, k).   Example 10: Determine the vertex: y = − 4 ( x − 3 ) 2 + 1 . Solution: When the equation is in this form, we can read the vertex directly from the equation. Here h = 3 and k = 1. Answer: The vertex is (3, 1).   Example 11: Determine the vertex: y = 2 ( x + 3 ) 2 − 2 . Solution: Rewrite the equation as follows before determining h and k. Here h = −3 and k = −2. Answer: The vertex is (−3, −2).   Often the equation is not given in this form. To obtain this form, complete the square.   Example 12: Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = x 2 + 4 x + 9 . Solution: Begin by making room for the constant term that completes the square. The idea is to add and subtract the value that completes the square, ( b 2 ) 2 , and then factor. In this case, add and subtract ( 4 2 ) 2 = ( 2 ) 2 = 4 . Adding and subtracting the same value within an expression does not change it. Doing so is equivalent to adding 0. Once the equation is in this form, we can easily determine the vertex. Here h = −2 and k = 5. Answer: The vertex is (−2, 5).   If there is a leading coefficient other than 1, then we must first factor out the leading coefficient from the first two terms of the trinomial.   Example 13: Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = 2 x 2 − 4 x + 8 . Solution: Since a = 2, factor this out of the first two terms in order to complete the square. Leave room inside the parentheses to add a constant term. Now use −2 to determine the value that completes the square. In this case, ( − 2 2 ) 2 = ( − 1 ) 2 = 1 . Add and subtract 1 and factor as follows: In this form, we can easily determine the vertex. Here h = 1 and k = 6. Answer: The vertex is (1, 6).   Try this! Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = − 2 x 2 − 12 x + 3 . Answer: y = − 2 ( x + 3 ) 2 + 21 ; vertex: (−3, 21) Video Solution  ||  || Introduction to Complex Numbers Up to this point, the square root of a negative number has been left undefined. For example, we know that − 9 − − − √ is not a real a number. There is no real number that when squared results in a negative number. We begin the resolution of this issue by defining the imaginary unit Defined as i = − 1 − − − √ and i 2 = − 1 . , i, as the square root of −1. To express a square root of a negative number in terms of the imaginary unit i, we use the following property, where a represents any nonnegative real number: With this we can write If − 9 − − − √ = 3 i , then we would expect that 3i squared equals −9: Therefore, the square root of any negative real number can be written in terms of the imaginary unit. Such numbers are often called imaginary numbers The square roots of any negative real numbers. .   Example 1: Rewrite in terms of the imaginary unit i. a. − 4 − − − √ b. − 5 − − − √ c. − 8 − − − √ Solution: a. − 4 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 4 − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 4 √ = i ⋅ 2 = 2 i b. − 5 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 5 − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 5 √ = i 5 √ c. − 8 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 2 − − − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 4 √ ⋅ 2 √ = i ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 √ = 2 i 2 √ Notation Note When an imaginary number involves a radical, place i in front of the radical. Consider the following: 2 i 2 √ = 2 2 √ i Since multiplication is commutative, these numbers are equivalent. However, in the form 2 2 √ i , the imaginary unit i is often misinterpreted to be part of the radicand. To avoid this confusion, it is a best practice to place the i in front of the radical and use 2 i 2 √ . A complex number Numbers of the form a + b i , where a and b are real numbers. is any number of the form where a and b are real numbers. Here a is called the real part The real number a of a complex number a + b i . and b is called the imaginary part The real number b of a complex number a + b i . . For example, 3 − 4 i is a complex number with a real part, 3, and an imaginary part, −4. It is important to note that any real number is also a complex number. For example, the real number 5 is also a complex number because it can be written as 5 + 0 i with a real part of 5 and an imaginary part of 0. Hence the set of real numbers, denoted R, is a subset of the set of complex numbers, denoted C. Adding and subtracting complex numbers is similar to adding and subtracting like terms. Add or subtract the real parts and then the imaginary parts.   Example 2: Add: ( 3 − 4 i ) + ( 2 + 5 i ) . Solution: Add the real parts and then add the imaginary parts. Answer:   To subtract complex numbers, subtract the real parts and subtract the imaginary parts. This is consistent with the use of the distributive property.   Example 3: Subtract: . Solution: Distribute the negative one and then combine like terms. Answer:   The distributive property also applies when multiplying complex numbers. Make use of the fact that to resolve the result into standard form: .   Example 4: Multiply: . Solution: Begin by applying the distributive property. Answer:   Example 5: Multiply: . Solution: Answer:   Given a complex number , its complex conjugate Two complex numbers whose real parts are the same and imaginary parts are opposite. If given , then its complex conjugate is . is . We next explore the product of complex conjugates.   Example 6: Multiply: . Solution: Answer: 25   In general, the product of complex conjugates The real number that results from multiplying complex conjugates: follows: Note that the result does not involve the imaginary unit; hence the result is real. This leads us to the very useful property: To divide complex numbers, we apply the technique used to rationalize the denominator. Multiply the numerator and denominator (dividend and divisor) by the conjugate of the denominator. The result can then be resolved into standard form, .   Example 7: Divide: . Solution: In this example, the conjugate of the denominator is . Multiply by 1 in the form . To express this complex number in standard form, write each term over the common denominator 5. Answer:   Example 8: Divide: . Solution: Answer:   Try this! Divide: . Answer: Video Solution  || Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions Now that complex numbers are defined, we can complete our study of solutions to quadratic equations. Often solutions to quadratic equations are not real.   Example 9: Solve using the quadratic formula: Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Check these solutions by substituting them into the original equation. Answer: The solutions are and .   The equation may not be given in standard form. The general steps for solving using the quadratic formula are outlined in the following example.   Example 10: Solve: . Solution: Step 1: Write the quadratic equation in standard form. Step 2: Identify a, b, and c for use in the quadratic formula. Here Step 3: Substitute the appropriate values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Answer: The solution is . The check is optional.   Example 11: Solve: . Solution: Begin by rewriting the equation in standard form. Here , , and . Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are and . Notation Note Consider the following: Both numbers are equivalent and is in standard form, where the real part is −1 and the imaginary part is . However, this number is often expressed as , even though this expression is not in standard form. Again, this is done to avoid the possibility of misinterpreting the imaginary unit as part of the radicand.   Try this! Solve: . Answer: Video Solution  || 