Multiplying and Dividing Fractions In this section, assume that a, b, c, and d are all nonzero integers. The product of two fractions is the fraction formed by the product of the numerators and the product of the denominators. In other words, to multiply fractions, multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators:   Example 4: Multiply: 2 3 ⋅ 5 7 . Solution: Multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators. Answer: 10 21   Example 5: Multiply: 5 9 ( − 1 4 ) . Solution: Recall that the product of a positive number and a negative number is negative. Answer: − 5 36   Example 6: Multiply: 2 3 ⋅ 5 3 4 . Solution: Begin by converting 5 3 4 to an improper fraction. In this example, we noticed that we could reduce before we multiplied the numerators and the denominators. Reducing in this way is called cross canceling Cancelling common factors in the numerator and the denominator of fractions before multiplying. , and can save time when multiplying fractions. Answer: 3 5 6   Two real numbers whose product is 1 are called reciprocals The reciprocal of a nonzero number n is 1/n. . Therefore, a b and b a are reciprocals because a b ⋅ b a = a b a b = 1 . For example, Because their product is 1, 2 3 and 3 2 are reciprocals. Some other reciprocals are listed below: This definition is important because dividing fractions requires that you multiply the dividend by the reciprocal of the divisor.   Example 7: Divide: 2 3 ÷ 5 7 . Solution: Multiply 2 3 by the reciprocal of 5 7 . Answer: 14 15   You also need to be aware of other forms of notation that indicate division: / and —. For example, Or The latter is an example of a complex fraction A fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. , which is a fraction whose numerator, denominator, or both are fractions. Note Students often ask why dividing is equivalent to multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. A mathematical explanation comes from the fact that the product of reciprocals is 1. If we apply the multiplicative identity property and multiply numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of the denominator, then we obtain the following: Before multiplying, look for common factors to cancel; this eliminates the need to reduce the end result.   Example 8: Divide:   5 2   7 4 . Solution: Answer: 10 7   When dividing by an integer, it is helpful to rewrite it as a fraction over 1.   Example 9: Divide: 2 3 ÷ 6 . Solution: Rewrite 6 as 6 1 and multiply by its reciprocal. Answer: 1 9   Also, note that we only cancel when working with multiplication. Rewrite any division problem as a product before canceling.   Try this! Divide: 5 ÷ 2 3 5 . Answer: 1 12 13 Video Solution Multiplying and Dividing Fractions In this section, assume that a, b, c, and d are all nonzero integers. The product of two fractions is the fraction formed by the product of the numerators and the product of the denominators. In other words, to multiply fractions, multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators:   Example 4: Multiply: 2 3 ⋅ 5 7 . Solution: Multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators. Answer: 10 21   Example 5: Multiply: 5 9 ( − 1 4 ) . Solution: Recall that the product of a positive number and a negative number is negative. Answer: − 5 36   Example 6: Multiply: 2 3 ⋅ 5 3 4 . Solution: Begin by converting 5 3 4 to an improper fraction. In this example, we noticed that we could reduce before we multiplied the numerators and the denominators. Reducing in this way is called cross canceling Cancelling common factors in the numerator and the denominator of fractions before multiplying. , and can save time when multiplying fractions. Answer: 3 5 6   Two real numbers whose product is 1 are called reciprocals The reciprocal of a nonzero number n is 1/n. . Therefore, a b and b a are reciprocals because a b ⋅ b a = a b a b = 1 . For example, Because their product is 1, 2 3 and 3 2 are reciprocals. Some other reciprocals are listed below: This definition is important because dividing fractions requires that you multiply the dividend by the reciprocal of the divisor.   Example 7: Divide: 2 3 ÷ 5 7 . Solution: Multiply 2 3 by the reciprocal of 5 7 . Answer: 14 15   You also need to be aware of other forms of notation that indicate division: / and —. For example, Or The latter is an example of a complex fraction A fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. , which is a fraction whose numerator, denominator, or both are fractions. Note Students often ask why dividing is equivalent to multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. A mathematical explanation comes from the fact that the product of reciprocals is 1. If we apply the multiplicative identity property and multiply numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of the denominator, then we obtain the following: Before multiplying, look for common factors to cancel; this eliminates the need to reduce the end result.   Example 8: Divide:   5 2   7 4 . Solution: Answer: 10 7   When dividing by an integer, it is helpful to rewrite it as a fraction over 1.   Example 9: Divide: 2 3 ÷ 6 . Solution: Rewrite 6 as 6 1 and multiply by its reciprocal. Answer: 1 9   Also, note that we only cancel when working with multiplication. Rewrite any division problem as a product before canceling.   Try this! Divide: 5 ÷ 2 3 5 . Answer: 1 12 13 Video Solution  || 