Special Case: Perfect Square Trinomial Recall from special products of binomials that and The trinomials on the right are called perfect squares because they are the squares of a single binomial, rather than the product of two different binomials. A quadratic trinomial can also have this form: (x + 3)2 = (x + 3)(x + 3) = x2 + 6x + 9 Notice that just as before the coefficient of x is the sum 3 + 3, and the constant term is the product 3 ´ 3. One can also say that The coefficient of x is twice the number 3 The constant term is the number three squared In general, if a quadratic trinomial is a perfect square, then o        The coefficient of x is twice the square root of the constant term Or to put it another way, o        The constant term is the square of half the coefficient of x In symbolic form we can express this as It is helpful to be able to recognize perfect square trinomials. We will see them again when we talk about solving quadratic equations. Coefficient of x2 is not 1 A quadratic is more difficult to factor when the coefficient of the squared term is not 1, because that coefficient is mixed in with the other products from FOILing the two binomials. There are two methods for attacking these: either you can use a systematic guess-and-check method, or a method called factoring by grouping. We will first look at the guess-and-check method (which we could call factoring by grouping). If you need to factor a trinomial such as 2x2 + x - 3, you have to think about what combinations could give the 2x2 as well as the other two terms. In this example the 2x2 must come from (x)(2x), and the constant term might come from either (-1)(3) or (1)(-3). The hard part is figuring out which combination will give the correct middle term. This gets messy because all those coefficients will be mixed in with the middle term when you FOIL the binomials. To see what is going on, let’s see what happens when we FOIL the following binomials: What happened? There are several significant things to notice: The leading term in the trinomial (the 2x2) is just the product of the leading terms in the binomials. The constant term in the trinomial (the -3) is the product of the constant terms in the binomials (so far this is the same as in the case where the coefficient of x2 is 1) The middle term in the trinomial (the x) is the sum of the outer and inner products, which involves all the constants and coefficients in the binomials, in a messy way that is not always obvious by inspection. Because 1 and 2 are relatively simple and 3 is complicated, it makes sense to think of the possible candidates that would satisfy conditions 1 and 2, and then test them in every possible combination by multiplying the resulting binomials to see if you get the correct middle term. This seems tedious, and indeed it can be if the numbers you are working with have a lot of factors, but in practice you usually only have to try a few combinations before you see what will work. As a demonstration, let’s see how we would attack the example by this method. Given 2x2 + x - 3 We make a list of the possible factors of 2x2: The only choice is (2x)(x). Then we make a list of the possible factors of the constant term -3: it is either (1)(-3) or (-1)(3). (Notice that since we need a negative number, one factor must be negative and the other positive, but it doesn’t matter which one so we have to try it both ways). The possible factors of the trinomial are the binomials that we can make out of these possible factors, taken in every possible order. From these possibilities, we see that the candidate binomials are: (2x + 1)(x – 3) (x + 1)(2x – 3) (2x + 3)(x – 1) (x + 3)(2x – 1) If we start multiplying these out, we will find that the third one works, and then we are finished. All you really need to check is to see if the sum of the outer and inner multiplications will give you the correct middle term, since we already know that we will get the correct first and last terms. In short, the method is: 1.      List all the possible ways to get the coefficient of x2 (which we call a) by multiplying two numbers 2.      List all the possible ways to get the constant term (which we call c) by multiplying two numbers 3.      Try all possible combinations of these to see which ones give the correct middle term ·        Don’t forget that the number itself times 1 is a possibility ·        If the number (a or c) is negative, remember to try the plus and minus signs both ways   Special Case: Perfect Square Trinomial Recall from special products of binomials that and The trinomials on the right are called perfect squares because they are the squares of a single binomial, rather than the product of two different binomials. A quadratic trinomial can also have this form: (x + 3)2 = (x + 3)(x + 3) = x2 + 6x + 9 Notice that just as before the coefficient of x is the sum 3 + 3, and the constant term is the product 3 ´ 3. One can also say that The coefficient of x is twice the number 3 The constant term is the number three squared In general, if a quadratic trinomial is a perfect square, then o        The coefficient of x is twice the square root of the constant term Or to put it another way, o        The constant term is the square of half the coefficient of x In symbolic form we can express this as It is helpful to be able to recognize perfect square trinomials. We will see them again when we talk about solving quadratic equations. Coefficient of x2 is not 1 A quadratic is more difficult to factor when the coefficient of the squared term is not 1, because that coefficient is mixed in with the other products from FOILing the two binomials. There are two methods for attacking these: either you can use a systematic guess-and-check method, or a method called factoring by grouping. We will first look at the guess-and-check method (which we could call factoring by grouping). If you need to factor a trinomial such as 2x2 + x - 3, you have to think about what combinations could give the 2x2 as well as the other two terms. In this example the 2x2 must come from (x)(2x), and the constant term might come from either (-1)(3) or (1)(-3). The hard part is figuring out which combination will give the correct middle term. This gets messy because all those coefficients will be mixed in with the middle term when you FOIL the binomials. To see what is going on, let’s see what happens when we FOIL the following binomials: What happened? There are several significant things to notice: The leading term in the trinomial (the 2x2) is just the product of the leading terms in the binomials. The constant term in the trinomial (the -3) is the product of the constant terms in the binomials (so far this is the same as in the case where the coefficient of x2 is 1) The middle term in the trinomial (the x) is the sum of the outer and inner products, which involves all the constants and coefficients in the binomials, in a messy way that is not always obvious by inspection. Because 1 and 2 are relatively simple and 3 is complicated, it makes sense to think of the possible candidates that would satisfy conditions 1 and 2, and then test them in every possible combination by multiplying the resulting binomials to see if you get the correct middle term. This seems tedious, and indeed it can be if the numbers you are working with have a lot of factors, but in practice you usually only have to try a few combinations before you see what will work. As a demonstration, let’s see how we would attack the example by this method. Given 2x2 + x - 3 We make a list of the possible factors of 2x2: The only choice is (2x)(x). Then we make a list of the possible factors of the constant term -3: it is either (1)(-3) or (-1)(3). (Notice that since we need a negative number, one factor must be negative and the other positive, but it doesn’t matter which one so we have to try it both ways). The possible factors of the trinomial are the binomials that we can make out of these possible factors, taken in every possible order. From these possibilities, we see that the candidate binomials are: (2x + 1)(x – 3) (x + 1)(2x – 3) (2x + 3)(x – 1) (x + 3)(2x – 1) If we start multiplying these out, we will find that the third one works, and then we are finished. All you really need to check is to see if the sum of the outer and inner multiplications will give you the correct middle term, since we already know that we will get the correct first and last terms. In short, the method is: 1.      List all the possible ways to get the coefficient of x2 (which we call a) by multiplying two numbers 2.      List all the possible ways to get the constant term (which we call c) by multiplying two numbers 3.      Try all possible combinations of these to see which ones give the correct middle term ·        Don’t forget that the number itself times 1 is a possibility ·        If the number (a or c) is negative, remember to try the plus and minus signs both ways    || 