Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We classify applications involving relationships between real numbers broadly as number problems. These problems can sometimes be solved using some creative arithmetic, guessing, and checking. Solving in this manner is not a good practice and should be avoided. Begin by working through the basic steps outlined in the general guidelines for solving word problems.   Example 3: A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller integer. The sum of the two integers is 18. Find the integers. Solution: Identify variables: Begin by assigning a variable to the smaller integer. Use the first sentence to identify the larger integer in terms of the variable x: “A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller.” Set up an equation: Add the expressions that represent the two integers, and set the resulting expression equal to 18 as indicated in the second sentence: “The sum of the two integers is 18.” Solve: Solve the equation to obtain the smaller integer x. Back substitute: Use the expression 3 x − 2 to find the larger integer—this is called back substituting The process of finding the answers to other unknowns after one has been found. . Answer the question: The two integers are 5 and 13. Check: 5 + 13 = 18. The answer makes sense.   Example 4: The difference between two integers is 2. The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller. Find the integers. Solution: Use the relationship between the two integers in the second sentence, “The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller,” to identify the unknowns in terms of one variable. Since the difference is positive, subtract the smaller integer from the larger. Solve. Use 2x − 6 to find the larger integer. Answer: The two integers are 8 and 10. These integers clearly solve the problem.   It is worth mentioning again that you can often find solutions to simple problems by guessing and checking. This is so because the numbers are chosen to simplify the process of solving, so that the algebraic steps are not too tedious. You learn how to set up algebraic equations with easier problems, so that you can use these ideas to solve more difficult problems later.   Example 5: The sum of two consecutive even integers is 46. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive even integers.” Add the even integers and set them equal to 46. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next even integer. Answer: The consecutive even integers are 22 and 24.   It should be clear that consecutive even integers are separated by two units. However, it may not be so clear that odd integers are as well.   Example 6: The sum of two consecutive odd integers is 36. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive odd integers.” Add the two odd integers and set the expression equal to 36. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next odd integer. Answer: The consecutive odd integers are 17 and 19.   The algebraic setup for even and odd integer problems is the same. A common mistake is to use x and x + 3 when identifying the variables for consecutive odd integers. This is incorrect because adding 3 to an odd number yields an even number: for example, 5 + 3 = 8. An incorrect setup is very likely to lead to a decimal answer, which may be an indication that the problem was set up incorrectly.   Example 7: The sum of three consecutive integers is 24. Find the integers. Solution: Consecutive integers are separated by one unit. Add the integers and set the sum equal to 24. Solve. Back substitute to find the other two integers. Answer: The three consecutive integers are 7, 8 and 9, where 7 + 8 + 9 = 24.   Try this! The sum of three consecutive odd integers is 87. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 27, 29, and 31. Video Solution Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We classify applications involving relationships between real numbers broadly as number problems. These problems can sometimes be solved using some creative arithmetic, guessing, and checking. Solving in this manner is not a good practice and should be avoided. Begin by working through the basic steps outlined in the general guidelines for solving word problems.   Example 3: A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller integer. The sum of the two integers is 18. Find the integers. Solution: Identify variables: Begin by assigning a variable to the smaller integer. Use the first sentence to identify the larger integer in terms of the variable x: “A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller.” Set up an equation: Add the expressions that represent the two integers, and set the resulting expression equal to 18 as indicated in the second sentence: “The sum of the two integers is 18.” Solve: Solve the equation to obtain the smaller integer x. Back substitute: Use the expression 3 x − 2 to find the larger integer—this is called back substituting The process of finding the answers to other unknowns after one has been found. . Answer the question: The two integers are 5 and 13. Check: 5 + 13 = 18. The answer makes sense.   Example 4: The difference between two integers is 2. The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller. Find the integers. Solution: Use the relationship between the two integers in the second sentence, “The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller,” to identify the unknowns in terms of one variable. Since the difference is positive, subtract the smaller integer from the larger. Solve. Use 2x − 6 to find the larger integer. Answer: The two integers are 8 and 10. These integers clearly solve the problem.   It is worth mentioning again that you can often find solutions to simple problems by guessing and checking. This is so because the numbers are chosen to simplify the process of solving, so that the algebraic steps are not too tedious. You learn how to set up algebraic equations with easier problems, so that you can use these ideas to solve more difficult problems later.   Example 5: The sum of two consecutive even integers is 46. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive even integers.” Add the even integers and set them equal to 46. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next even integer. Answer: The consecutive even integers are 22 and 24.   It should be clear that consecutive even integers are separated by two units. However, it may not be so clear that odd integers are as well.   Example 6: The sum of two consecutive odd integers is 36. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive odd integers.” Add the two odd integers and set the expression equal to 36. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next odd integer. Answer: The consecutive odd integers are 17 and 19.   The algebraic setup for even and odd integer problems is the same. A common mistake is to use x and x + 3 when identifying the variables for consecutive odd integers. This is incorrect because adding 3 to an odd number yields an even number: for example, 5 + 3 = 8. An incorrect setup is very likely to lead to a decimal answer, which may be an indication that the problem was set up incorrectly.   Example 7: The sum of three consecutive integers is 24. Find the integers. Solution: Consecutive integers are separated by one unit. Add the integers and set the sum equal to 24. Solve. Back substitute to find the other two integers. Answer: The three consecutive integers are 7, 8 and 9, where 7 + 8 + 9 = 24.   Try this! The sum of three consecutive odd integers is 87. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 27, 29, and 31. Video Solution  || 