The Inverse Properties Additive Inverses When two numbers are added together and the result is the additive identity, 0, the numbers are called additive inverses of each other. For example, when 3 is added to − 3 the result is 0, that is, 3 + ( − 3) = 0 . The numbers 3 and − 3 are additive inverses of each other. Multiplicative Inverses When two numbers are multiplied together and the result is the multiplicative identity, 1, the numbers are called multiplicative inverses of each other. For example, when 6 and are multiplied together, the result is 1, that is, . The numbers 6 and are multiplicative inverses of each other. We summarize the inverse properties as follows. The Inverse Properties If a is any real number, then there is a unique real number − a , such that The numbers a and − a are called additive inverses of each other. If a is any nonzero real number, then there is a unique real number such that The numbers a and are called multiplicative inverses of each other. Expanding Quantities When we perform operations such as 6(a + 3) = 6a + 18 , we say we are expanding the quantity 6(a + 3) . The Inverse Properties Additive Inverses When two numbers are added together and the result is the additive identity, 0, the numbers are called additive inverses of each other. For example, when 3 is added to − 3 the result is 0, that is, 3 + ( − 3) = 0 . The numbers 3 and − 3 are additive inverses of each other. Multiplicative Inverses When two numbers are multiplied together and the result is the multiplicative identity, 1, the numbers are called multiplicative inverses of each other. For example, when 6 and are multiplied together, the result is 1, that is, . The numbers 6 and are multiplicative inverses of each other. We summarize the inverse properties as follows. The Inverse Properties If a is any real number, then there is a unique real number − a , such that The numbers a and − a are called additive inverses of each other. If a is any nonzero real number, then there is a unique real number such that The numbers a and are called multiplicative inverses of each other. Expanding Quantities When we perform operations such as 6(a + 3) = 6a + 18 , we say we are expanding the quantity 6(a + 3) .  || 