 ||  || Definition of a Linear System Real-world applications are often modeled using more than one variable and more than one equation. A system of equations A set of two or more equations with the same variables. consists of a set of two or more equations with the same variables. In this section, we will study linear systems In this section, we restrict our study to systems of two linear equations with two variables. consisting of two linear equations each with two variables. For example, A solution to a linear system An ordered pair that satisfies both equations and corresponds to a point of intersection. , or simultaneous solution Used when referring to a solution of a system of equations. , to a linear system is an ordered pair (x, y) that solves both of the equations. In this case, (3, 2) is the only solution. To check that an ordered pair is a solution, substitute the corresponding x- and y-values into each equation and then simplify to see if you obtain a true statement for both equations.   Example 1: Determine whether (1, 0) is a solution to the system { x − y = 1 − 2 x + 3 y = 5 . Solution: Substitute the appropriate values into both equations. Answer: Since (1, 0) does not satisfy both equations, it is not a solution.   Try this! Is (−2, 4) a solution to the system {   x − y = − 6 − 2 x + 3 y = 16 ? Answer: Yes Video Solution  || Solve by Graphing Geometrically, a linear system consists of two lines, where a solution is a point of intersection. To illustrate this, we will graph the following linear system with a solution of (3, 2): First, rewrite the equations in slope-intercept form so that we may easily graph them. Next, replace these forms of the original equations in the system to obtain what is called an equivalent system A system consisting of equivalent equations that share the same solution set. . Equivalent systems share the same solution set. If we graph both of the lines on the same set of axes, then we can see that the point of intersection is indeed (3, 2), the solution to the system. To summarize, linear systems described in this section consist of two linear equations each with two variables. A solution is an ordered pair that corresponds to a point where the two lines in the rectangular coordinate plane intersect. Therefore, we can solve linear systems by graphing both lines on the same set of axes and determining the point where they cross. When graphing the lines, take care to choose a good scale and use a straightedge to draw the line through the points; accuracy is very important here. The steps for solving linear systems using the graphing method A means of solving a system by graphing the equations on the same set of axes and determining where they intersect. are outlined in the following example.   Example 2: Solve by graphing: { x − y = − 4 2 x + y = 1 . Solution: Step 1: Rewrite the linear equations in slope-intercept form. Step 2: Write the equivalent system and graph the lines on the same set of axes. Step 3: Use the graph to estimate the point where the lines intersect and check to see if it solves the original system. In the above graph, the point of intersection appears to be (−1, 3). Answer: (−1, 3)   Example 3: Solve by graphing: { 2 x + y = 2 − 2 x + 3 y = − 18 . Solution: We first solve each equation for y to obtain an equivalent system where the lines are in slope-intercept form. Graph the lines and determine the point of intersection. Answer: (3, −4)   Example 4: Solve by graphing: { 3 x + y = 6 y = − 3 . Solution: Answer: (3, −3)   The graphing method for solving linear systems is not ideal when the solution consists of coordinates that are not integers. There will be more accurate algebraic methods in sections to come, but for now, the goal is to understand the geometry involved when solving systems. It is important to remember that the solutions to a system correspond to the point, or points, where the graphs of the equations intersect.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { − x + y = 6   5 x + 2 y = − 2 . Answer: (−2, 4) Video Solution  || Dependent and Inconsistent Systems Systems with at least one solution are called consistent systems A system with at least one solution. . Up to this point, all of the examples have been of consistent systems with exactly one ordered pair solution. It turns out that this is not always the case. Sometimes systems consist of two linear equations that are equivalent. If this is the case, the two lines are the same and when graphed will coincide. Hence the solution set consists of all the points on the line. This is a dependent system A system that consists of equivalent equations with infinitely many ordered pair solutions, denoted by (x, mx + b). . Given a consistent linear system with two variables, there are two possible results: The solutions to independent systems A system of equations with one ordered pair solution (x, y). are ordered pairs (x, y). We need some way to express the solution sets to dependent systems, since these systems have infinitely many solutions, or points of intersection. Recall that any line can be written in slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . Here, y depends on x. So we may express all the ordered pair solutions ( x ,   y ) in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) , where x is any real number.   Example 5: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 3 y = − 9   4 x − 6 y = 18 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation in the system. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and same y-intercept. They are, in fact, the same line. And the system is dependent. Answer: ( x ,   2 3 x − 3 )   In this example, it is important to notice that the two lines have the same slope and same y-intercept. This tells us that the two equations are equivalent and that the simultaneous solutions are all the points on the line y = 2 3 x − 3 . This is a dependent system, and the infinitely many solutions are expressed using the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Other resources may express this set using set notation, {(x, y) | y = 2 3 x − 3 }, which reads “the set of all ordered pairs (x, y) such that y equals two-thirds x minus 3.” Sometimes the lines do not cross and there is no point of intersection. Such systems have no solution, Ø, and are called inconsistent systems A system with no simultaneous solution. .   Example 6: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 5 y = − 15 − 4 x + 10 y = 10 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and different y-intercepts. Therefore, they are parallel and will never intersect. Answer: There is no simultaneous solution, Ø.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { x + y = − 1 − 2 x − 2 y = 2 . Answer: ( x ,   − x − 1 ) Video Solution  ||  || The Substitution Method In this section, we will define a completely algebraic technique for solving systems. The idea is to solve one equation for one of the variables and substitute the result into the other equation. After performing this substitution step, we will be left with a single equation with one variable, which can be solved using algebra. This is called the substitution method A means of solving a linear system by solving for one of the variables and substituting the result into the other equation. , and the steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Solve by substitution: { 2 x + y = 7 3 x − 2 y = − 7 . Solution: Step 1: Solve for either variable in either equation. If you choose the first equation, you can isolate y in one step. Step 2: Substitute the expression − 2 x + 7 for the y variable in the other equation. This leaves you with an equivalent equation with one variable, which can be solved using the techniques learned up to this point. Step 3: Solve for the remaining variable. To solve for x, first distribute −2: Step 4: Back substitute Once a value is found for a variable, substitute it back into one of the original equations, or their equivalent equations, to determine the corresponding value of the other variable. to find the value of the other coordinate. Substitute x = 1 into either of the original equations or their equivalents. Typically, we use the equivalent equation that we found when isolating a variable in step 1. The solution to the system is (1, 5). Be sure to present the solution as an ordered pair. Step 5: Check. Verify that these coordinates solve both equations of the original system: The graph of this linear system follows: The substitution method for solving systems is a completely algebraic method. Thus graphing the lines is not required. Answer: (1, 5)   Example 2: Solve by substitution: { 2 x − y = 12 x − y = 3 . Solution: In this example, we can see that x has a coefficient of 1 in the second equation. This indicates that it can be isolated in one step as follows: Substitute 3 + y for x in the first equation. Use parentheses and take care to distribute. Use x = 3 + y to find x. Answer: (9, 6). The check is left to the reader.   Example 3: Solve by substitution: { 3 x − 5 y = 17 x = − 1 . Solution: In this example, the variable x is already isolated. Hence we can substitute x = − 1 into the first equation. Answer: (−1, −4). It is a good exercise to graph this particular system to compare the substitution method to the graphing method for solving systems.   Try this! Solve by substitution: { 3 x + y = 4 8 x + 2 y = 10 . Answer: (1, 1) Video Solution Solving systems algebraically frequently requires work with fractions.   Example 4: Solve by substitution: { 2 x + 8 y = 5 24 x − 4 y = − 15 . Solution: Begin by solving for x in the first equation. Next, substitute into the second equation and solve for y. Back substitute into the equation used in the substitution step: Answer: (−1/2, 3/4)   As we know, not all linear systems have only one ordered pair solution. Recall that some systems have infinitely many ordered pair solutions and some do not have any solutions. Next, we explore what happens when using the substitution method to solve a dependent system.   Example 5: Solve by substitution: { − 5 x + y = − 1 10 x − 2 y = 2 . Solution: Since the first equation has a term with coefficient 1, we choose to solve for that first. Next, substitute this expression in for y in the second equation. This process led to a true statement; hence the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution. This indicates that the system is dependent. The simultaneous solutions take the form (x, mx + b), or in this case, (x, 5x − 1), where x is any real number. Answer: ( x ,   5 x − 1 )   To have a better understanding of the previous example, rewrite both equations in slope-intercept form and graph them on the same set of axes. We can see that both equations represent the same line, and thus the system is dependent. Now explore what happens when solving an inconsistent system using the substitution method.   Example 6: Solve by substitution: { − 7 x + 3 y = 3 14 x − 6 y = − 16 . Solution: Solve for y in the first equation. Substitute into the second equation and solve. Solving leads to a false statement. This indicates that the equation is a contradiction. There is no solution for x and hence no solution to the system. Answer: No solution, Ø   A false statement indicates that the system is inconsistent, or in geometric terms, that the lines are parallel and do not intersect. To illustrate this, determine the slope-intercept form of each line and graph them on the same set of axes. In slope-intercept form, it is easy to see that the two lines have the same slope but different y-intercepts.   Try this! Solve by substitution: { 2 x − 5 y = 3 4 x − 10 y = 6 . Answer: ( x ,   2 5 x − 3 5 ) Video Solution  ||  || The Elimination Method In this section, the goal is to develop another completely algebraic method for solving a system of linear equations. We begin by defining what it means to add equations together. In the following example, notice that if we add the expressions on both sides of the equal sign, we obtain another true statement. This is true in general: if A, B, C, and D are algebraic expressions, then we have the following addition property of equations If A, B, C, and D are algebraic expressions, where A = B and C = D, then A + C = B + D. : For the system we add the two equations together: The sum of y and −y is zero and that term is eliminated. This leaves us with a linear equation with one variable that can be easily solved: At this point, we have the x coordinate of the simultaneous solution, so all that is left to do is back substitute to find the corresponding y-value. Hence the solution to the system is (3, 2). This process describes the elimination (or addition) method A means of solving a system by adding equivalent equations in such a way as to eliminate a variable. for solving linear systems. Of course, the variable is not always so easily eliminated. Typically, we have to find an equivalent system by applying the multiplication property of equality to one or both of the equations as a means to line up one of the variables to eliminate. The goal is to arrange that either the x terms or the y terms are opposites, so that when the equations are added, the terms eliminate. The steps for the elimination method are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Solve by elimination: { 2 x + y = 7 3 x − 2 y = − 7 . Solution: Step 1: Multiply one, or both, of the equations to set up the elimination of one of the variables. In this example, we will eliminate the variable y by multiplying both sides of the first equation by 2. Take care to distribute. This leaves us with an equivalent system where the variable y is lined up to eliminate. Step 2: Add the equations together to eliminate one of the variables. Step 3: Solve for the remaining variable. Step 3: Back substitute into either equation or its equivalent equation. Step 4: Check. Remember that the solution must solve both of the original equations. Answer: (1, 5)   Occasionally, we will have to multiply both equations to line up one of the variables to eliminate. We want the resulting equivalent equations to have terms with opposite coefficients.   Example 2: Solve by elimination: { 5 x − 3 y = − 1 3 x + 2 y = 7 . Solution: We choose to eliminate the terms with variable y because the coefficients have different signs. To do this, we first determine the least common multiple of the coefficients; in this case, the LCM(3, 2) is 6. Therefore, multiply both sides of both equations by the appropriate values to obtain coefficients of −6 and 6. This results in the following equivalent system: The y terms are now lined up to eliminate. Back substitute. Answer: (1, 2)   Sometimes linear systems are not given in standard form. When this is the case, it is best to first rearrange the equations before beginning the steps to solve by elimination.   Example 3: Solve by elimination: { 5 x + 12 y = 11 3 y = 4 x + 1 . Solution: First, rewrite the second equation in standard form. This results in the following equivalent system where like terms are aligned in columns: We can eliminate the term with variable y if we multiply the second equation by −4. Next, we add the equations together, Back substitute. Answer: (1/3, 7/9)   Try this! Solve by elimination: { 2 x + y = − 3 − 3 x − 2 y = 4 . Answer: (−2, 1) Video Solution At this point, we explore what happens when solving dependent and inconsistent systems using the elimination method.   Example 4: Solve by elimination: { 3 x − y = 7 6 x − 2 y = 14 . Solution: To eliminate the variable x, we could multiply the first equation by −2. Now adding the equations we have A true statement indicates that this is a dependent system. The lines coincide, and we need y in terms of x to present the solution set in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Choose one of the original equations and solve for y. Since the equations are equivalent, it does not matter which one we choose. Answer: ( x ,   3 x − 7 )   Example 5: Solve by elimination: { − x + 3 y = 9   2 x − 6 y = 12 . Solution: We can eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by 2. Now adding the equations we have A false statement indicates that the system is inconsistent. The lines are parallel and do not intersect. Answer: No solution, ∅   Try this! Solve by elimination: { 3 x + 15 y = − 15 2 x + 10 y = 30 . Answer: No solution, ∅ Video Solution  || Clearing Fractions and Decimals Given a linear system where the equations have fractional coefficients, it is usually best to clear the fractions before beginning the elimination method.   Example 6: Solve: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ − 1 10 x + 1 2 y = 4 5   1 7 x + 1 3 y = − 2 21 . Solution: Recall that we can clear fractions by multiplying both sides of an equation by the least common denominator (LCD). Take care to distribute and then simplify. This results in an equivalent system where the equations have integer coefficients, Solve using the elimination method. Back substitute. Answer: (−3, 1)   We can use a similar technique to clear decimals before solving.   Example 7: Solve: { 3 x − 0.6 y = − 0.9 − 0.5 x + 0.12 y = 0.16 . Solution: Multiply each equation by the lowest power of 10 necessary to result in integer coefficients. In this case, multiply the first equation by 10 and the second equation by 100. This results in an equivalent system where the equations have integer coefficients: Solve using the elimination method. Back substitute. Answer: (−0.2, 0.5)   Try this! Solve using elimination: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ 1 3 x − 2 3 y = 3 1 3 x − 1 2 y = 8 3 . Answer: (5, −2) Video Solution  ||  || Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We now have the techniques needed to solve linear systems. For this reason, we are no longer limited to using one variable when setting up equations that model applications. If we translate an application to a mathematical setup using two variables, then we need to form a linear system with two equations.   Example 1: The sum of two numbers is 40 and their difference is 8. Find the numbers. Solution: Identify variables. Set up equations: When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first key phrase, “the sum of the two numbers is 40,” translates as follows: And the second key phrase, “the difference is 8,” leads us to the second equation: Therefore, our algebraic setup consists of the following system: Solve: We can solve the resulting system using any method of our choosing. Here we choose to solve by elimination. Adding the equations together eliminates the variable y. Once we have x, back substitute to find y. Check: The sum of the two numbers should be 42 and their difference 8. Answer: The two numbers are 24 and 16.   Example 2: The sum of 9 times a larger number and twice a smaller is 6. The difference of 3 times the larger and the smaller is 7. Find the numbers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the larger and smaller number. The first sentence describes a sum and the second sentence describes a difference. This leads to the following system: Solve using the elimination method. Multiply the second equation by 2 and add. Back substitute to find y. Answer: The larger number is 4/3 and the smaller number is −3.   Try this! The sum of two numbers is 3. When twice the smaller number is subtracted from 6 times the larger the result is 22. Find the numbers. Answer: The two numbers are −1/2 and 7/2. Video Solution  || Interest and Money Problems In this section, the interest and money problems Applications involving simple interest and money. should seem familiar. The difference is that we will be making use of two variables when setting up the algebraic equations.   Example 3: A roll of 32 bills contains only $5 bills and $10 bills. If the value of the roll is $220, then how many of each bill are in the roll? Solution: Begin by identifying the variables. When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first equation is created from the fact that there are 32 bills. The second equation sums the value of each bill: the total value is $220. Present both equations as a system; this is our algebraic setup. Here we choose to solve by elimination, although substitution would work just as well. Eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by −5. Now add the equations together: Once we have y, the number of $10 bills, back substitute to find x. Answer: There are twenty $5 bills and twelve $10 bills. The check is left to the reader.   Example 4: A total of $6,300 was invested in two accounts. Part was invested in a CD at a 4 1 2 % annual interest rate and part was invested in a money market fund at a 3 3 4 % annual interest rate. If the total simple interest for one year was $267.75, then how much was invested in each account? Solution: The total amount in both accounts can be expressed as To set up a second equation, use the fact that the total interest was $267.75. Recall that the interest for one year is the interest rate times the principal ( I = p r t = p r ⋅ 1 = p r ). Use this to add the interest in both accounts. Be sure to use the decimal equivalents for the interest rates given as percentages. These two equations together form the following linear system: Eliminate y by multiplying the first equation by −0.0375. Next, add the equations together to eliminate the variable y. Back substitute. Answer: $4,200 was invested at 4 1 2 % and $2,100 was invested at 3 3 4 % .   At this point, we should be able to solve these types of problems in two ways: with one variable and now with two variables. Setting up word problems with two variables often simplifies the entire process, particularly when the relationships between the variables are not so clear.   Try this! On the first day of a two-day meeting, 10 coffees and 10 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $20.00. Since nobody drank the coffee and all the doughnuts were eaten, the next day only 2 coffees and 14 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $13.00. How much did each coffee and each doughnut cost? Answer: Coffee: $1.25; doughnut: $0.75 Video Solution  || Mixture Problems Mixture problems Applications involving a mixture of amounts usually given as a percentage of some total. often include a percentage and some total amount. It is important to make a distinction between these two types of quantities. For example, if a problem states that a 20-ounce container is filled with a 2% saline (salt) solution, then this means that the container is filled with a mixture of salt and water as follows: Percentage Amount Salt 2% = 0.02 0.02(20 ounces) = 0.4 ounces Water 98% = 0.98 0.98(20 ounces) = 19.6 ounces In other words, we multiply the percentage times the total to get the amount of each part of the mixture.   Example 5: A 2% saline solution is to be combined and mixed with a 5% saline solution to produce 72 ounces of a 2.5% saline solution. How much of each is needed? Solution: The total amount of saline solution needed is 72 ounces. This leads to one equation, The second equation adds up the amount of salt in the correct percentages. The amount of salt is obtained by multiplying the percentage times the amount, where the variables x and y represent the amounts of the solutions. The algebraic setup consists of both equations presented as a system: Solve. Back substitute. Answer: We need 60 ounces of the 2% saline solution and 12 ounces of the 5% saline solution.   Example 6: A 50% alcohol solution is to be mixed with a 10% alcohol solution to create an 8-ounce mixture of a 32% alcohol solution. How much of each is needed? Solution: The total amount of the mixture must be 8 ounces. The second equation adds up the amount of alcohol from each solution in the correct percentages. The amount of alcohol in the end result is 32% of 8 ounces, or 0.032(8). Now we can form a system of two linear equations and two variables as follows: In this example, multiply the second equation by 100 to eliminate the decimals. In addition, multiply the first equation by −10 to line up the variable y to eliminate. We obtain the following equivalent system: Add the equations and then solve for x: Back substitute. Answer: To obtain 8 ounces of a 32% alcohol mixture we need to mix 4.4 ounces of the 50% alcohol solution and 3.6 ounces of the 10% solution.   Try this! A 70% antifreeze concentrate is to be mixed with water to produce a 5-gallon mixture containing 28% antifreeze. How much water and antifreeze concentrate is needed? Answer: We need to mix 3 gallons of water with 2 gallons of antifreeze concentrate. Video Solution  || Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Recall that the distance traveled is equal to the average rate times the time traveled at that rate, D = r ⋅ t . These uniform motion problems Applications relating distance, average rate, and time. usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize that data in a chart and then set up a linear system. In this section, you are encouraged to use two variables.   Example 7: An executive traveled a total of 8 hours and 1,930 miles by car and by plane. Driving to the airport by car, she averaged 60 miles per hour. In the air, the plane averaged 350 miles per hour. How long did it take her to drive to the airport? Solution: We are asked to find the time it takes her to drive to the airport; this indicates that time is the unknown quantity. Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. The distance column and the time column of the chart help us to set up the following linear system. Solve. Now back substitute to find the time it took to drive to the airport x: Answer: It took her 3 hours to drive to the airport.   It is not always the case that time is the unknown quantity. Read the problem carefully and identify what you are asked to find; this defines your variables.   Example 8: Flying with the wind, an airplane traveled 1,365 miles in 3 hours. The plane then turned against the wind and traveled another 870 miles in 2 hours. Find the speed of the airplane and the speed of the wind. Solution: There is no obvious relationship between the speed of the plane and the speed of the wind. For this reason, use two variables as follows: Use the following chart to organize the data: With the wind, the airplane’s total speed is x + w . Flying against the wind, the total speed is x − w . Use the rows of the chart along with the formula D = r ⋅ t to construct a linear system that models this problem. Take care to group the quantities that represent the rate in parentheses. If we divide both sides of the first equation by 3 and both sides of the second equation by 2, then we obtain the following equivalent system: Back substitute. Answer: The speed of the airplane is 445 miles per hour and the speed of the wind is 10 miles per hour.   Try this! A boat traveled 24 miles downstream in 2 hours. The return trip, which was against the current, took twice as long. What are the speeds of the boat and of the current? Answer: The speed of the boat is 9 miles per hour and the speed of the current is 3 miles per hour. Video Solution  ||  || Solutions to Systems of Linear Inequalities A system of linear inequalities A set of two or more linear inequalities that define the conditions to be considered simultaneously. consists of a set of two or more linear inequalities with the same variables. The inequalities define the conditions that are to be considered simultaneously. For example, We know that each inequality in the set contains infinitely many ordered pair solutions defined by a region in a rectangular coordinate plane. When considering two of these inequalities together, the intersection of these sets defines the set of simultaneous ordered pair solutions. When we graph each of the above inequalities separately, we have When graphed on the same set of axes, the intersection can be determined. The intersection is shaded darker and the final graph of the solution set is presented as follows: The graph suggests that (3, 2) is a solution because it is in the intersection. To verify this, show that it solves both of the original inequalities: Points on the solid boundary are included in the set of simultaneous solutions and points on the dashed boundary are not. Consider the point (−1, 0) on the solid boundary defined by y = 2 x + 2 and verify that it solves the original system: Notice that this point satisfies both inequalities and thus is included in the solution set. Now consider the point (2, 0) on the dashed boundary defined by y = x − 2 and verify that it does not solve the original system: This point does not satisfy both inequalities and thus is not included in the solution set.  || Solving Systems of Linear Inequalities Solutions to a system of linear inequalities are the ordered pairs that solve all the inequalities in the system. Therefore, to solve these systems, graph the solution sets of the inequalities on the same set of axes and determine where they intersect. This intersection, or overlap, defines the region of common ordered pair solutions.   Example 1: Graph the solution set: { − 2 x + y > − 4 3 x − 6 y ≥ 6 . Solution: To facilitate the graphing process, we first solve for y. For the first inequality, we use a dashed boundary defined by y = 2 x − 4 and shade all points above the line. For the second inequality, we use a solid boundary defined by y = 1 2 x − 1 and shade all points below. The intersection is darkened. Now we present the solution with only the intersection shaded. Answer:   Example 2: Graph the solution set: { − 2 x + 3 y > 6 4 x − 6 y > 12 . Solution: Begin by solving both inequalities for y. Use a dashed line for each boundary. For the first inequality, shade all points above the boundary. For the second inequality, shade all points below the boundary. As you can see, there is no intersection of these two shaded regions. Therefore, there are no simultaneous solutions. Answer: No solution, ∅   Example 3: Graph the solution set: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ y ≥ − 4 y < x + 3 y ≤ − 3 x + 3 . Solution: The intersection of all the shaded regions forms the triangular region as pictured darkened below: After graphing all three inequalities on the same set of axes, we determine that the intersection lies in the triangular region pictured. Answer: The graphic suggests that (−1, 1) is a common point. As a check, substitute that point into the inequalities and verify that it solves all three conditions.  || 