Algebraic Definition of Absolute Value The problems in the first example may help to suggest the following algebraic definition of absolute value. The definition is interpreted below. Examples follow the interpretation. Absolute Value—Algebraic Approach The absolute value of a number a is The algebraic definition takes into account the fact that the number a could be either positive or zero ( ≥ 0 ) or negative ( < 0 ) . If the number a is positive or zero ( ≥ 0 ) , the first part of the definition applies. The first part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed in the absolute bars is a nonnegative number, the absolute value of the number is the number itself. If the number a is negative ( < 0 ) , the second part of the definition applies. The second part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a negative number, the absolute value of the number is the opposite of the number. The opposite of a negative number is a positive number. Algebraic Definition of Absolute Value The problems in the first example may help to suggest the following algebraic definition of absolute value. The definition is interpreted below. Examples follow the interpretation. Absolute Value—Algebraic Approach The absolute value of a number a is The algebraic definition takes into account the fact that the number a could be either positive or zero ( ≥ 0 ) or negative ( < 0 ) . If the number a is positive or zero ( ≥ 0 ) , the first part of the definition applies. The first part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed in the absolute bars is a nonnegative number, the absolute value of the number is the number itself. If the number a is negative ( < 0 ) , the second part of the definition applies. The second part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a negative number, the absolute value of the number is the opposite of the number. The opposite of a negative number is a positive number.  || 