Number Problems Recall that the reciprocal The reciprocal of a nonzero number n is 1/n. of a nonzero number n is 1/n. For example, the reciprocal of 5 is 1/5 and 5 ⋅ 1/5 = 1. In this section, the applications will often involve the key word “reciprocal.” When this is the case, we will see that the algebraic setup results in a rational equation.   Example 1: A positive integer is 4 less than another. The sum of the reciprocals of the two positive integers is 10/21. Find the two integers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the unknowns. Next, use the reciprocals 1 n and 1 n − 4 to translate the sentences into an algebraic equation. We can solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD). In this case, the LCD is 21 n ( n − 4 ) . Solve the resulting quadratic equation. The question calls for integers and the only integer solution is n = 7 . Hence disregard 6/5. Use the expression n − 4 to find the smaller integer. Answer: The two positive integers are 3 and 7. The check is left to the reader.   Example 2: A positive integer is 4 less than another. If the reciprocal of the smaller integer is subtracted from twice the reciprocal of the larger, then the result is 1/30. Find the two integers. Solution: Set up an algebraic equation. Solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides by the LCD. The LCD is 30 n ( n − 4 ) . Here we have two viable possibilities for the larger integer. For this reason, we will we have two solutions to this problem. As a check, perform the operations indicated in the problem. Answer: Two sets of positive integers solve this problem: {6, 10} and {20, 24}.   Try this! The difference between the reciprocals of two consecutive positive odd integers is 2/15. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 3 and 5. Video Solution Number Problems Recall that the reciprocal The reciprocal of a nonzero number n is 1/n. of a nonzero number n is 1/n. For example, the reciprocal of 5 is 1/5 and 5 ⋅ 1/5 = 1. In this section, the applications will often involve the key word “reciprocal.” When this is the case, we will see that the algebraic setup results in a rational equation.   Example 1: A positive integer is 4 less than another. The sum of the reciprocals of the two positive integers is 10/21. Find the two integers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the unknowns. Next, use the reciprocals 1 n and 1 n − 4 to translate the sentences into an algebraic equation. We can solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD). In this case, the LCD is 21 n ( n − 4 ) . Solve the resulting quadratic equation. The question calls for integers and the only integer solution is n = 7 . Hence disregard 6/5. Use the expression n − 4 to find the smaller integer. Answer: The two positive integers are 3 and 7. The check is left to the reader.   Example 2: A positive integer is 4 less than another. If the reciprocal of the smaller integer is subtracted from twice the reciprocal of the larger, then the result is 1/30. Find the two integers. Solution: Set up an algebraic equation. Solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides by the LCD. The LCD is 30 n ( n − 4 ) . Here we have two viable possibilities for the larger integer. For this reason, we will we have two solutions to this problem. As a check, perform the operations indicated in the problem. Answer: Two sets of positive integers solve this problem: {6, 10} and {20, 24}.   Try this! The difference between the reciprocals of two consecutive positive odd integers is 2/15. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 3 and 5. Video Solution  || 