Solving Systems of Linear Inequalities Solutions to a system of linear inequalities are the ordered pairs that solve all the inequalities in the system. Therefore, to solve these systems, graph the solution sets of the inequalities on the same set of axes and determine where they intersect. This intersection, or overlap, defines the region of common ordered pair solutions.   Example 1: Graph the solution set: { − 2 x + y > − 4 3 x − 6 y ≥ 6 . Solution: To facilitate the graphing process, we first solve for y. For the first inequality, we use a dashed boundary defined by y = 2 x − 4 and shade all points above the line. For the second inequality, we use a solid boundary defined by y = 1 2 x − 1 and shade all points below. The intersection is darkened. Now we present the solution with only the intersection shaded. Answer:   Example 2: Graph the solution set: { − 2 x + 3 y > 6 4 x − 6 y > 12 . Solution: Begin by solving both inequalities for y. Use a dashed line for each boundary. For the first inequality, shade all points above the boundary. For the second inequality, shade all points below the boundary. As you can see, there is no intersection of these two shaded regions. Therefore, there are no simultaneous solutions. Answer: No solution, ∅   Example 3: Graph the solution set: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ y ≥ − 4 y < x + 3 y ≤ − 3 x + 3 . Solution: The intersection of all the shaded regions forms the triangular region as pictured darkened below: After graphing all three inequalities on the same set of axes, we determine that the intersection lies in the triangular region pictured. Answer: The graphic suggests that (−1, 1) is a common point. As a check, substitute that point into the inequalities and verify that it solves all three conditions. Solving Systems of Linear Inequalities Solutions to a system of linear inequalities are the ordered pairs that solve all the inequalities in the system. Therefore, to solve these systems, graph the solution sets of the inequalities on the same set of axes and determine where they intersect. This intersection, or overlap, defines the region of common ordered pair solutions.   Example 1: Graph the solution set: { − 2 x + y > − 4 3 x − 6 y ≥ 6 . Solution: To facilitate the graphing process, we first solve for y. For the first inequality, we use a dashed boundary defined by y = 2 x − 4 and shade all points above the line. For the second inequality, we use a solid boundary defined by y = 1 2 x − 1 and shade all points below. The intersection is darkened. Now we present the solution with only the intersection shaded. Answer:   Example 2: Graph the solution set: { − 2 x + 3 y > 6 4 x − 6 y > 12 . Solution: Begin by solving both inequalities for y. Use a dashed line for each boundary. For the first inequality, shade all points above the boundary. For the second inequality, shade all points below the boundary. As you can see, there is no intersection of these two shaded regions. Therefore, there are no simultaneous solutions. Answer: No solution, ∅   Example 3: Graph the solution set: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ y ≥ − 4 y < x + 3 y ≤ − 3 x + 3 . Solution: The intersection of all the shaded regions forms the triangular region as pictured darkened below: After graphing all three inequalities on the same set of axes, we determine that the intersection lies in the triangular region pictured. Answer: The graphic suggests that (−1, 1) is a common point. As a check, substitute that point into the inequalities and verify that it solves all three conditions.  || 