The Intercept Method of Graphing When we want to graph a linear equation, it is certainly impractical to graph infinitely many points. Since a straight line is determined by only two points, we need only find two solutions to the equation (although a third point is helpful as a check). Intercepts When a linear equation in two variables is given in general from, a x + b y = c , often the two most convenient points (solutions) to fine are called the Intercepts: these are the points at which the line intercepts the coordinate axes. Of course, a horizontal or vertical line intercepts only one axis, so this method does not apply. Horizontal and vertical lines are easily recognized as they contain only one variable. (See Sample Set C .) y-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the y-axis is called the y-intercept . The x-value at this point is zero (since the point is neither to the left nor right of the origin). x-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the x-axis is called the x-intercept  and the y-value at that point is zero. The y-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for x into the equation and solving for y . The x-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for y into the equation and solving for x . Intercept Method Since we are graphing an equation by finding the intercepts, we call this method the intercept method The Intercept Method of Graphing When we want to graph a linear equation, it is certainly impractical to graph infinitely many points. Since a straight line is determined by only two points, we need only find two solutions to the equation (although a third point is helpful as a check). Intercepts When a linear equation in two variables is given in general from, a x + b y = c , often the two most convenient points (solutions) to fine are called the Intercepts: these are the points at which the line intercepts the coordinate axes. Of course, a horizontal or vertical line intercepts only one axis, so this method does not apply. Horizontal and vertical lines are easily recognized as they contain only one variable. (See Sample Set C .) y-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the y-axis is called the y-intercept . The x-value at this point is zero (since the point is neither to the left nor right of the origin). x-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the x-axis is called the x-intercept  and the y-value at that point is zero. The y-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for x into the equation and solving for y . The x-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for y into the equation and solving for x . Intercept Method Since we are graphing an equation by finding the intercepts, we call this method the intercept method  || 