Reading and Writing Fractions In order to properly translate fractions from word form to number form, or from number form to word form, it is necessary to understand the use of the hyphen. Use of the Hyphen One of the main uses of the hyphen is to tell the reader that two words not ordinarily joined are to be taken in combination as a unit. Hyphens are always used for numbers between and including 21 and 99 (except those ending in zero). Sample Set B Write each fraction using whole numbers. Example 4.5.  Fifty three-hundredths. The hyphen joins the words three and hundredths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty three-hundredths translates as Example 4.6.  Fifty-three hundredths. The hyphen joins the numbers fifty and three and tells us to con­sider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty-three hundredths translates as Example 4.7.  Four hundred seven-thousandths. The hyphen joins the words seven and thousandths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, four hundred seven-thousandths translates as Example 4.8.  Four hundred seven thousandths. The absence of hyphens indicates that the words seven and thousandths are to be considered individually. four hundred seven thousandths translates as Write each fraction using words. Example 4.9.  translates as twenty-one eighty-fifths. Example 4.10.  translates as two hundred three-thousandths. A hyphen is needed between the words three and thousandths to tell the reader that these words are to be considered as a single unit. Example 4.11.  translates as two hundred three thousandths. Practice Set B Write the following fractions using whole numbers. Exercise 4.2.6. (Go to Solution) one tenth Exercise 4.2.7. (Go to Solution) eleven fourteenths Exercise 4.2.8. (Go to Solution) sixteen thirty-fifths Exercise 4.2.9. (Go to Solution) eight hundred seven-thousandths Write the following using words. Exercise 4.2.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.13. (Go to Solution) Name the fraction that describes each shaded portion. Exercise 4.2.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.15. (Go to Solution) In the following 2 problems, state the numerator and denominator, and write each fraction in words. Exercise 4.2.16. (Go to Solution) The number is used in converting from Fahrenheit to Celsius. Exercise 4.2.17. (Go to Solution) A dime is of a dollar. Reading and Writing Fractions In order to properly translate fractions from word form to number form, or from number form to word form, it is necessary to understand the use of the hyphen. Use of the Hyphen One of the main uses of the hyphen is to tell the reader that two words not ordinarily joined are to be taken in combination as a unit. Hyphens are always used for numbers between and including 21 and 99 (except those ending in zero). Sample Set B Write each fraction using whole numbers. Example 4.5.  Fifty three-hundredths. The hyphen joins the words three and hundredths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty three-hundredths translates as Example 4.6.  Fifty-three hundredths. The hyphen joins the numbers fifty and three and tells us to con­sider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty-three hundredths translates as Example 4.7.  Four hundred seven-thousandths. The hyphen joins the words seven and thousandths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, four hundred seven-thousandths translates as Example 4.8.  Four hundred seven thousandths. The absence of hyphens indicates that the words seven and thousandths are to be considered individually. four hundred seven thousandths translates as Write each fraction using words. Example 4.9.  translates as twenty-one eighty-fifths. Example 4.10.  translates as two hundred three-thousandths. A hyphen is needed between the words three and thousandths to tell the reader that these words are to be considered as a single unit. Example 4.11.  translates as two hundred three thousandths. Practice Set B Write the following fractions using whole numbers. Exercise 4.2.6. (Go to Solution) one tenth Exercise 4.2.7. (Go to Solution) eleven fourteenths Exercise 4.2.8. (Go to Solution) sixteen thirty-fifths Exercise 4.2.9. (Go to Solution) eight hundred seven-thousandths Write the following using words. Exercise 4.2.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.13. (Go to Solution) Name the fraction that describes each shaded portion. Exercise 4.2.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.15. (Go to Solution) In the following 2 problems, state the numerator and denominator, and write each fraction in words. Exercise 4.2.16. (Go to Solution) The number is used in converting from Fahrenheit to Celsius. Exercise 4.2.17. (Go to Solution) A dime is of a dollar.  || 