Equivalent Fractions Let's examine the following two diagrams. Notice that both and represent the same part of the whole, that is, they represent the same number. Equivalent Fractions Fractions that have the same value are called equivalent fractions. Equiva­lent fractions may look different, but they are still the same point on the number line. There is an interesting property that equivalent fractions satisfy. A Test for Equivalent Fractions Using the Cross Product These pairs of products are called cross products. If the cross products are equal, the fractions are equivalent. If the cross products are not equal, the fractions are not equivalent. Thus, and are equivalent, that is, . Sample Set A Determine if the following pairs of fractions are equivalent. Example 4.18.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are equals. The fractions and are equivalent, so . Example 4.19.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are not equal. The fractions and are not equivalent. Practice Set A Determine if the pairs of fractions are equivalent. Exercise 4.4.1. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.2. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.3. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.4. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.5. (Go to Solution) , Equivalent Fractions Let's examine the following two diagrams. Notice that both and represent the same part of the whole, that is, they represent the same number. Equivalent Fractions Fractions that have the same value are called equivalent fractions. Equiva­lent fractions may look different, but they are still the same point on the number line. There is an interesting property that equivalent fractions satisfy. A Test for Equivalent Fractions Using the Cross Product These pairs of products are called cross products. If the cross products are equal, the fractions are equivalent. If the cross products are not equal, the fractions are not equivalent. Thus, and are equivalent, that is, . Sample Set A Determine if the following pairs of fractions are equivalent. Example 4.18.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are equals. The fractions and are equivalent, so . Example 4.19.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are not equal. The fractions and are not equivalent. Practice Set A Determine if the pairs of fractions are equivalent. Exercise 4.4.1. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.2. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.3. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.4. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.5. (Go to Solution) ,  || 