 || Order and the Inequality Symbols Our number system is called an ordered number system because the numbers in the system can be placed in order from smaller to larger. This is easily seen on the number line. On the number line, a number that appears to the right of another number is larger than that other number. For example, 5 is greater than 2 because 5 is located to the right of 2 on the number line. We may also say that 2 is less than 5. To make the inequality phrases "greater than" and "less than" more brief, mathematicians represent them with the symbols > and <, respectively. Symbols for Greater Than > and Less Than < > represents the phrase "greater than." < represents the phrase "less than." 5 > 2 represents "5 is greater than 2." 2 < 5 represents "2 is less than 5."  || Comparing Fractions Recall that the fraction indicates that we have 4 of 5 parts of some whole quantity, and the fraction indicates that we have 3 of 5 parts. Since 4 of 5 parts is more than 3 of 5 parts, is greater than ; that is, We have just observed that when two fractions have the same denominator, we can determine which is larger by comparing the numerators. Comparing Fractions If two fractions have the same denominators, the fraction with the larger nu­merator is the larger fraction. Thus, to compare the sizes of two or more fractions, we need only convert each of them to equivalent fractions that have a common denominator. We then compare the numerators. It is convenient if the common denominator is the LCD. The fraction with the larger numerator is the larger fraction. Sample Set A Example 5.16.  Compare and . Convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction with the LCD as the denominator. Find the LCD. Since 40 < 42, Thus . Example 5.17.  Write and in order from smallest to largest. Convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction with the LCD as the denominator. Find the LCD. Since 21 < 25 < 26 , < < < < Writing these numbers in order from smallest to largest, we get , , . Example 5.18.  Compare and . To compare mixed numbers that have different whole number parts, we need only compare whole number parts. Since 6 < 8, Example 5.19.  Compare To compare mixed numbers that have the same whole number parts, we need only compare fractional parts. Since 14 < 15, Hence, Practice Set A Exercise 5.5.1. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.2. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.3. (Go to Solution) Write , , and in order from smallest to largest. Exercise 5.5.4. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.5. (Go to Solution) Compare and .  || 