 ||  || Factors Let’s begin our review of arithmetic by recalling the meaning of multiplication for whole numbers (the counting numbers and zero). Multiplication Multiplication is a description of repeated addition. In the addition 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 the number 7 is repeated as an addend* 4 times. Therefore, we say we have four times seven and describe it by writing 4  ·  7 The raised dot between the numbers 4 and 7 indicates multiplication. The dot directs us to multiply the two numbers that it separates. In algebra, the dot is preferred over the symbol × to denote multiplication because the letter x is often used to represent a number. Thus, 4  ·  7 = 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 Factors and Products In a multiplication, the numbers being multiplied are called factors. The result of a multiplication is called the product. For example, in the multiplication 4  ·  7 = 28 the numbers 4 and 7 are factors, and the number 28 is the product. We say that 4 and 7 are factors of 28. (They are not the only factors of 28. Can you think of others?)Now we know thatThis indicates that a first number is a factor of a second number if the first number divides into the second number with no remainder. For example, since 4  ·  7 = 28 both 4 and 7 are factors of 28 since both 4 and 7 divide into 28 with no remainder.  || Exponential Notation Quite often, a particular number will be repeated as a factor in a multiplication. For example, in the multiplication 7  ·  7  ·  7  ·  7 the number 7 is repeated as a factor 4 times. We describe this by writing 74 . Thus, 7  ·  7  ·  7  ·  7 = 74 The repeated factor is the lower number (the base), and the number recording how many times the factor is repeated is the higher number (the superscript). The superscript number is called an exponent. Exponent An exponent is a number that records how many times the number to which it is attached occurs as a factor in a multiplication.  ||  || Prime And Composite Numbers Notice that the only factors of 7 are 1 and 7 itself, and that the only factors of 23 are 1 and 23 itself. Prime Number A whole number greater than 1 whose only whole number factors are itself and 1 is called a prime number. The first seven prime numbers are2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and 17The number 1 is not considered to be a prime number, and the number 2 is the first and only even prime number.Many numbers have factors other than themselves and 1. For example, the factors of 28 are 1, 2, 4, 7, 14, and 28 (since each of these whole numbers and only these whole numbers divide into 28 without a remainder). Composite Numbers A whole number that is composed of factors other than itself and 1 is called a composite number. Composite numbers are not prime numbers.Some composite numbers are 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 15.  || The Fundamental Principle Of Arithmetic Prime numbers are very important in the study of mathematics. We will use them soon in our study of fractions. We will now, however, be introduced to an important mathematical principle. The Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic Except for the order of the factors, every whole number, other than 1, can be factored in one and only one way as a product of prime numbers. Prime Factorization When a number is factored so that all its factors are prime numbers, the factorization is called the prime factorization of the number.  || The Prime Factorization Of A Whole Number The following method provides a way of finding the prime factorization of a whole number. The examples that follow will use the method and make it more clear. Divide the number repeatedly by the smallest prime number that will divide into the number without a remainder. When the prime number used in step 1 no longer divides into the given number without a remainder, repeat the process with the next largest prime number. Continue this process until the quotient is 1. The prime factorization of the given number is the product of all these prime divisors.  ||  || Multiples Multiples When a whole number is multiplied by other whole numbers, with the exception of Multiples zero, the resulting products are called multiples of the given whole number. Table 1.1. Multiples of 2   Multiples of 3   Multiples of 8   Multiples of 10 2 · 1 = 2   3 · 1 = 3   8 · 1 = 8   10 · 1 = 10 2 · 2 = 4   3 · 2 = 6   8 · 2 = 16   10 · 2 = 20 2 · 3 = 6   3 · 3 = 9   8 · 3 = 24   10 · 3 = 30 2 · 4 = 8   3 · 4 = 12   8 · 4 = 32   10 · 4 = 40 2 · 5 = 10   3 · 5 = 15   8 · 5 = 40   10 · 5 = 50 …   …   …   …  || Common Multiples There will be times when we are given two or more whole numbers and we will need to know if there are any multiples that are common to each of them. If there are, we will need to know what they are. For example, some of the multiples that are common to 2 and 3 are 6, 12, and 18.  || The Least Common Multiple (LCM) Notice that in our number line visualization of common multiples (above) the first common multiple is also the smallest, or least common multiple, abbreviated by LCM. Least Common Multiple The least common multiple, LCM, of two or more whole numbers is the smallest whole number that each of the given numbers will divide into without a remainder.  || Finding The Least Common Multiple Finding the LCM To find the LCM of two or more numbers, Write the prime factorization of each number, using exponents on repeated factors. Write each base that appears in each of the prime factorizations. To each base, attach the largest exponent that appears on it in the prime factorizations. The LCM is the product of the numbers found in step 3.  ||  || Equivalent Fractions Equivalent Fractions Fractions that have the same value are called equivalent fractions. For example, and represent the same part of a whole quantity and are therefore equivalent. Several more collections of equivalent fractions are listed below. Example 1.15.  Example 1.16.  Example 1.17.   || Reducing Fractions To Lowest Terms Reduced to Lowest Terms It is often useful to convert one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. When a fraction is converted to an equivalent fraction that has the smallest numerator and denominator in the collection of equivalent fractions, it is said to be reduced to lowest terms. The conversion process is called reducing a fraction. We can reduce a fraction to lowest terms by Expressing the numerator and denominator as a product of prime numbers. (Find the prime factorization of the numerator and denominator. See Section (Section 1.3) for this technique.) Divide the numerator and denominator by all common factors. (This technique is commonly called “cancelling.”)  || Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms Equally important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. The higher, equivalent fraction is constructed by multiplying the original fraction by 1.Notice that and are equivalent, that is Also, This observation helps us suggest the following method for raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to higher terms by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number. For example, can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8, that is, multiplying by 1 in the form How did we know to choose 8 as the proper factor? Since we wish to convert 4 to 32 by multiplying it by some number, we know that 4 must be a factor of 32. This means that 4 divides into 32. In fact, 32÷4 = 8. We divided the original denominator into the new, specified denominator to obtain the proper factor for the multiplication.  ||  || Multiplication of Fractions Multiplication of Fractions To multiply two fractions, multiply the numerators together and multiply the denominators together. Reduce to lowest terms if possible. Example 1.24.  For example, multiply Notice that we since had to reduce, we nearly started over again with the original two fractions. If we factor first, then cancel, then multiply, we will save time and energy and still obtain the correct product.  || Division of Fractions Reciprocals Two numbers whose product is 1 are reciprocals of each other. For example, since and are reciprocals of each other. Some other pairs of reciprocals are listed below.Reciprocals are used in division of fractions. Division of Fractions To divide a first fraction by a second fraction, multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second fraction. Reduce if possible. This method is sometimes called the “invert and multiply” method.  || Addition and Subtraction of Fractions Fractions with Like Denominators To add (or subtract) two or more fractions that have the same denominators, add (or subtract) the numerators and place the resulting sum over the common denominator. Reduce if possible. CAUTIONAdd or subtract only the numerators. Do not add or subtract the denominators!  ||  || Decimal Fractions Fractions are one way we can represent parts of whole numbers. Decimal fractions are another way of representing parts of whole numbers. Decimal Fractions A decimal fraction is a fraction in which the denominator is a power of 10. A decimal fraction uses a decimal point to separate whole parts and fractional parts. Whole parts are written to the left of the decimal point and fractional parts are written to the right of the decimal point. Just as each digit in a whole number has a particular value, so do the digits in decimal positions.  || Adding and Subtracting Decimal Fractions Adding/Subtracting Decimal Fractions To add or subtract decimal fractions, Align the numbers vertically so that the decimal points line up under each other and corresponding decimal positions are in the same column. Add zeros if necessary. Add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Place a decimal point in the resulting sum or difference directly under the other decimal points.  || Multiplying Decimal Fractions Multiplying Decimal Fractions To multiply decimals, Multiply tbe numbers as if they were whole numbers. Find the sum of the number of decimal places in the factors. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum found in step 2.  || Dividing Decimal Fractions Dividing Decimal Fractions To divide a decimal by a nonzero decimal, Convert the divisor to a whole number by moving the decimal point to the position immediately to the right of the divisor’s last digit. Move the decimal point of the dividend to the right the same number of digits it was moved in the divisor. Set the decimal point in the quotient by placing a decimal point directly above the decimal point in the dividend. Divide as usual.  || Converting Decimal Fractions to Fractions We can convert a decimal fraction to a fraction by reading it and then writing the phrase we have just read. As we read the decimal fraction, we note the place value farthest to the right. We may have to reduce the fraction.  || Converting Fractions to Decimal Fractions  ||  || The Meaning of Percent The word percent comes from the Latin word “per centum,” “per” meaning “for each,” and “centum” meaning “hundred.” Percent (%) Percent means “for each hundred” or “for every hundred.” The symbol % is used to represent the word percent. Thus,  || Converting A Fraction To A Percent We can see how a fraction can be converted to a percent by analyzing the method that is converted to a percent. In order to convert to a percent, we need to introduce (since percent means for each hundred). Example 1.51.  Fraction to Percent To convert a fraction to a percent, multiply the fraction by 1 in the form , then replace with the % symbol.  || Converting A Decimal To A Percent We can see how a decimal is converted to a percent by analyzing the method that 0.75 is converted to a percent. We need to introduce Decimal to Percent To convert a fraction to a percent, multiply the decimal by 1 in the form , then replace with the % symbol. This amounts to moving the decimal point 2 places to the right.  || Converting A Percent To A Decimal We can see how a percent is converted to a decimal by analyzing the method that 12% is converted to a decimal. We need to introduce Percent to Decimal To convert a percent to a decimal, replace the % symbol with then divide the number by 100. This amounts to moving the decimal point 2 places to the left.  || 