 || Decimal Fractions Fractions are one way we can represent parts of whole numbers. Decimal fractions are another way of representing parts of whole numbers. Decimal Fractions A decimal fraction is a fraction in which the denominator is a power of 10. A decimal fraction uses a decimal point to separate whole parts and fractional parts. Whole parts are written to the left of the decimal point and fractional parts are written to the right of the decimal point. Just as each digit in a whole number has a particular value, so do the digits in decimal positions.  || Adding and Subtracting Decimal Fractions Adding/Subtracting Decimal Fractions To add or subtract decimal fractions, Align the numbers vertically so that the decimal points line up under each other and corresponding decimal positions are in the same column. Add zeros if necessary. Add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Place a decimal point in the resulting sum or difference directly under the other decimal points.  || Multiplying Decimal Fractions Multiplying Decimal Fractions To multiply decimals, Multiply tbe numbers as if they were whole numbers. Find the sum of the number of decimal places in the factors. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum found in step 2.  || Dividing Decimal Fractions Dividing Decimal Fractions To divide a decimal by a nonzero decimal, Convert the divisor to a whole number by moving the decimal point to the position immediately to the right of the divisor’s last digit. Move the decimal point of the dividend to the right the same number of digits it was moved in the divisor. Set the decimal point in the quotient by placing a decimal point directly above the decimal point in the dividend. Divide as usual.  || Converting Decimal Fractions to Fractions We can convert a decimal fraction to a fraction by reading it and then writing the phrase we have just read. As we read the decimal fraction, we note the place value farthest to the right. We may have to reduce the fraction.  || Converting Fractions to Decimal Fractions  || 