Bounded Intervals An inequality such as reads “−1 one is less than or equal to x and x is less than three.” This is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: The logical “and” requires that both conditions must be true. Both inequalities are satisfied by all the elements in the intersection The set formed by the shared values of the individual solution sets that is indicated by the logical use of the word “and,” denoted with the symbol ∩ . , denoted ∩ , of the solution sets of each.   Example 5: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3   and   x ≥ − 1 . Solution: Determine the intersection, or overlap, of the two solution sets. The solutions to each inequality are sketched above the number line as a means to determine the intersection, which is graphed on the number line below. Here x = 3 is not a solution because it solves only one of the inequalities. Answer: Interval notation: [ − 1 ,   3 )   Alternatively, we may interpret − 1 ≤ x < 3 as all possible values for x between or bounded by −1 and 3 on a number line. For example, one such solution is x = 1 . Notice that 1 is between −1 and 3 on a number line, or that −1 < 1 < 3. Similarly, we can see that other possible solutions are −1, −0.99, 0, 0.0056, 1.8, and 2.99. Since there are infinitely many real numbers between −1 and 3, we must express the solution graphically and/or with interval notation, in this case [ − 1 ,   3 ) .   Example 6: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: − 3 2 < x < 2 . Solution: Shade all real numbers bounded by, or strictly between, − 3 2 = − 1 1 2 and 2. Answer: Interval notation: ( − 3 2 ,   2 )   Example 7: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: − 5 < x ≤ 15 . Solution: Shade all real numbers between −5 and 15, and indicate that the upper bound, 15, is included in the solution set by using a closed dot. Answer: Interval notation: ( − 5 ,   15 ]   In the previous two examples, we did not decompose the inequalities; instead we chose to think of all real numbers between the two given bounds. In summary, Bounded Intervals An inequality such as reads “−1 one is less than or equal to x and x is less than three.” This is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: The logical “and” requires that both conditions must be true. Both inequalities are satisfied by all the elements in the intersection The set formed by the shared values of the individual solution sets that is indicated by the logical use of the word “and,” denoted with the symbol ∩ . , denoted ∩ , of the solution sets of each.   Example 5: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3   and   x ≥ − 1 . Solution: Determine the intersection, or overlap, of the two solution sets. The solutions to each inequality are sketched above the number line as a means to determine the intersection, which is graphed on the number line below. Here x = 3 is not a solution because it solves only one of the inequalities. Answer: Interval notation: [ − 1 ,   3 )   Alternatively, we may interpret − 1 ≤ x < 3 as all possible values for x between or bounded by −1 and 3 on a number line. For example, one such solution is x = 1 . Notice that 1 is between −1 and 3 on a number line, or that −1 < 1 < 3. Similarly, we can see that other possible solutions are −1, −0.99, 0, 0.0056, 1.8, and 2.99. Since there are infinitely many real numbers between −1 and 3, we must express the solution graphically and/or with interval notation, in this case [ − 1 ,   3 ) .   Example 6: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: − 3 2 < x < 2 . Solution: Shade all real numbers bounded by, or strictly between, − 3 2 = − 1 1 2 and 2. Answer: Interval notation: ( − 3 2 ,   2 )   Example 7: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: − 5 < x ≤ 15 . Solution: Shade all real numbers between −5 and 15, and indicate that the upper bound, 15, is included in the solution set by using a closed dot. Answer: Interval notation: ( − 5 ,   15 ]   In the previous two examples, we did not decompose the inequalities; instead we chose to think of all real numbers between the two given bounds. In summary,  || 