Reproducing Calculator Results on Homework Paper In this section we delineate recommendations and requirements when repro- ducing graphing calculator results on your homework paper. Consider again the final result of Example 2 shown in Figure 3.29. To determine the scale at each end of each axis, press the WINDOW button on the topmost row of buttons on your calculator. The WINDOW settings for Figure 3.29 are shown in Figure 3.30. Figure 3.31 presents a visual explanation of each of the entries Xmin, Xmax, Ymin, and Ymax. Figure 3.30: The WINDOW pa- rameters. x y −10 10 −10 10 Xmin Xmax Ymin Ymax Figure 3.31: Xmin, Xmax, Ymin, and Ymax contain the scale at the end of each axis. 3.2. THE GRAPHING CALCULATOR 175 Xmin and Xmax indicate the scale at the left- and right-hand ends of the x-axis, respectively, while Ymin and Ymax indicate the scale at the bottom- and top-ends of the y-axis. Finally, as we shall see shortly, Xscl and Yscl control the spacing between tick marks on the x- and y-axes, respectively. When reproducing the graph in your calculator viewing window on your homework paper, follow the Calculator Submission Guidelines. Calculator Submission Guidelines. 1. All lines (including the horizontal and vertical axes) should be drawn with a ruler. All curves should be drawn freehand. 2. Set up a coordinate system on your homework paper that mimics closely the coordinate system in your calculator’s view screen. Label your axes (usually with x and y). 3. Indicate the scale at each end of each axis. Use Xmin, Xmax, Ymin, and Ymax in the WINDOW menu for this purpose. 4. Copy the graph from your calculator’s viewing window onto your coordi- nate system. Label the graph with its equation. For example, to report the results of Figure 3.29, draw the axes with a ruler, label the horizontal axis with x, the vertical axis with y, then place the values of Xmin, Xmax, Ymin, and Ymax at the appropriate end of each axis (see Figure 3.32). x y −10 10 −10 10 y = x2 − 7 Figure 3.32: Reporting the graph of y = x2 − 7 on your homework paper. Because the graph is a curve, make a freehand copy that closely mimics the graph shown in Figure 3.29, then label it with its equation, as shown in 176 CHAPTER 3. INTRODUCTION TO GRAPHING Figure 3.32. Reproducing Calculator Results on Homework Paper In this section we delineate recommendations and requirements when repro- ducing graphing calculator results on your homework paper. Consider again the final result of Example 2 shown in Figure 3.29. To determine the scale at each end of each axis, press the WINDOW button on the topmost row of buttons on your calculator. The WINDOW settings for Figure 3.29 are shown in Figure 3.30. Figure 3.31 presents a visual explanation of each of the entries Xmin, Xmax, Ymin, and Ymax. Figure 3.30: The WINDOW pa- rameters. x y −10 10 −10 10 Xmin Xmax Ymin Ymax Figure 3.31: Xmin, Xmax, Ymin, and Ymax contain the scale at the end of each axis. 3.2. THE GRAPHING CALCULATOR 175 Xmin and Xmax indicate the scale at the left- and right-hand ends of the x-axis, respectively, while Ymin and Ymax indicate the scale at the bottom- and top-ends of the y-axis. Finally, as we shall see shortly, Xscl and Yscl control the spacing between tick marks on the x- and y-axes, respectively. When reproducing the graph in your calculator viewing window on your homework paper, follow the Calculator Submission Guidelines. Calculator Submission Guidelines. 1. All lines (including the horizontal and vertical axes) should be drawn with a ruler. All curves should be drawn freehand. 2. Set up a coordinate system on your homework paper that mimics closely the coordinate system in your calculator’s view screen. Label your axes (usually with x and y). 3. Indicate the scale at each end of each axis. Use Xmin, Xmax, Ymin, and Ymax in the WINDOW menu for this purpose. 4. Copy the graph from your calculator’s viewing window onto your coordi- nate system. Label the graph with its equation. For example, to report the results of Figure 3.29, draw the axes with a ruler, label the horizontal axis with x, the vertical axis with y, then place the values of Xmin, Xmax, Ymin, and Ymax at the appropriate end of each axis (see Figure 3.32). x y −10 10 −10 10 y = x2 − 7 Figure 3.32: Reporting the graph of y = x2 − 7 on your homework paper. Because the graph is a curve, make a freehand copy that closely mimics the graph shown in Figure 3.29, then label it with its equation, as shown in 176 CHAPTER 3. INTRODUCTION TO GRAPHING Figure 3.32.  || 