Multiplying and Dividing Rational Functions The product and quotient of two rational functions can be simplified using the techniques described in this section. The restrictions to the domain of a product consist of the restrictions of each function.   Example 12: Calculate and determine the restrictions to the domain. Solution: In this case, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 0, and the domain of consists of all real numbers except 1/4. Therefore, the domain of the product consists of all real numbers except 0 and 1/4. Multiply the functions and then simplify the result. Answer: , where   The restrictions to the domain of a quotient will consist of the restrictions of each function as well as the restrictions on the reciprocal of the divisor.   Example 13: Calculate and determine the restrictions. Solution: In this case, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 3 and 8, and the domain of consists all real numbers except 3. In addition, the reciprocal of has a restriction of −8. Therefore, the domain of this quotient consists of all real numbers except 3, 8, and −8. Answer: , where Multiplying and Dividing Rational Functions The product and quotient of two rational functions can be simplified using the techniques described in this section. The restrictions to the domain of a product consist of the restrictions of each function.   Example 12: Calculate and determine the restrictions to the domain. Solution: In this case, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 0, and the domain of consists of all real numbers except 1/4. Therefore, the domain of the product consists of all real numbers except 0 and 1/4. Multiply the functions and then simplify the result. Answer: , where   The restrictions to the domain of a quotient will consist of the restrictions of each function as well as the restrictions on the reciprocal of the divisor.   Example 13: Calculate and determine the restrictions. Solution: In this case, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 3 and 8, and the domain of consists all real numbers except 3. In addition, the reciprocal of has a restriction of −8. Therefore, the domain of this quotient consists of all real numbers except 3, 8, and −8. Answer: , where  || 