 || Discriminant If given a quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then the solutions can be calculated using the quadratic formula: The solutions are rational, irrational, or not real. We can determine the type and number of solutions by studying the discriminant The expression inside the radical of the quadratic formula, b 2 − 4 a c . , the expression inside the radical, b 2 − 4 a c . If the value of this expression is negative, then the equation has no real solutions. If the discriminant is positive, then we have two real solutions. And if the discriminant is 0, then we have one real solution.   Example 1: Determine the type and number of solutions: x 2 − 10 x + 30 = 0 . Solution: We begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is negative, we conclude that there are no real solutions. Answer: No real solution   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a negative radicand stops the process of simplification and shows that there is no real solution. Note We will study quadratic equations with no real solutions as we progress in our study of algebra.   Example 2: Determine the type and number of solutions: 7 x 2 − 10 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here Substitute these values into the discriminant: Since the discriminant is positive, we can conclude that there are two real solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a positive radicand in the quadratic formula leads to two real solutions. The two real solutions are 5 − 3 2 √ 7 and 5 + 3 2 √ 7 . Note that these solutions are irrational; we can approximate the values on a calculator.   Example 3: Determine the type and number of solutions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 = 0 . Solution: In this example, Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is positive, we conclude that there are two real solutions. Furthermore, since the discriminant is a perfect square, we obtain two rational solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   We could solve the previous quadratic equation using the quadratic formula as follows: Note that if the discriminant is a perfect square, then we could have factored the original equation. Given the special condition where the discriminant is 0, we obtain only one solution, a double root.   Example 4: Determine the type and number of solutions: 9 x 2 − 6 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here a = 9 , b = − 6 , and c = 1 , and we have Since the discriminant is 0, we conclude that there is only one real solution, a double root. Answer: One real solution   Since 0 is a perfect square, we can solve the equation above by factoring. Here 1/3 is a solution that occurs twice; it is a double root. In summary, if given any quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then we have the following: Positive discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c > 0 Two real solutions Zero discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c = 0 One real solution Negative discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c < 0 No real solution As we will see, knowing the number and type of solutions ahead of time helps us determine which method is best for solving a quadratic equation.   Try this! Determine the number and type of solutions: 3 x 2 − 5 x + 4 = 0 . Answer: No real solution Video Solution  || General Guidelines for Solving Quadratic Equations Use the coefficients of a quadratic equation to help decide which method is most appropriate for solving it. While the quadratic formula always works, it is sometimes not the most efficient method. Given any quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , general guidelines for determining the method for solving it follow: If c = 0, then factor out the GCF and solve by factoring. If b = 0, then solve by extracting the roots. If a, b, and c are all nonzero, then determine the value for the discriminant, b 2 − 4 a c : If the discriminant is a perfect square, then solve by factoring. If the discriminant is not a perfect square, then solve using the quadratic formula. If the discriminant is positive, we obtain two real solutions. If the discriminant is negative, then there is no real solution.   Example 5: Solve: 15 x 2 − 5 x = 0 . Solution: In this case, c = 0 and we can solve by factoring out the GCF. Answer: The solutions are 0 and 1/3.   Example 6: Solve: 3 x 2 − 5 = 0 . Solution: In this case, b = 0 and we can solve by extracting the roots. Answer: The solutions are ± 15 √ 3 .   Example 7: Solve: 9 x 2 − 6 x − 7 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c as the coefficients of each term. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and then simplify. Since the discriminant is positive and not a perfect square, use the quadratic formula and expect two real solutions. Answer: The solutions are 1 ± 2 2 √ 3 .   Example 8: Solve: 4 x ( x − 2 ) = − 7 . Solution: Begin by rewriting the quadratic equation in standard form. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and then simplify. Since the discriminant is negative, the solutions are not real numbers. Answer: No real solution   Example 9: Solve: ( 3 x + 5 ) ( 3 x + 7 ) = 6 x + 10 . Solution: Begin by rewriting the quadratic equation in standard form. Substitute a = 9, b = 30, and c = 25 into the discriminant. Since the discriminant is 0, solve by factoring and expect one real solution, a double root. Answer: The solution is −5/3.   Try this! Solve: 5 x 2 + 2 x − 7 = 2 x − 3 . Answer: ± 2 5 √ 5 Video Solution  || Applications Involving Quadratic Equations In this section, the algebraic setups usually consist of a quadratic equation where the solutions may not be integers.   Example 10: The height of a triangle is 2 inches less than twice the length of its base. If the total area of the triangle is 11 square inches, then find the lengths of the base and height. Round answers to the nearest hundredth. Solution: Use the formula A = 1 2 b h and the fact that the area is 11 square inches to set up an algebraic equation. To rewrite this quadratic equation in standard form, first distribute 1 2 x . Use the coefficients, a = 1, b = −1, and c = −11, to determine the type of solutions. Since the discriminant is positive, expect two real solutions. In this problem, disregard the negative solution and consider only the positive solution. Back substitute to find the height. Answer: The base measures 1 + 3 5 √ 2 ≈ 3.85 inches and the height is − 1 + 3 5 √ ≈ 5.71 inches.   Example 11: The sum of the squares of two consecutive positive integers is 481. Find the integers. Solution: The algebraic setup follows: Rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form. When the coefficients are large, sometimes it is less work to use the quadratic formula instead of trying to factor it. In this case, a = 1 , b = 1 , and c = − 240 . Substitute into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Since the problem calls for positive integers, disregard the negative solution and choose n = 15. Answer: The positive integers are 15 and 16.  || 