Rational Expressions, Evaluating, and Restrictions A rational number, or fraction a b , is a real number defined as a quotient of two integers a and b, where b ≠ 0 . Similarly, we define a rational expression The quotient P Q of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0. , or algebraic fraction Term used when referring to a rational expression. P Q , as the quotient of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0 . Some examples of rational expressions follow: The example x + 3 x − 5 consists of linear expressions in both the numerator and denominator. Because the denominator contains a variable, this expression is not defined for all values of x.   Example 1: Evaluate x + 3 x − 5 for the set of x-values {−3, 4, 5}. Solution: Substitute the values in for x. Answer: When x = − 3 , the value of the rational expression is 0; when x = 4 , the value of the rational expression is −7; and when x = 5 , the value of the rational expression is undefined.   This example illustrates that variables are restricted to values that do not make the denominator equal to 0. The domain of a rational expression The set of real numbers for which the rational expression is defined. is the set of real numbers for which it is defined, and restrictions The set of real numbers for which a rational expression is not defined. are the real numbers for which the expression is not defined. We often express the domain of a rational expression in terms of its restrictions.   Example 2: Find the domain of the following: x + 7 2 x 2 + x − 6 . Solution: In this example, the numerator x + 7 is a linear expression and the denominator 2 x 2 + x − 6 is a quadratic expression. If we factor the denominator, then we will obtain an equivalent expression. Because rational expressions are undefined when the denominator is 0, we wish to find the values for x that make it 0. To do this, apply the zero-product property. Set each factor in the denominator equal to 0 and solve. We conclude that the original expression is defined for any real number except 3/2 and −2. These two values are the restrictions to the domain. It is important to note that −7 is not a restriction to the domain because the expression is defined as 0 when the numerator is 0. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ 3 2 and x ≠ − 2 .   We can express the domain of the previous example using notation as follows: The restrictions to the domain of a rational expression are determined by the denominator. Ignore the numerator when finding those restrictions.   Example 3: Determine the domain: x 4 + x 3 − 2 x 2 − x x 2 − 1 . Solution: To find the restrictions to the domain, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve: These two values cause the denominator to be 0. Hence they are restricted from the domain. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ ± 1 .   Example 4: Determine the domain: x 2 − 25 4 . Solution: There is no variable in the denominator and thus no restriction to the domain. Answer: The domain consists of all real numbers, R. Rational Expressions, Evaluating, and Restrictions A rational number, or fraction a b , is a real number defined as a quotient of two integers a and b, where b ≠ 0 . Similarly, we define a rational expression The quotient P Q of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0. , or algebraic fraction Term used when referring to a rational expression. P Q , as the quotient of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0 . Some examples of rational expressions follow: The example x + 3 x − 5 consists of linear expressions in both the numerator and denominator. Because the denominator contains a variable, this expression is not defined for all values of x.   Example 1: Evaluate x + 3 x − 5 for the set of x-values {−3, 4, 5}. Solution: Substitute the values in for x. Answer: When x = − 3 , the value of the rational expression is 0; when x = 4 , the value of the rational expression is −7; and when x = 5 , the value of the rational expression is undefined.   This example illustrates that variables are restricted to values that do not make the denominator equal to 0. The domain of a rational expression The set of real numbers for which the rational expression is defined. is the set of real numbers for which it is defined, and restrictions The set of real numbers for which a rational expression is not defined. are the real numbers for which the expression is not defined. We often express the domain of a rational expression in terms of its restrictions.   Example 2: Find the domain of the following: x + 7 2 x 2 + x − 6 . Solution: In this example, the numerator x + 7 is a linear expression and the denominator 2 x 2 + x − 6 is a quadratic expression. If we factor the denominator, then we will obtain an equivalent expression. Because rational expressions are undefined when the denominator is 0, we wish to find the values for x that make it 0. To do this, apply the zero-product property. Set each factor in the denominator equal to 0 and solve. We conclude that the original expression is defined for any real number except 3/2 and −2. These two values are the restrictions to the domain. It is important to note that −7 is not a restriction to the domain because the expression is defined as 0 when the numerator is 0. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ 3 2 and x ≠ − 2 .   We can express the domain of the previous example using notation as follows: The restrictions to the domain of a rational expression are determined by the denominator. Ignore the numerator when finding those restrictions.   Example 3: Determine the domain: x 4 + x 3 − 2 x 2 − x x 2 − 1 . Solution: To find the restrictions to the domain, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve: These two values cause the denominator to be 0. Hence they are restricted from the domain. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ ± 1 .   Example 4: Determine the domain: x 2 − 25 4 . Solution: There is no variable in the denominator and thus no restriction to the domain. Answer: The domain consists of all real numbers, R.  || 