Graphing Solutions to Linear Inequalities Solutions to linear inequalities are a shaded half-plane, bounded by a solid line or a dashed line. This boundary is either included in the solution or not, depending on the given inequality. If we are given a strict inequality, we use a dashed line to indicate that the boundary is not included. If we are given an inclusive inequality, we use a solid line to indicate that it is included. The steps for graphing the solution set for an inequality with two variables are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Graph the solution set: y > − 3 x + 1 . Solution: Step 1: Graph the boundary line. In this case, graph a dashed line y = − 3 x + 1 because of the strict inequality. By inspection, we see that the slope is m = − 3 = − 3 1 = r i s e r u n and the y-intercept is (0, 1). Step 2: Test a point not on the boundary. A common test point is the origin (0, 0). The test point helps us determine which half of the plane to shade. Step 3: Shade the region containing the solutions. Since the test point (0, 0) was not a solution, it does not lie in the region containing all the ordered pair solutions. Therefore, shade the half of the plane that does not contain this test point. In this case, shade above the boundary line. Answer: Consider the problem of shading above or below the boundary line when the inequality is in slope-intercept form. If y > m x + b , then shade above the line. If y < m x + b , then shade below the line. Use this with caution; sometimes the boundary is given in standard form, in which case these rules do not apply.   Example 2: Graph the solution set: 2 x − 5 y ≥ − 10 . Solution: Here the boundary is defined by the line 2 x − 5 y = − 10 . Since the inequality is inclusive, we graph the boundary using a solid line. In this case, graph the boundary line using intercepts. Next, test a point; this helps decide which region to shade. Since the test point is in the solution set, shade the half of the plane that contains it. Answer: In this example, notice that the solution set consists of all the ordered pairs below the boundary line. This may be counterintuitive because of the original ≥ in the inequality. This illustrates that it is a best practice to actually test a point. Solve for y and you see that the shading is correct. In slope-intercept form, you can see that the region below the boundary line should be shaded. An alternate approach is to first express the boundary in slope-intercept form, graph it, and then shade the appropriate region.   Example 3: Graph the solution set: y < 2 . Solution: First, graph the boundary line y = 2 with a dashed line because of the strict inequality. Next, test a point. In this case, shade the region that contains the test point. Answer:   Try this! Graph the solution set: 5 x − y ≤ 10 . Answer: Video Solution Graphing Solutions to Linear Inequalities Solutions to linear inequalities are a shaded half-plane, bounded by a solid line or a dashed line. This boundary is either included in the solution or not, depending on the given inequality. If we are given a strict inequality, we use a dashed line to indicate that the boundary is not included. If we are given an inclusive inequality, we use a solid line to indicate that it is included. The steps for graphing the solution set for an inequality with two variables are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Graph the solution set: y > − 3 x + 1 . Solution: Step 1: Graph the boundary line. In this case, graph a dashed line y = − 3 x + 1 because of the strict inequality. By inspection, we see that the slope is m = − 3 = − 3 1 = r i s e r u n and the y-intercept is (0, 1). Step 2: Test a point not on the boundary. A common test point is the origin (0, 0). The test point helps us determine which half of the plane to shade. Step 3: Shade the region containing the solutions. Since the test point (0, 0) was not a solution, it does not lie in the region containing all the ordered pair solutions. Therefore, shade the half of the plane that does not contain this test point. In this case, shade above the boundary line. Answer: Consider the problem of shading above or below the boundary line when the inequality is in slope-intercept form. If y > m x + b , then shade above the line. If y < m x + b , then shade below the line. Use this with caution; sometimes the boundary is given in standard form, in which case these rules do not apply.   Example 2: Graph the solution set: 2 x − 5 y ≥ − 10 . Solution: Here the boundary is defined by the line 2 x − 5 y = − 10 . Since the inequality is inclusive, we graph the boundary using a solid line. In this case, graph the boundary line using intercepts. Next, test a point; this helps decide which region to shade. Since the test point is in the solution set, shade the half of the plane that contains it. Answer: In this example, notice that the solution set consists of all the ordered pairs below the boundary line. This may be counterintuitive because of the original ≥ in the inequality. This illustrates that it is a best practice to actually test a point. Solve for y and you see that the shading is correct. In slope-intercept form, you can see that the region below the boundary line should be shaded. An alternate approach is to first express the boundary in slope-intercept form, graph it, and then shade the appropriate region.   Example 3: Graph the solution set: y < 2 . Solution: First, graph the boundary line y = 2 with a dashed line because of the strict inequality. Next, test a point. In this case, shade the region that contains the test point. Answer:   Try this! Graph the solution set: 5 x − y ≤ 10 . Answer: Video Solution  || 