Using the Graphing Calculator In this section we will employ two different calculator routines to find the solution of a nonlinear equation. Before picking up the calculator, let’s first use an algebraic method to solve the equation x2 = −5x. The equation is nonlinear, so the first step is to move everything to one side of the equation, making one side equal to zero. x2 = −5x Nonlinear. Make one side zero. x2 + 5x = 0 Add 5x to both sides. x(x+ 5) = 0 Factor out the GCF. Use the zero product property, setting each factor equal to zero, then solving the resulting equations for x. x = 0 or x+ 5 = 0 x = −5 Hence, the solutions are x = 0 and x = −5. 6.2. SOLVING NONLINEAR EQUATIONS 405 We’ll now use the calculator to find the solutions of x2 = −5x. The first technique employs the 5:intersect routine on the calculator’s CALC menu. You Try It! EXAMPLE 7. Use the 5:intersect utility on the graphing calculator to Use the 5:intersect utility on the graphing calculator to solve the equation x2 = 4x for x. solve the equation x2 = −5x for x. Solution: Load the left-hand side of x2 = −5x in Y1 and the right-hand side in Y2 (see Figure 6.2). Selecting 6:ZStandard from the ZOOM menu produces the graphs shown in the image on the right in Figure 6.2. Figure 6.2: Sketch the graphs of each side of the equation x2 = −5x. Note that the graph of y = x2 is a parabola that opens upward, with vertex (turning point) at the origin. This graph reveals why the equation x2 = −5x is called a nonlinear equation (not all the graphs involved are lines). Next, the graph of y = −5x is a line with slope −5 and y-intercept at the origin. The two graphs obviously intersect at the origin, but it also appears that there may be another point of intersection that is off the screen. Let’s increase Ymax in an attempt to reveal the second point of intersection. After some experimentation, the settings shown in the first image in Figure 6.3 reveal both points of intersection. Pushing the GRAPH button produces the image on the right in Figure 6.3. Figure 6.3: Adjust the WINDOW parameters to reveal both points of inter- section. To find the solutions of the equation x2 = −5x, we must find the coordinates of the points where the graphs of y = x2 and y = −5x intersect. The x- coordinate of each point of intersection will be a solution of the equation x2 = −5x. 406 CHAPTER 6. FACTORING • Start by selecting 5:intersect from the CALC menu. When prompted for the “First curve?”, press ENTER. When prompted for the “Second curve?”, press ENTER. When prompted for a “Guess,” press ENTER. The result is the point (0, 0) shown in the image on the left in Figure 6.4. • Repeat the process a second time. Select 5:intersect from the CALC menu. When prompted for the “First curve?”, press ENTER. When prompted for the “Second curve?”, press ENTER. When prompted for a “Guess,” use the left-arrow key to move the cursor closer to the leftmost point of intersection, then press ENTER. The result is the point (−5, 25) shown in the image on the right in Figure 6.4. Figure 6.4: Use the 5:intersect utility to find the points of intersection. Reporting the solution on your homework: Duplicate the image in your calculator’s viewing window on your homework page. Use a ruler to draw all lines, but freehand any curves. • Label the horizontal and vertical axes with x and y, respectively (see Figure 6.5). • Place your WINDOW parameters at the end of each axis (see Figure 6.5). • Label each graph with its equation (see Figure 6.5). • Drop dashed vertical lines through each point of intersection. Shade and label the x-values of the points where the dashed vertical line crosses the x-axis. These are the solutions of the equation x2 = −5x (see Figure 6.5). Hence, the solutions of x2 = −5x are x = −5 and x = 0. Note now these match the solutions found using the algebraic technique. Answer: ! Before demonstrating a second graphing calculator technique for solving nonlinear equations, let’s take a moment to recall the definition of a zero of a function, which was first presented in Chapter 5, Section 3. Zeros and x-intercepts. The points where the graph of f crosses the x-axis are called the x-intercepts of the graph of f . The x-value of each x-intercept is called a zero of the function f . 6.2. SOLVING NONLINEAR EQUATIONS 407 −10 10 −20 50 x y −5 0 y = x2y = −5x Figure 6.5: Reporting your graphical solution on your homework. We’ll now employ the 2:zero utility from the CALC menu to find the solutions of the equation x2 = −5x. You Try It! EXAMPLE 8. Use the 2:zero utility on the graphing calculator to solve Use the 2:zero utility on the graphing calculator to solve the equation x2 = 4x for x. the equation x2 = −5x for x. Solution: First, make one side of the equation equal to zero. x2 = −5x Make one side zero. x2 + 5x = 0 Add 5x to both sides. To determine the values of x that make x2 +5x = 0, we must locate the points where the graph of f(x) = x2 + 5x crosses the x-axis. These points are the x-intercepts of the graph of f and the x-values of these points are the zeros of the function f . Load the function f(x) = x2 + 5x in Y1, then select 6:ZStandard to It’s often easier to find the so- lutions of a nonlinear equa- tion by making one side zero and identifying where the graph of the resulting func- tion crosses the x-axis. produce the image in Figure 6.6. Note that the graph of f has two x-intercepts, and the x-values of each of these points are the zeros of the function f . Figure 6.6: Sketch the graph of p(x) = x2 + 5x. Select 2:zero from the CALC menu (see Figure 6.7). 408 CHAPTER 6. FACTORING • The calculator responds by asking for a “Left Bound?” Use the left-arrow key to move the cursor so that it lies to the left of the x-intercept near (−5, 0) (see the second image in Figure 6.7), then press the ENTER key. • The calculator responds by asking for a “Right Bound?” Move the cursor so that is slightly to the right of the x-intercept near (−5, 0) (see the third image Figure 6.7), then press the ENTER key. Figure 6.7: Setting the left and right bounds when using the 2:zero utility to find the x-intercepts of the graph of f(x) = x2 + 5x. • The calculator responds by asking for a “Guess?” Note the two triangular marks near the top of the viewing window in the first image in Figure 6.8 that mark the left- and right-bounds. As long as you place the cursor so that the x-value of the cursor location lies between these two marks, you’ve made a valid guess. Because the cursor already lies between these two marks, we usually leave it where it is and press the ENTER key. Figure 6.8: Setting the right bound and making a guess. After making your guess and pressing the ENTER key, the calculator pro- ceeds to find an approximation of the x-intercept that lies between the left- and right-bounds previously marked (see the second image in Figure 6.8). Hence, this x-intercept is (−5, 0), making −5 a zero of f(x) = x2 + 5x and a solution of the equation x2 + 5x = 0. We’ll leave it to our readers to repeat the 2:zero process to find the second zero at the origin. Reporting the solution on your homework: Duplicate the image in your calculator’s viewing window on your homework page. Use a ruler to draw all lines, but freehand any curves. 6.2. SOLVING NONLINEAR EQUATIONS 409 • Label the horizontal and vertical axes with x and y, respectively (see Figure 6.9). • Place your WINDOW parameters at the end of each axis (see Figure 6.9). • Label each graph with its equation (see Figure 6.9). • Drop dashed vertical lines through each x-intercept. Shade and label the x-values of each x-intercept. These are the solutions of the equation x2 = −5x (see Figure 6.9). −10 10 −10 10 x y −5 0 y = x2 + 5x Figure 6.9: Reporting your graphical solution on your homework. Hence, the solutions of x2 = −5x are x = −5 and x = 0. Note how nicely this agrees with the solutions found using the algebraic technique and the solutions found using the 5:intersect utility in Example 7. Answer: ! 410 CHAPTER 6. FACTORING ! ! ! Using the Graphing Calculator In this section we will employ two different calculator routines to find the solution of a nonlinear equation. Before picking up the calculator, let’s first use an algebraic method to solve the equation x2 = −5x. The equation is nonlinear, so the first step is to move everything to one side of the equation, making one side equal to zero. x2 = −5x Nonlinear. Make one side zero. x2 + 5x = 0 Add 5x to both sides. x(x+ 5) = 0 Factor out the GCF. Use the zero product property, setting each factor equal to zero, then solving the resulting equations for x. x = 0 or x+ 5 = 0 x = −5 Hence, the solutions are x = 0 and x = −5. 6.2. SOLVING NONLINEAR EQUATIONS 405 We’ll now use the calculator to find the solutions of x2 = −5x. The first technique employs the 5:intersect routine on the calculator’s CALC menu. You Try It! EXAMPLE 7. Use the 5:intersect utility on the graphing calculator to Use the 5:intersect utility on the graphing calculator to solve the equation x2 = 4x for x. solve the equation x2 = −5x for x. Solution: Load the left-hand side of x2 = −5x in Y1 and the right-hand side in Y2 (see Figure 6.2). Selecting 6:ZStandard from the ZOOM menu produces the graphs shown in the image on the right in Figure 6.2. Figure 6.2: Sketch the graphs of each side of the equation x2 = −5x. Note that the graph of y = x2 is a parabola that opens upward, with vertex (turning point) at the origin. This graph reveals why the equation x2 = −5x is called a nonlinear equation (not all the graphs involved are lines). Next, the graph of y = −5x is a line with slope −5 and y-intercept at the origin. The two graphs obviously intersect at the origin, but it also appears that there may be another point of intersection that is off the screen. Let’s increase Ymax in an attempt to reveal the second point of intersection. After some experimentation, the settings shown in the first image in Figure 6.3 reveal both points of intersection. Pushing the GRAPH button produces the image on the right in Figure 6.3. Figure 6.3: Adjust the WINDOW parameters to reveal both points of inter- section. To find the solutions of the equation x2 = −5x, we must find the coordinates of the points where the graphs of y = x2 and y = −5x intersect. The x- coordinate of each point of intersection will be a solution of the equation x2 = −5x. 406 CHAPTER 6. FACTORING • Start by selecting 5:intersect from the CALC menu. When prompted for the “First curve?”, press ENTER. When prompted for the “Second curve?”, press ENTER. When prompted for a “Guess,” press ENTER. The result is the point (0, 0) shown in the image on the left in Figure 6.4. • Repeat the process a second time. Select 5:intersect from the CALC menu. When prompted for the “First curve?”, press ENTER. When prompted for the “Second curve?”, press ENTER. When prompted for a “Guess,” use the left-arrow key to move the cursor closer to the leftmost point of intersection, then press ENTER. The result is the point (−5, 25) shown in the image on the right in Figure 6.4. Figure 6.4: Use the 5:intersect utility to find the points of intersection. Reporting the solution on your homework: Duplicate the image in your calculator’s viewing window on your homework page. Use a ruler to draw all lines, but freehand any curves. • Label the horizontal and vertical axes with x and y, respectively (see Figure 6.5). • Place your WINDOW parameters at the end of each axis (see Figure 6.5). • Label each graph with its equation (see Figure 6.5). • Drop dashed vertical lines through each point of intersection. Shade and label the x-values of the points where the dashed vertical line crosses the x-axis. These are the solutions of the equation x2 = −5x (see Figure 6.5). Hence, the solutions of x2 = −5x are x = −5 and x = 0. Note now these match the solutions found using the algebraic technique. Answer: ! Before demonstrating a second graphing calculator technique for solving nonlinear equations, let’s take a moment to recall the definition of a zero of a function, which was first presented in Chapter 5, Section 3. Zeros and x-intercepts. The points where the graph of f crosses the x-axis are called the x-intercepts of the graph of f . The x-value of each x-intercept is called a zero of the function f . 6.2. SOLVING NONLINEAR EQUATIONS 407 −10 10 −20 50 x y −5 0 y = x2y = −5x Figure 6.5: Reporting your graphical solution on your homework. We’ll now employ the 2:zero utility from the CALC menu to find the solutions of the equation x2 = −5x. You Try It! EXAMPLE 8. Use the 2:zero utility on the graphing calculator to solve Use the 2:zero utility on the graphing calculator to solve the equation x2 = 4x for x. the equation x2 = −5x for x. Solution: First, make one side of the equation equal to zero. x2 = −5x Make one side zero. x2 + 5x = 0 Add 5x to both sides. To determine the values of x that make x2 +5x = 0, we must locate the points where the graph of f(x) = x2 + 5x crosses the x-axis. These points are the x-intercepts of the graph of f and the x-values of these points are the zeros of the function f . Load the function f(x) = x2 + 5x in Y1, then select 6:ZStandard to It’s often easier to find the so- lutions of a nonlinear equa- tion by making one side zero and identifying where the graph of the resulting func- tion crosses the x-axis. produce the image in Figure 6.6. Note that the graph of f has two x-intercepts, and the x-values of each of these points are the zeros of the function f . Figure 6.6: Sketch the graph of p(x) = x2 + 5x. Select 2:zero from the CALC menu (see Figure 6.7). 408 CHAPTER 6. FACTORING • The calculator responds by asking for a “Left Bound?” Use the left-arrow key to move the cursor so that it lies to the left of the x-intercept near (−5, 0) (see the second image in Figure 6.7), then press the ENTER key. • The calculator responds by asking for a “Right Bound?” Move the cursor so that is slightly to the right of the x-intercept near (−5, 0) (see the third image Figure 6.7), then press the ENTER key. Figure 6.7: Setting the left and right bounds when using the 2:zero utility to find the x-intercepts of the graph of f(x) = x2 + 5x. • The calculator responds by asking for a “Guess?” Note the two triangular marks near the top of the viewing window in the first image in Figure 6.8 that mark the left- and right-bounds. As long as you place the cursor so that the x-value of the cursor location lies between these two marks, you’ve made a valid guess. Because the cursor already lies between these two marks, we usually leave it where it is and press the ENTER key. Figure 6.8: Setting the right bound and making a guess. After making your guess and pressing the ENTER key, the calculator pro- ceeds to find an approximation of the x-intercept that lies between the left- and right-bounds previously marked (see the second image in Figure 6.8). Hence, this x-intercept is (−5, 0), making −5 a zero of f(x) = x2 + 5x and a solution of the equation x2 + 5x = 0. We’ll leave it to our readers to repeat the 2:zero process to find the second zero at the origin. Reporting the solution on your homework: Duplicate the image in your calculator’s viewing window on your homework page. Use a ruler to draw all lines, but freehand any curves. 6.2. SOLVING NONLINEAR EQUATIONS 409 • Label the horizontal and vertical axes with x and y, respectively (see Figure 6.9). • Place your WINDOW parameters at the end of each axis (see Figure 6.9). • Label each graph with its equation (see Figure 6.9). • Drop dashed vertical lines through each x-intercept. Shade and label the x-values of each x-intercept. These are the solutions of the equation x2 = −5x (see Figure 6.9). −10 10 −10 10 x y −5 0 y = x2 + 5x Figure 6.9: Reporting your graphical solution on your homework. Hence, the solutions of x2 = −5x are x = −5 and x = 0. Note how nicely this agrees with the solutions found using the algebraic technique and the solutions found using the 5:intersect utility in Example 7. Answer: ! 410 CHAPTER 6. FACTORING ! ! !  || 