Tips for Factoring Trinomials 1.                  Clear fractions (by multiplying through by the common denominator) 2.                  Remove common factors if possible 3.                  If the coefficient of the x2 term is 1, then x2 + bx + c = (x + n)(x + m), where n and m                                              i.      Multiply to give c                                            ii.      Add to give b 4.                  If the coefficient of the x2 term is not 1, then use either a.       Guess-and Check                                                    i.      List the factors of the coefficient of the x2 term                                                  ii.      List the factors of the constant term                                                 iii.      Test all the possible binomials you can make from these factors b.      Factoring by Grouping                                                    i.      Find the product ac                                                  ii.      Find two factors of ac that add to give b                                                 iii.      Split the middle term into the sum of two terms, using these two factors                                                iv.      Group the terms into pairs                                                 v.      Factor out the common binomial   Tips for Factoring Trinomials 1.                  Clear fractions (by multiplying through by the common denominator) 2.                  Remove common factors if possible 3.                  If the coefficient of the x2 term is 1, then x2 + bx + c = (x + n)(x + m), where n and m                                              i.      Multiply to give c                                            ii.      Add to give b 4.                  If the coefficient of the x2 term is not 1, then use either a.       Guess-and Check                                                    i.      List the factors of the coefficient of the x2 term                                                  ii.      List the factors of the constant term                                                 iii.      Test all the possible binomials you can make from these factors b.      Factoring by Grouping                                                    i.      Find the product ac                                                  ii.      Find two factors of ac that add to give b                                                 iii.      Split the middle term into the sum of two terms, using these two factors                                                iv.      Group the terms into pairs                                                 v.      Factor out the common binomial    || 