Exponential Notation In Section Section 2.4 we were reminded that multiplication is a description for repeated addition. A natural question is “Is there a description for repeated multiplication?” The answer is yes. The notation that describes repeated multiplication is exponential notation. Factors In multiplication, the numbers being multiplied together are called factors. In repeated multiplication, all the factors are the same. In nonrepeated multiplication, none of the factors are the same. For example, Example 2.52.  Exponential notation is used to show repeated multiplication of the same factor. The notation consists of using a superscript on the factor that is repeated. The superscript is called an exponent. Exponential Notation If x is any real number and n is a natural number, thenAn exponent records the number of identical factors in a multiplication. Note that the definition for exponential notation only has meaning for natural number exponents. We will extend this notation to include other numbers as exponents later. Exponential Notation In Section Section 2.4 we were reminded that multiplication is a description for repeated addition. A natural question is “Is there a description for repeated multiplication?” The answer is yes. The notation that describes repeated multiplication is exponential notation. Factors In multiplication, the numbers being multiplied together are called factors. In repeated multiplication, all the factors are the same. In nonrepeated multiplication, none of the factors are the same. For example, Example 2.52.  Exponential notation is used to show repeated multiplication of the same factor. The notation consists of using a superscript on the factor that is repeated. The superscript is called an exponent. Exponential Notation If x is any real number and n is a natural number, thenAn exponent records the number of identical factors in a multiplication. Note that the definition for exponential notation only has meaning for natural number exponents. We will extend this notation to include other numbers as exponents later.  || 