General Form of a Linear Equation General Form of a Linear Equation in Two Variables There is a standard form in which linear equations in two variables are written. Suppose that a , b , and c are any real numbers and that a and b cannot both be zero at the same time. Then, the linear equation in two variables a x + b y = c is said to be in general form. We must stipulate that a and b cannot both equal zero at the same time, for if they were we would have 0x + 0y = c 0 = c This statement is true only if c = 0 . If c were to be any other number, we would get a false statement. Now, we have the following: The graphing of all ordered pairs that solve a linear equation in two variables produces a straight line. This implies, The graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line. From these statements we can conclude, If an ordered pair is a solution to a linear equations in two variables, then it lies on the graph of the equation. Also, Any point (ordered pairs) that lies on the graph of a linear equation in two variables is a solution to that equation. General Form of a Linear Equation General Form of a Linear Equation in Two Variables There is a standard form in which linear equations in two variables are written. Suppose that a , b , and c are any real numbers and that a and b cannot both be zero at the same time. Then, the linear equation in two variables a x + b y = c is said to be in general form. We must stipulate that a and b cannot both equal zero at the same time, for if they were we would have 0x + 0y = c 0 = c This statement is true only if c = 0 . If c were to be any other number, we would get a false statement. Now, we have the following: The graphing of all ordered pairs that solve a linear equation in two variables produces a straight line. This implies, The graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line. From these statements we can conclude, If an ordered pair is a solution to a linear equations in two variables, then it lies on the graph of the equation. Also, Any point (ordered pairs) that lies on the graph of a linear equation in two variables is a solution to that equation.  || 