Variables and Constants A basic characteristic of algebra is the use of symbols (usually letters) to represent numbers. Variable A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. Constant A letter or symbol that represents a specific number, known or unknown is called a constant. In the following examples, the letter x is a variable since it can be any member of the collection of numbers {35, 25, 10} . The letter h is a constant since it can assume only the value 5890. Example 2.1.  Suppose that the streets on your way from home to school have speed limits of 35 mph, 25 mph, and 10 mph. In algebra we can let the letter x represent our speed as we travel from home to school. The maximum value of x depends on what section of street we are on. The letter x can assume any one of the various values 35,25,10. Example 2.2.  Suppose that in writing a term paper for a geography class we need to specify the height of Mount Kilimanjaro. If we do not happen to know the height of the mountain, we can represent it (at least temporarily) on our paper with the letter h . Later, we look up the height in a reference book and find it to be 5890 meters. The letter h can assume only the one value, 5890, and no others. The value of h is constant. Variables and Constants A basic characteristic of algebra is the use of symbols (usually letters) to represent numbers. Variable A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. Constant A letter or symbol that represents a specific number, known or unknown is called a constant. In the following examples, the letter x is a variable since it can be any member of the collection of numbers {35, 25, 10} . The letter h is a constant since it can assume only the value 5890. Example 2.1.  Suppose that the streets on your way from home to school have speed limits of 35 mph, 25 mph, and 10 mph. In algebra we can let the letter x represent our speed as we travel from home to school. The maximum value of x depends on what section of street we are on. The letter x can assume any one of the various values 35,25,10. Example 2.2.  Suppose that in writing a term paper for a geography class we need to specify the height of Mount Kilimanjaro. If we do not happen to know the height of the mountain, we can represent it (at least temporarily) on our paper with the letter h . Later, we look up the height in a reference book and find it to be 5890 meters. The letter h can assume only the one value, 5890, and no others. The value of h is constant.  || 