Ordered Pairs as Solutions It is important to keep in mind that a solution to a linear equation in two variables is an ordered pair of values, one value for each variable. A solution is not completely known until the values of both variables are specified. Independent and Dependent Variables Recall that, in an equation, any variable whose value can be freely assigned is said to be an independent variable. Any variable whose value is determined once the other value or values have been assigned is said to be a dependent variable. If, in a linear equation, the independent variable is x and the dependent variable is y , and a solution to the equation is x = a and y = b , the solution is written as the ORDERED PAIR      (a, b) Ordered Pair In an ordered pair, (a, b) , the first component, a , gives the value of the independent variable, and the second component, b , gives the value of the dependent variable. We can use ordered pairs to show some solutions to the equation y = 6x − 7 . Example 5.60.  (0, − 7) .If x = 0 and y = − 7 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. Example 5.61.  (8, 41) .If x = 8 and y = 41 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. Example 5.62.  ( − 4,  − 31) .If x = − 4 and y = − 31 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. These are only three of the infintely many solutions to this equation. Ordered Pairs as Solutions It is important to keep in mind that a solution to a linear equation in two variables is an ordered pair of values, one value for each variable. A solution is not completely known until the values of both variables are specified. Independent and Dependent Variables Recall that, in an equation, any variable whose value can be freely assigned is said to be an independent variable. Any variable whose value is determined once the other value or values have been assigned is said to be a dependent variable. If, in a linear equation, the independent variable is x and the dependent variable is y , and a solution to the equation is x = a and y = b , the solution is written as the ORDERED PAIR      (a, b) Ordered Pair In an ordered pair, (a, b) , the first component, a , gives the value of the independent variable, and the second component, b , gives the value of the dependent variable. We can use ordered pairs to show some solutions to the equation y = 6x − 7 . Example 5.60.  (0, − 7) .If x = 0 and y = − 7 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. Example 5.61.  (8, 41) .If x = 8 and y = 41 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. Example 5.62.  ( − 4,  − 31) .If x = − 4 and y = − 31 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. These are only three of the infintely many solutions to this equation.  || 