Number Line A real number line A line that allows us to visually represent real numbers by associating them with points on the line. , or simply number line, allows us to visually display real numbers by associating them with unique points on a line. The real number associated with a point is called a coordinate The real number associated with a point on a number line. . A point on the real number line that is associated with a coordinate is called its graph A point on the number line associated with a coordinate. . To construct a number line, draw a horizontal line with arrows on both ends to indicate that it continues without bound. Next, choose any point to represent the number zero; this point is called the origin The point on the number line that represtents zero. . Mark off consistent lengths on both sides of the origin and label each tick mark to define the scale. Positive real numbers lie to the right of the origin and negative real numbers lie to the left. The number zero (0) is neither positive nor negative. Typically, each tick represents one unit. As illustrated below, the scale need not always be one unit. In the first number line, each tick mark represents two units. In the second, each tick mark represents 1 7 . The graph of each real number is shown as a dot at the appropriate point on the number line. A partial graph of the set of integers Z follows:   Example 1: Graph the following set of real numbers: { − 1 ,   − 1 3 ,   0 ,   5 3 } . Solution: Graph the numbers on a number line with a scale where each tick mark represents 1 3 unit. Number Line A real number line A line that allows us to visually represent real numbers by associating them with points on the line. , or simply number line, allows us to visually display real numbers by associating them with unique points on a line. The real number associated with a point is called a coordinate The real number associated with a point on a number line. . A point on the real number line that is associated with a coordinate is called its graph A point on the number line associated with a coordinate. . To construct a number line, draw a horizontal line with arrows on both ends to indicate that it continues without bound. Next, choose any point to represent the number zero; this point is called the origin The point on the number line that represtents zero. . Mark off consistent lengths on both sides of the origin and label each tick mark to define the scale. Positive real numbers lie to the right of the origin and negative real numbers lie to the left. The number zero (0) is neither positive nor negative. Typically, each tick represents one unit. As illustrated below, the scale need not always be one unit. In the first number line, each tick mark represents two units. In the second, each tick mark represents 1 7 . The graph of each real number is shown as a dot at the appropriate point on the number line. A partial graph of the set of integers Z follows:   Example 1: Graph the following set of real numbers: { − 1 ,   − 1 3 ,   0 ,   5 3 } . Solution: Graph the numbers on a number line with a scale where each tick mark represents 1 3 unit.  || 