 || Digits to the Right of the Ones Position We began our study of arithmetic (Section 1.2) by noting that our number system is called a positional number system with base ten. We also noted that each position has a particular value. We observed that each position has ten times the value of the position to its right. This means that each position has the value of the position to its left. Thus, a digit written to the right of the units position must have a value of of 1. Recalling that the word "of" translates to multiplication (⋅), we can see that the value of the first position to the right of the units digit is of 1, or The value of the second position to the right of the units digit is of , or The value of the third position to the right of the units digit is of , or This pattern continues. We can now see that if we were to write digits in positions to the right of the units positions, those positions have values that are fractions. Not only do the positions have fractional values, but the fractional values are all powers of 10 (10,102 ,103 ,…).  || Decimal Fractions Decimal Point, Decimal If we are to write numbers with digits appearing to the right of the units digit, we must have a way of denoting where the whole number part ends and the fractional part begins. Mathematicians denote the separation point of the units digit and the tenths digit by writing a decimal point. The word decimal comes from the Latin prefix "deci" which means ten, and we use it because we use a base ten number system. Numbers written in this form are called decimal fractions, or more simply, decimals. Notice that decimal numbers have the suffix "th." Decimal Fraction A decimal fraction is a fraction in which the denominator is a power of 10. The following numbers are examples of decimals. 42.6 The 6 is in the tenths position. 9.8014 The 8 is in the tenths position. The 0 is in the hundredths position. The 1 is in the thousandths position. The 4 is in the ten thousandths position. 0.93 The 9 is in the tenths position. The 3 is in the hundredths position. Note Quite often a zero is inserted in front of a decimal point (in the units position) of a decimal fraction that has a value less than one. This zero helps keep us from overlooking the decimal point. 0.7 The 7 is in the tenths position. Note We can insert zeros to the right of the right-most digit in a decimal fraction without changing the value of the number.  || Reading Decimal Fractions Reading a Decimal Fraction To read a decimal fraction, Read the whole number part as usual. (If the whole number is less than 1, omit steps 1 and 2.) Read the decimal point as the word "and." Read the number to the right of the decimal point as if it were a whole number. Say the name of the position of the last digit. Sample Set A Read the following numbers. Example 6.1.  6.8 Note Some people read this as "six point eight." This phrasing gets the message across, but technically, "six and eight tenths" is the correct phrasing. Example 6.2.  14.116 Example 6.3.  0.0019 Example 6.4.  81 Eighty-one In this problem, the indication is that any whole number is a decimal fraction. Whole numbers are often called decimal numbers. 81 = 81 . 0 Practice Set A Read the following decimal fractions. Exercise 6.2.1. (Go to Solution) 12.9 Exercise 6.2.2. (Go to Solution) 4.86 Exercise 6.2.3. (Go to Solution) 7.00002 Exercise 6.2.4. (Go to Solution) 0.030405  || Writing Decimal Fractions Writing a Decimal Fraction To write a decimal fraction, Write the whole number part. Write a decimal point for the word "and." Write the decimal part of the number so that the right-most digit appears in the position indicated in the word name. If necessary, insert zeros to the right of the decimal point in order that the right-most digit appears in the correct position. Sample Set B Write each number. Example 6.5.  Thirty-one and twelve hundredths. The decimal position indicated is the hundredths position. 31.12 Example 6.6.  Two and three hundred-thousandths. The decimal position indicated is the hundred thousandths. We'll need to insert enough zeros to the immediate right of the decimal point in order to locate the 3 in the correct position. 2.00003 Example 6.7.  Six thousand twenty-seven and one hundred four millionths. The decimal position indicated is the millionths position. We'll need to insert enough zeros to the immediate right of the decimal point in order to locate the 4 in the correct position. 6,027.000104 Example 6.8.  Seventeen hundredths. The decimal position indicated is the hundredths position. 0.17 Practice Set B Write each decimal fraction. Exercise 6.2.5. (Go to Solution) Three hundred six and forty-nine hundredths. Exercise 6.2.6. (Go to Solution) Nine and four thousandths. Exercise 6.2.7. (Go to Solution) Sixty-one millionths.  || 