 || Square Roots When we studied exponents in Section Section 2.5, we noted that 42 = 16 and ( − 4 ) 2 = 16. We can see that 16 is the square of both 4 and − 4 . Since 16 comes from squaring 4 or − 4 , 4 and − 4 are called the square roots of 16. Thus 16 has two square roots, 4 and − 4 . Notice that these two square roots are opposites of each other. We can say that Square Root The square root of a positive number x is a number such that when it is squared the number x results. Every positive number has two square roots, one positive square root and one negative square root. Furthermore, the two square roots of a positive number are opposites of each other. The square root of 0 is 0.  || Principal and Secondary Square Roots There is a notation for distinguishing the positive square root of a number x from the negative square root of x . Principal Square Root: If x is a positive real number, then represents the positive square root of x . The positive square root of a number is called the principal square root of the number. Secondary Square Root: represents the negative square root of x . The negative square root of a number is called the secondary square root of the number. indicates the secondary square root of x . Radical Sign, Radicand, and Radical In the expression is called a radical sign. x is called the radicand. is called a radical. The horizontal bar that appears attached to the radical sign, , is a grouping symbol that specifies the radicand. Because and are the two square root of x ,  || Meaningful Expressions Since we know that the square of any real number is a positive number or zero, we can see that expressions such as do not describe real numbers. There is no real number that can be squared that will produce −16. For to be a real number, we must have x ≥ 0. In our study of algebra, we will assume that all variables and all expressions in radicands represent nonnegative numbers (numbers greater than or equal to zero).  || Simplifying Square Roots When variables occur in the radicand, we can often simplify the expression by removing the radical sign. We can do so by keeping in mind that the radicand is the square of some other expression. We can simplify a radical by seeking an expression whose square is the radicand. The following observations will help us find the square root of a variable quantity. Example 9.9.  Since is a square root of x 6 . Also Example 9.10.  Since is a square root of x 8 . Also Example 9.11.  Since is a square root of x 12 . Also These examples suggest the following rule: If a variable has an even exponent, its square root can be found by dividing that exponent by 2. The examples of Sample Set B illustrate the use of this rule.  || Exercised for Review Exercise 9.2.93. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.4) Find the quotient. Exercise 9.2.94. (Section 8.6) Find the sum. Exercise 9.2.95. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.7) Solve the equation, if possible: Exercise 9.2.96. (Section 8.10) Perform the division: Exercise 9.2.97. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.10) Perform the division:  || 