 || Variables and Constants A basic characteristic of algebra is the use of symbols (usually letters) to represent numbers. Variable A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. Constant A letter or symbol that represents a specific number, known or unknown is called a constant. In the following examples, the letter x is a variable since it can be any member of the collection of numbers {35, 25, 10} . The letter h is a constant since it can assume only the value 5890. Example 2.1.  Suppose that the streets on your way from home to school have speed limits of 35 mph, 25 mph, and 10 mph. In algebra we can let the letter x represent our speed as we travel from home to school. The maximum value of x depends on what section of street we are on. The letter x can assume any one of the various values 35,25,10. Example 2.2.  Suppose that in writing a term paper for a geography class we need to specify the height of Mount Kilimanjaro. If we do not happen to know the height of the mountain, we can represent it (at least temporarily) on our paper with the letter h . Later, we look up the height in a reference book and find it to be 5890 meters. The letter h can assume only the one value, 5890, and no others. The value of h is constant.  || Symbols of Operation, Equality, and Inequality Binary Operation A binary operation on a collection of numbers is a process that assigns a number to two given numbers in the collection. The binary operations used in algebra are addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Symbols of Operation If we let x and y each represent a number, we have the following notations:  || Grouping Symbols Grouping symbols are used to indicate that a particular collection of numbers and meaningful operations are to be grouped together and considered as one number. The grouping symbols commonly used in algebra are In a computation in which more than one operation is involved, grouping symbols help tell us which operations to perform first. If possible, we perform operations inside grouping symbols first.  || The Order of Operations Suppose we wish to find the value of 16 + 4⋅9 . We could add 16 and 4, then multiply this sum by 9. 16 + 4⋅9 = 20⋅9 = 180 multiply 4 and 9, then add 16 to this product. 16 + 4⋅9 = 16 + 36 = 52 We now have two values for one number. To determine the correct value we must use the standard order of operations. Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols, beginning with the innermost set. Perform all multiplications and divisions, as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all additions and subtractions, as you come to them, moving left-to-right. As we proceed in our study of algebra, we will come upon another operation, exponentiation, that will need to be inserted before multiplication and division. (See Section Section 2.5.)  || 