Opposite Binomial Factors Recall that the opposite of the real number a is −a. Similarly, we can define the opposite of a polynomial P to be −P. We first consider the opposite of the binomial a − b : This leads us to the opposite binomial property If given a binomial a − b , then the opposite is − ( a − b ) = b − a . : This is equivalent to factoring out a –1. If a ≠ b , then we can divide both sides by ( a − b ) and obtain the following:   Example 10: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 − x x − 3 . Solution: By inspection, we can see that the denominator is 0 if x = 3 . Therefore, 3 is the restriction to the domain. Apply the opposite binomial property to the numerator and then cancel. Answer: 3 − x x − 3 = − 1 , where x ≠ 3   Since addition is commutative, we have or Take care not to confuse this with the opposite binomial property. Also, it is important to recall that In other words, show a negative fraction by placing the negative sign in the numerator, in front of the fraction bar, or in the denominator. Generally, negative denominators are avoided.   Example 11: Simplify and state the restrictions: 4 − x 2 x 2 + 3 x − 10 . Solution: Begin by factoring the numerator and denominator. Answer: − x + 2 x + 5 , where x ≠ 2 and x ≠ − 5   Try this! Simplify and state the restrictions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 15 25 − x 2 . Answer: − 2 x + 3 x + 5 , where x ≠ ± 5 Video Solution Opposite Binomial Factors Recall that the opposite of the real number a is −a. Similarly, we can define the opposite of a polynomial P to be −P. We first consider the opposite of the binomial a − b : This leads us to the opposite binomial property If given a binomial a − b , then the opposite is − ( a − b ) = b − a . : This is equivalent to factoring out a –1. If a ≠ b , then we can divide both sides by ( a − b ) and obtain the following:   Example 10: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 − x x − 3 . Solution: By inspection, we can see that the denominator is 0 if x = 3 . Therefore, 3 is the restriction to the domain. Apply the opposite binomial property to the numerator and then cancel. Answer: 3 − x x − 3 = − 1 , where x ≠ 3   Since addition is commutative, we have or Take care not to confuse this with the opposite binomial property. Also, it is important to recall that In other words, show a negative fraction by placing the negative sign in the numerator, in front of the fraction bar, or in the denominator. Generally, negative denominators are avoided.   Example 11: Simplify and state the restrictions: 4 − x 2 x 2 + 3 x − 10 . Solution: Begin by factoring the numerator and denominator. Answer: − x + 2 x + 5 , where x ≠ 2 and x ≠ − 5   Try this! Simplify and state the restrictions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 15 25 − x 2 . Answer: − 2 x + 3 x + 5 , where x ≠ ± 5 Video Solution  || 