 || Standard Form to Scientific Form Very large numbers such as 43,000,000,000,000,000,000 (the number of different possible configurations of Rubik’s cube) and very small numbers such as 0.000000000000000000000340 (the mass of the amino acid tryptophan) are extremely inconvenient to write and read. Such numbers can be expressed more conveniently by writing them as part of a power of 10. To see how this is done, let us start with a somewhat smaller number such as 2480. Notice that Scientific Form The last form is called the scientific form of the number. There is one nonzero digit to the left of the decimal point and the absolute value of the exponent on 10 records the number of places the original decimal point was moved to the left. There is one nonzero digit to the left of the decimal point and the absolute value of the exponent of 10 records the number of places the original decimal point was moved to the right. Scientific Notation Numbers written in scientific form are also said to be written using scientific notation. In scientific notation, a number is written as the product of a number between and including 1 and 10 (1 is included,10 is not) and some power of 10. Writing a Number in Scientific Notation To write a number in scientific notation: Move the decimal point so that there is one nonzero digit to its left. Multiply the result by a power of 10 using an exponent whose absolute value is the number of places the decimal point was moved. Make the exponent positive if the decimal point was moved to the left and negative if the decimal point was moved to the right.  || Scientific Form to Standard Form A number written in scientific notation can be converted to standard form by reversing the process shown in Sample Set A. Converting from Scientific Notation To convert a number written in scientific notation to a number in standard form, move the decimal point the number of places prescribed by the exponent on the 10. Positive Exponent Negative Exponent Move the decimal point to the right when you have a positive exponent, and move the decimal point to the left when you have a negative exponent.  || Working with Numbers in Scientific Notation Multiplying Numbers Using Scientific Notation There are many occasions (particularly in the sciences) when it is necessary to find the product of two numbers written in scientific notation. This is accomplished by using two of the basic rules of algebra. Suppose we wish to find (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) . Since the only operation is multiplication, we can use the commutative property of multiplication to rearrange the numbers. (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) = (a × b)( 10 n × 10 m ) Then, by the rules of exponents, 10 n × 10 m = 10 n + m . Thus, (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) = (a × b) × 10 n + m The product of (a × b) may not be between 1 and 10, so (a × b) × 10 n + m may not be in scientific form. The decimal point in (a × b) may have to be moved. An example of this situation is in Sample Set C, problem 2.  || 