Reducing A fraction A rational number written as a quotient of two integers: a b , where b is nonzero. is a real number written as a quotient, or ratio Relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. , of two integers a and b, where b ≠ 0 . The integer above the fraction bar is called the numerator The number above the fraction bar. and the integer below is called the denominator The number below the fraction bar. . The numerator is often called the “part” and the denominator is often called the “whole.” Equivalent fractions Two equal fractions expressed using different numerators and denominators. are two equal ratios expressed using different numerators and denominators. For example, Fifty parts out of 100 is the same ratio as 1 part out of 2 and represents the same real number. Consider the following factorizations of 50 and 100: The numbers 50 and 100 share the factor 25. A shared factor is called a common factor A factor that is shared by more than one real number. . We can rewrite the ratio 50 100 as follows: Making use of the multiplicative identity property and the fact that 25 25 = 1 , we have Dividing 25 25 and replacing this factor with a 1 is called canceling The process of dividing out common factors in the numerator and the denominator. . Together, these basic steps for finding equivalent fractions define the process of reducing The process of finding equivalent fractions by dividing the numerator and the denominator by common factors. . Since factors divide their product evenly, we achieve the same result by dividing both the numerator and denominator by 25 as follows: Finding equivalent fractions where the numerator and denominator have no common factor other than 1 is called reducing to lowest terms Finding equivalent fractions where the numerator and the denominator share no common integer factor other than 1. . When learning how to reduce to lowest terms, it is helpful to first rewrite the numerator and denominator as a product of primes and then cancel. For example, We achieve the same result by dividing the numerator and denominator by the greatest common factor (GCF) The largest shared factor of any number of integers. . The GCF is the largest number that divides both the numerator and denominator evenly. One way to find the GCF of 50 and 100 is to list all the factors of each and identify the largest number that appears in both lists. Remember, each number is also a factor of itself. Common factors are listed in bold, and we see that the greatest common factor is 50. We use the following notation to indicate the GCF of two numbers: GCF(50, 100) = 50. After determining the GCF, reduce by dividing both the numerator and the denominator as follows:   Example 1: Reduce to lowest terms: 105 300 . Solution: Rewrite the numerator and denominator as a product of primes and then cancel. Alternatively, we achieve the same result if we divide both the numerator and denominator by the GCF(105, 300). A quick way to find the GCF of the two numbers requires us to first write each as a product of primes. The GCF is the product of all the common prime factors. In this case, the common prime factors are 3 and 5 and the greatest common factor of 105 and 300 is 15. Answer: 7 20   Try this! Reduce to lowest terms: 32 96 . Answer: 1 3 Video Solution An improper fraction A fraction where the numerator is larger than the denominator. is one where the numerator is larger than the denominator. A mixed number A number that represents the sum of a whole number and a fraction. is a number that represents the sum of a whole number and a fraction. For example, 5   1 2 is a mixed number that represents the sum 5 + 1 2 . Use long division to convert an improper fraction to a mixed number; the remainder is the numerator of the fractional part.   Example 2: Write 23 5 as a mixed number. Solution: Notice that 5 divides into 23 four times with a remainder of 3. We then can write Note that the denominator of the fractional part of the mixed number remains the same as the denominator of the original fraction. Answer: 4 3 5   To convert mixed numbers to improper fractions, multiply the whole number by the denominator and then add the numerator; write this result over the original denominator.   Example 3: Write 3 5 7 as an improper fraction. Solution: Obtain the numerator by multiplying 7 times 3 and then add 5. Answer: 26 7   It is important to note that converting to a mixed number is not part of the reducing process. We consider improper fractions, such as 26 7 , to be reduced to lowest terms. In algebra it is often preferable to work with improper fractions, although in some applications, mixed numbers are more appropriate.   Try this! Convert 10 1 2 to an improper fraction. Answer: 21 2 Video Solution Reducing A fraction A rational number written as a quotient of two integers: a b , where b is nonzero. is a real number written as a quotient, or ratio Relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. , of two integers a and b, where b ≠ 0 . The integer above the fraction bar is called the numerator The number above the fraction bar. and the integer below is called the denominator The number below the fraction bar. . The numerator is often called the “part” and the denominator is often called the “whole.” Equivalent fractions Two equal fractions expressed using different numerators and denominators. are two equal ratios expressed using different numerators and denominators. For example, Fifty parts out of 100 is the same ratio as 1 part out of 2 and represents the same real number. Consider the following factorizations of 50 and 100: The numbers 50 and 100 share the factor 25. A shared factor is called a common factor A factor that is shared by more than one real number. . We can rewrite the ratio 50 100 as follows: Making use of the multiplicative identity property and the fact that 25 25 = 1 , we have Dividing 25 25 and replacing this factor with a 1 is called canceling The process of dividing out common factors in the numerator and the denominator. . Together, these basic steps for finding equivalent fractions define the process of reducing The process of finding equivalent fractions by dividing the numerator and the denominator by common factors. . Since factors divide their product evenly, we achieve the same result by dividing both the numerator and denominator by 25 as follows: Finding equivalent fractions where the numerator and denominator have no common factor other than 1 is called reducing to lowest terms Finding equivalent fractions where the numerator and the denominator share no common integer factor other than 1. . When learning how to reduce to lowest terms, it is helpful to first rewrite the numerator and denominator as a product of primes and then cancel. For example, We achieve the same result by dividing the numerator and denominator by the greatest common factor (GCF) The largest shared factor of any number of integers. . The GCF is the largest number that divides both the numerator and denominator evenly. One way to find the GCF of 50 and 100 is to list all the factors of each and identify the largest number that appears in both lists. Remember, each number is also a factor of itself. Common factors are listed in bold, and we see that the greatest common factor is 50. We use the following notation to indicate the GCF of two numbers: GCF(50, 100) = 50. After determining the GCF, reduce by dividing both the numerator and the denominator as follows:   Example 1: Reduce to lowest terms: 105 300 . Solution: Rewrite the numerator and denominator as a product of primes and then cancel. Alternatively, we achieve the same result if we divide both the numerator and denominator by the GCF(105, 300). A quick way to find the GCF of the two numbers requires us to first write each as a product of primes. The GCF is the product of all the common prime factors. In this case, the common prime factors are 3 and 5 and the greatest common factor of 105 and 300 is 15. Answer: 7 20   Try this! Reduce to lowest terms: 32 96 . Answer: 1 3 Video Solution An improper fraction A fraction where the numerator is larger than the denominator. is one where the numerator is larger than the denominator. A mixed number A number that represents the sum of a whole number and a fraction. is a number that represents the sum of a whole number and a fraction. For example, 5   1 2 is a mixed number that represents the sum 5 + 1 2 . Use long division to convert an improper fraction to a mixed number; the remainder is the numerator of the fractional part.   Example 2: Write 23 5 as a mixed number. Solution: Notice that 5 divides into 23 four times with a remainder of 3. We then can write Note that the denominator of the fractional part of the mixed number remains the same as the denominator of the original fraction. Answer: 4 3 5   To convert mixed numbers to improper fractions, multiply the whole number by the denominator and then add the numerator; write this result over the original denominator.   Example 3: Write 3 5 7 as an improper fraction. Solution: Obtain the numerator by multiplying 7 times 3 and then add 5. Answer: 26 7   It is important to note that converting to a mixed number is not part of the reducing process. We consider improper fractions, such as 26 7 , to be reduced to lowest terms. In algebra it is often preferable to work with improper fractions, although in some applications, mixed numbers are more appropriate.   Try this! Convert 10 1 2 to an improper fraction. Answer: 21 2 Video Solution  || 