 || Prime And Composite Numbers Notice that the only factors of 7 are 1 and 7 itself, and that the only factors of 23 are 1 and 23 itself. Prime Number A whole number greater than 1 whose only whole number factors are itself and 1 is called a prime number. The first seven prime numbers are2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and 17The number 1 is not considered to be a prime number, and the number 2 is the first and only even prime number.Many numbers have factors other than themselves and 1. For example, the factors of 28 are 1, 2, 4, 7, 14, and 28 (since each of these whole numbers and only these whole numbers divide into 28 without a remainder). Composite Numbers A whole number that is composed of factors other than itself and 1 is called a composite number. Composite numbers are not prime numbers.Some composite numbers are 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 15.  || The Fundamental Principle Of Arithmetic Prime numbers are very important in the study of mathematics. We will use them soon in our study of fractions. We will now, however, be introduced to an important mathematical principle. The Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic Except for the order of the factors, every whole number, other than 1, can be factored in one and only one way as a product of prime numbers. Prime Factorization When a number is factored so that all its factors are prime numbers, the factorization is called the prime factorization of the number.  || The Prime Factorization Of A Whole Number The following method provides a way of finding the prime factorization of a whole number. The examples that follow will use the method and make it more clear. Divide the number repeatedly by the smallest prime number that will divide into the number without a remainder. When the prime number used in step 1 no longer divides into the given number without a remainder, repeat the process with the next largest prime number. Continue this process until the quotient is 1. The prime factorization of the given number is the product of all these prime divisors.  || 