 ||  || Properties The above definition can be extended by requiring other powers (i.e. other than positive integers) to behave like the positive integer powers. For example, we know that xn xm = xn + m for positive integer powers, because we can write out the multiplication. Example:              x2 x5 = (x · x)(x · x · x · x · x) = x · x · x · x · x · x · x = x7 We now require that this rule hold even if n and m are not positive integers, although this means that we can no longer write out the multiplication (How do you multiply something by itself a negative number of times? Or a fractional number of times?). We can find several new properties of exponents by similarly considering the rule for dividing powers: (We will assume without always mentioning it that  x ¹ 0). This rule is quite reasonable when m and n are positive integers and m > n. For example: where indeed 5 – 2 = 3. However, in other cases it leads to situation where we have to define new properties for exponents. First, suppose that m < n. We can simplify it by canceling like factors as before: But following our rule would give In order for these two results to be consistent, it must be true that or, in general, ·        Notice that a minus sign in the exponent does not make the result negative—instead, it makes it the reciprocal of the result with the positive exponent. Now suppose that n = m. The fraction becomes , which is obviously equal to 1. But our rule gives Again, in order to remain consistent we have to say that these two results are equal, and so we define             x0 = 1 for all values of x (except x = 0, because 00 is undefined)    ||  || Square Roots The square root is the inverse function of squaring (strictly speaking only for positive numbers, because sign information can be lost) Principal Root Every positive number has two square roots, one positive and one negative Example:  2 is a square root of 4 because 2 ´ 2 = 4, but –2 is also a square root of 4 because (–2) ´ (–2) = 4 To avoid confusion between the two we define the symbol (this symbol is called a radical) to mean the principal or positive square root. The convention is: For any positive number x,  is the positive root, and  is the negative root. If you mean the negative root, use a minus sign in front of the radical. Example:  Properties  for all non-negative numbers x   for all non-negative numbers x   However, if x happens to be negative, then squaring it will produce a positive number, which will have a positive square root, so   for all real numbers x ·        You don’t need the absolute value sign if you already know that x is positive. For example, , and saying anything about the absolute value of 2 would be superfluous. You only need the absolute value signs when you are taking the square root of a square of a variable, which may be positive or negative. ·        The square root of a negative number is undefined, because anything times itself will give a positive (or zero) result.  (your calculator will probably say ERROR) ·        Note: Zero has only one square root (itself). Zero is considered neither positive nor negative. WARNING: Do not attempt to do something like the distributive law with radicals:    (WRONG) or  (WRONG). This is a violation of the order of operations. The radical operates on the result of everything inside of it, not individual terms. Try it with numbers to see:   (CORRECT) But if we (incorrectly) do the square roots first, we get  (WRONG) However, radicals do distribute over products:   and provided that both a and b are non-negative (otherwise you would have the square root of a negative number).  || Perfect Squares Some numbers are perfect squares, that is, their square roots are integers: 0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, etc. It turns out that all other whole numbers have irrational square roots: , , ,  etc. are all irrational numbers. ·         The square root of an integer is either perfect or irrational  ||  for all real numbers if both x and y are non-negative, and if both x and y are non-negative, and y is not zeroWARNING: Never cancel something inside a radical with something outside of it:  WRONG! If you did this you would be canceling a 3 with, and they are certainly not the same number.The general plan for reducing the radicand is to remove any perfect powers. We are only considering square roots here, so what we are looking for is any factor that is a perfect square. In the following examples we will assume that x is positive.Example: In this case the 16 was recognized as a perfect square and removed from the radical, causing it to become its square root, 4.Example:  Although x3 is not a perfect square, it has a factor of x2, which is the square of x.Example:  Here the perfect square factor is x4, which is the square of x2.Example:  In this example we could take out a 4 and a factor of x2, leaving behind a 2 and one factor of x.·        The basic idea is to factor out anything that is “square-rootable” and then go ahead and square root it. ||  || If the Denominator Contains Two Terms If the denominator contains a square root plus some other terms, a special trick does the job. It makes use of the difference of two squares formula:               (a + b)(a – b) = a2 – b2   Suppose that your denominator looked like a + b, where b was a square root and a represents all the other terms. If you multiply it by a – b, then you will end up with the square of your square root, which means no more square roots. It is called the conjugate when you replace the plus with a minus (or vice-versa). An example would help.   Example:  Given: Multiply numerator and denominator by the conjugate of the denominator: Multiply out:  || 