Measuring the Change in a Variable To calculate the change in some quantity, we take a difference. For example, suppose that the temperature in the morning is 40◦ F, then in the afternoon the temperature measures 60◦ F (F stands for Fahrenheit temperature). Then the change in temperature is found by taking a difference. Change in temperature = Afternoon temperature−Morning temperature = 60◦ F− 40◦ F = 20◦ F Therefore, there was a twenty degree increase in temperature from morning to afternoon. 3.3. RATES AND SLOPE 185 Now, suppose that the evening temperature measures 50◦ F. To calculate the change in temperature from the afternoon to the evening, we again subtract. Change in temperature = Evening temperature−Afternoon temperature = 50◦ F− 60◦ F = −10◦F There was a ten degree decrease in temperature from afternoon to evening. Calculating the Change in a Quantity. To calculate the change in a quantity, subtract the earlier measurement from the later measurement. Let T represent the temperature. Mathematicians like to use the symbolism ∆T to represent the change in temperature. For the change in temperature from morning to afternoon, we would write ∆T = 20◦ F. For the afternoon to evening change, we would write ∆T = −10◦ F. Mathematicians and scientists make frequent use of the Greek alphabet, the first few letters of which are: α,β, γ, δ, . . . (Greek alphabet, lower case) A,B,Γ,∆, . . . (Greek alphabet, upper case) a, b, c, d, . . . (English alphabet) Thus, the Greek letter ∆, the upper case form of δ, correlates with the letter ‘d’ in the English alphabet. Why did mathematicians make this choice of letter to represent the change in a quantity? Because to find the change in a quantity, we take a difference, and the word “difference” starts with the letter ‘d.’ Thus, ∆T is also pronounced “the difference in T .” Important Pronunciations. Two ways to pronounce the symbolism ∆T . 1. ∆T is pronounced “the change in T .” 2. ∆T is also pronounced “the difference in T .” Measuring the Change in a Variable To calculate the change in some quantity, we take a difference. For example, suppose that the temperature in the morning is 40◦ F, then in the afternoon the temperature measures 60◦ F (F stands for Fahrenheit temperature). Then the change in temperature is found by taking a difference. Change in temperature = Afternoon temperature−Morning temperature = 60◦ F− 40◦ F = 20◦ F Therefore, there was a twenty degree increase in temperature from morning to afternoon. 3.3. RATES AND SLOPE 185 Now, suppose that the evening temperature measures 50◦ F. To calculate the change in temperature from the afternoon to the evening, we again subtract. Change in temperature = Evening temperature−Afternoon temperature = 50◦ F− 60◦ F = −10◦F There was a ten degree decrease in temperature from afternoon to evening. Calculating the Change in a Quantity. To calculate the change in a quantity, subtract the earlier measurement from the later measurement. Let T represent the temperature. Mathematicians like to use the symbolism ∆T to represent the change in temperature. For the change in temperature from morning to afternoon, we would write ∆T = 20◦ F. For the afternoon to evening change, we would write ∆T = −10◦ F. Mathematicians and scientists make frequent use of the Greek alphabet, the first few letters of which are: α,β, γ, δ, . . . (Greek alphabet, lower case) A,B,Γ,∆, . . . (Greek alphabet, upper case) a, b, c, d, . . . (English alphabet) Thus, the Greek letter ∆, the upper case form of δ, correlates with the letter ‘d’ in the English alphabet. Why did mathematicians make this choice of letter to represent the change in a quantity? Because to find the change in a quantity, we take a difference, and the word “difference” starts with the letter ‘d.’ Thus, ∆T is also pronounced “the difference in T .” Important Pronunciations. Two ways to pronounce the symbolism ∆T . 1. ∆T is pronounced “the change in T .” 2. ∆T is also pronounced “the difference in T .”  || 