The Real Number Line Real Number Line In our study of algebra, we will use several collections of numbers. The real number line allows us to visually display the numbers in which we are interested. A line is composed of infinitely many points. To each point we can associate a unique number, and with each number we can associate a particular point. Coordinate The number associated with a point on the number line is called the coordinate of the point. Graph The point on a line that is associated with a particular number is called the graph of that number. We construct the real number line as follows: Construction of the Real Number Line Draw a horizontal line. Choose any point on the line and label it 0. This point is called the origin. Choose a convenient length. This length is called "1 unit." Starting at 0, mark this length off in both directions, being careful to have the lengths look like they are about the same. We now define a real number. Real Number A real number is any number that is the coordinate of a point on the real number line. Positive and Negative Real Numbers The collection of these infinitely many numbers is called the collection of real numbers. The real numbers whose graphs are to the right of 0 are called the positive real numbers. The real numbers whose graphs appear to the left of 0 are called the negative real numbers. The number 0 is neither positive nor negative. The Real Number Line Real Number Line In our study of algebra, we will use several collections of numbers. The real number line allows us to visually display the numbers in which we are interested. A line is composed of infinitely many points. To each point we can associate a unique number, and with each number we can associate a particular point. Coordinate The number associated with a point on the number line is called the coordinate of the point. Graph The point on a line that is associated with a particular number is called the graph of that number. We construct the real number line as follows: Construction of the Real Number Line Draw a horizontal line. Choose any point on the line and label it 0. This point is called the origin. Choose a convenient length. This length is called "1 unit." Starting at 0, mark this length off in both directions, being careful to have the lengths look like they are about the same. We now define a real number. Real Number A real number is any number that is the coordinate of a point on the real number line. Positive and Negative Real Numbers The collection of these infinitely many numbers is called the collection of real numbers. The real numbers whose graphs are to the right of 0 are called the positive real numbers. The real numbers whose graphs appear to the left of 0 are called the negative real numbers. The number 0 is neither positive nor negative.  || 