Product of Polynomials When multiplying polynomials, we apply the distributive property many times. Multiply all of the terms of each polynomial and then combine like terms.   Example 9: Multiply: . Solution: Multiply each term of the first trinomial by each term of the second trinomial and then combine like terms. Aligning like terms in columns, as we have here, aids in the simplification process. Answer:   Notice that when multiplying a trinomial by a trinomial, we obtain nine terms before simplifying. In fact, when multiplying an n-term polynomial by an m-term polynomial, we will obtain n × m terms. In the previous example, we were asked to multiply and found that Because it is easy to make a small calculation error, it is a good practice to trace through the steps mentally to verify that the operations were performed correctly. Alternatively, we can check by evaluating We can be fairly certain that we have multiplied the polynomials correctly if we check that a few values evaluate to the same results in the original expression and in the answer. any value for x in both expressions to verify that the results are the same. Here we choose x = 2: Because the results could coincidentally be the same, a check by evaluating does not necessarily prove that we have multiplied correctly. However, after verifying a few values, we can be fairly confident that the product is correct.   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution Product of Polynomials When multiplying polynomials, we apply the distributive property many times. Multiply all of the terms of each polynomial and then combine like terms.   Example 9: Multiply: . Solution: Multiply each term of the first trinomial by each term of the second trinomial and then combine like terms. Aligning like terms in columns, as we have here, aids in the simplification process. Answer:   Notice that when multiplying a trinomial by a trinomial, we obtain nine terms before simplifying. In fact, when multiplying an n-term polynomial by an m-term polynomial, we will obtain n × m terms. In the previous example, we were asked to multiply and found that Because it is easy to make a small calculation error, it is a good practice to trace through the steps mentally to verify that the operations were performed correctly. Alternatively, we can check by evaluating We can be fairly certain that we have multiplied the polynomials correctly if we check that a few values evaluate to the same results in the original expression and in the answer. any value for x in both expressions to verify that the results are the same. Here we choose x = 2: Because the results could coincidentally be the same, a check by evaluating does not necessarily prove that we have multiplied correctly. However, after verifying a few values, we can be fairly confident that the product is correct.   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || 