Slope The slope of a line is a measure of how “tilted” the line is. A highway sign might say something like “6% grade ahead.” What does this mean, other than that you hope your brakes work? What it means is that the ratio of your drop in altitude to your horizontal distance is 6%, or 6/100. In other words, if you move 100 feet forward, you will drop 6 feet; if you move 200 feet forward, you will drop 12 feet, and so on. We measure the slope of lines in much the same way, although we do not convert the result to a percent. Suppose we have a graph of an unknown straight line. Pick any two different points on the line and label them point 1 and point 2: In moving from point 1 to point 2, we cover 4 steps horizontally (the x direction) and 2 steps vertically (the y direction): Therefore, the ratio of the change in altitude to the change in horizontal distance is 2 to 4. Expressing it as a fraction and reducing, we say that the slope of this line is To formalize this procedure a bit, we need to think about the two points in terms of their x and y coordinates. Now you should be able to see that the horizontal displacement is the difference between the x coordinates of the two points, or 4 = 5 – 1, and the vertical displacement is the difference between the y coordinates, or 2 = 4 – 2. In general, if we say that the coordinates of point 1 are (x1, y1) and the coordinates of point 2 are (x2, y2), then we can define the slope m as follows: where (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) are any two distinct points on the line. It is customary (in the US) to use the letter m to represent slope. No one knows why. It makes no difference which two points are used for point 1 and point 2. If they were switched, both the numerator and the denominator of the fraction would be changed to the opposite sign, giving exactly the same result. Many people find it useful to remember this formula as “slope is rise over run.” Another common notation is , where the Greek letter delta (D) means “the change in.” The slope is a ratio of how much y changes per change in x: Slope The slope of a line is a measure of how “tilted” the line is. A highway sign might say something like “6% grade ahead.” What does this mean, other than that you hope your brakes work? What it means is that the ratio of your drop in altitude to your horizontal distance is 6%, or 6/100. In other words, if you move 100 feet forward, you will drop 6 feet; if you move 200 feet forward, you will drop 12 feet, and so on. We measure the slope of lines in much the same way, although we do not convert the result to a percent. Suppose we have a graph of an unknown straight line. Pick any two different points on the line and label them point 1 and point 2: In moving from point 1 to point 2, we cover 4 steps horizontally (the x direction) and 2 steps vertically (the y direction): Therefore, the ratio of the change in altitude to the change in horizontal distance is 2 to 4. Expressing it as a fraction and reducing, we say that the slope of this line is To formalize this procedure a bit, we need to think about the two points in terms of their x and y coordinates. Now you should be able to see that the horizontal displacement is the difference between the x coordinates of the two points, or 4 = 5 – 1, and the vertical displacement is the difference between the y coordinates, or 2 = 4 – 2. In general, if we say that the coordinates of point 1 are (x1, y1) and the coordinates of point 2 are (x2, y2), then we can define the slope m as follows: where (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) are any two distinct points on the line. It is customary (in the US) to use the letter m to represent slope. No one knows why. It makes no difference which two points are used for point 1 and point 2. If they were switched, both the numerator and the denominator of the fraction would be changed to the opposite sign, giving exactly the same result. Many people find it useful to remember this formula as “slope is rise over run.” Another common notation is , where the Greek letter delta (D) means “the change in.” The slope is a ratio of how much y changes per change in x:  || 