Factor by Grouping In this section, we outline a technique for factoring polynomials with four terms. First, review some preliminary examples where the terms have a common binomial factor.   Example 12: Factor: 5 x ( x − 3 ) + 2 ( x − 3 ) . Solution: This expression is a binomial with terms 5 x ( x − 3 ) and 2 ( x − 3 ) . In this case, ( x − 3 ) is a common factor. Begin by factoring this common factor out: To determine the terms of the remaining factor, divide each term by ( x − 3 ) : This step is typically performed mentally. We have Answer: ( x − 3 ) ( 5 x + 2 )   Recall that 1 is always a common factor. If the GCF is the same as a term, then the factor 1 remains after we factor out that GCF.   Example 13: Factor: 3 x ( 4 x + 1 ) − ( 4 x + 1 ) . Solution: Rewrite the second term − ( 4 x + 1 ) as − 1 ( 4 x + 1 ) and then factor out the common binomial factor ( 4 x + 1 ) . Answer: ( 4 x + 1 ) ( 3 x − 1 )   Remember that the goal for this section is to develop a technique that enables us to factor polynomials with four terms into a product of binomials. The intermediate step of this process looks like the previous two examples. For example, we wish to factor Begin by grouping the first two terms and the last two terms. Then factor out the GCF of each grouping: In this form, it is a binomial with a common binomial factor, ( x − 3 ) . The steps that follow outline a technique for factoring four-term polynomials called factor by grouping A technique for factoring polynomials with four terms. .   Example 14: Factor: 2 x 3 + 4 x 2 + 3 x + 6 . Solution: Group terms in such a way as to obtain a binomial with common factors. Step 1: Group the first two and last two terms and then factor out the GCF of each. The GCF of the first two terms is 2 x 2 , and the GCF of the second two terms is 3. Step 2: At this point, the polynomial is a binomial. Factor out any factors common to both terms. Here ( x + 2 ) is a common factor. Step 3: Optional check: multiply to verify that we obtain the original expression. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( 2 x 2 + 3 )   Example 15: Factor: 2 a 3 − 3 a 2 + 2 a − 3 . Solution: The GCF of the first two terms is a 2 and the GCF of the second two terms is 1. Answer: ( 2 a − 3 ) ( a 2 + 1 ) . The check is left to the reader.   Example 16: Factor: 6 x 4 − 24 x 3 − 5 x + 20 . Solution: The GCF for the first group is 6 x 3 . We have to choose 5 or −5 to factor out of the second group. Factoring out a +5 does not result in a common binomial factor. If we choose to factor out −5, then we obtain a common binomial factor and can proceed. Note that when factoring out a negative number, we change the signs of the factored terms. Answer: ( x − 4 ) ( 6 x 3 − 5 ) . The check is left to the reader. Tip The sign of the leading coefficient in the second grouping usually indicates whether or not to factor out a negative factor. If that coefficient is positive, factor out a positive factor. If it is negative, factor out a negative factor. When all the terms of a polynomial have a GCF other than 1, it is a best practice to factor that out before factoring by grouping.   Example 17: Factor: 3 y 4 + 9 y 2 − 6 y 3 − 18 y . Solution: Here we notice that the greatest common factor of all the terms is 3 y . Begin by factoring out the GCF and then factor the result by grouping. Answer: 3 y ( y 2 + 3 ) ( y − 2 )   Sometimes we must first rearrange the terms in order to obtain a common factor.   Example 18: Factor: a b − 2 a 2 b + a 3 − 2 b 3 . Solution: Simply factoring the GCF out of the first group and last group does not yield a common binomial factor. We must rearrange the terms, searching for a grouping that produces a common factor. In this example, we have a workable grouping if we switch the terms a 3 and a b . Answer: ( a − 2 b ) ( a 2 + b )   Not all factorable four-term polynomials can be factored with this technique. For example, This four-term polynomial cannot be grouped in any way as to produce a common binomial factor. Despite this, the polynomial is not prime and can be written as a product of polynomials. It can be factored as follows: Factoring such polynomials is something that we will learn to do as we move further along in our study of algebra. For now, we will limit our attempt to factor four-term polynomials to using the factor by grouping technique.   Try this! Factor: x 3 − x 2 y − x y + y 2 . Answer: ( x − y ) ( x 2 − y ) Video Solution Factor by Grouping In this section, we outline a technique for factoring polynomials with four terms. First, review some preliminary examples where the terms have a common binomial factor.   Example 12: Factor: 5 x ( x − 3 ) + 2 ( x − 3 ) . Solution: This expression is a binomial with terms 5 x ( x − 3 ) and 2 ( x − 3 ) . In this case, ( x − 3 ) is a common factor. Begin by factoring this common factor out: To determine the terms of the remaining factor, divide each term by ( x − 3 ) : This step is typically performed mentally. We have Answer: ( x − 3 ) ( 5 x + 2 )   Recall that 1 is always a common factor. If the GCF is the same as a term, then the factor 1 remains after we factor out that GCF.   Example 13: Factor: 3 x ( 4 x + 1 ) − ( 4 x + 1 ) . Solution: Rewrite the second term − ( 4 x + 1 ) as − 1 ( 4 x + 1 ) and then factor out the common binomial factor ( 4 x + 1 ) . Answer: ( 4 x + 1 ) ( 3 x − 1 )   Remember that the goal for this section is to develop a technique that enables us to factor polynomials with four terms into a product of binomials. The intermediate step of this process looks like the previous two examples. For example, we wish to factor Begin by grouping the first two terms and the last two terms. Then factor out the GCF of each grouping: In this form, it is a binomial with a common binomial factor, ( x − 3 ) . The steps that follow outline a technique for factoring four-term polynomials called factor by grouping A technique for factoring polynomials with four terms. .   Example 14: Factor: 2 x 3 + 4 x 2 + 3 x + 6 . Solution: Group terms in such a way as to obtain a binomial with common factors. Step 1: Group the first two and last two terms and then factor out the GCF of each. The GCF of the first two terms is 2 x 2 , and the GCF of the second two terms is 3. Step 2: At this point, the polynomial is a binomial. Factor out any factors common to both terms. Here ( x + 2 ) is a common factor. Step 3: Optional check: multiply to verify that we obtain the original expression. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( 2 x 2 + 3 )   Example 15: Factor: 2 a 3 − 3 a 2 + 2 a − 3 . Solution: The GCF of the first two terms is a 2 and the GCF of the second two terms is 1. Answer: ( 2 a − 3 ) ( a 2 + 1 ) . The check is left to the reader.   Example 16: Factor: 6 x 4 − 24 x 3 − 5 x + 20 . Solution: The GCF for the first group is 6 x 3 . We have to choose 5 or −5 to factor out of the second group. Factoring out a +5 does not result in a common binomial factor. If we choose to factor out −5, then we obtain a common binomial factor and can proceed. Note that when factoring out a negative number, we change the signs of the factored terms. Answer: ( x − 4 ) ( 6 x 3 − 5 ) . The check is left to the reader. Tip The sign of the leading coefficient in the second grouping usually indicates whether or not to factor out a negative factor. If that coefficient is positive, factor out a positive factor. If it is negative, factor out a negative factor. When all the terms of a polynomial have a GCF other than 1, it is a best practice to factor that out before factoring by grouping.   Example 17: Factor: 3 y 4 + 9 y 2 − 6 y 3 − 18 y . Solution: Here we notice that the greatest common factor of all the terms is 3 y . Begin by factoring out the GCF and then factor the result by grouping. Answer: 3 y ( y 2 + 3 ) ( y − 2 )   Sometimes we must first rearrange the terms in order to obtain a common factor.   Example 18: Factor: a b − 2 a 2 b + a 3 − 2 b 3 . Solution: Simply factoring the GCF out of the first group and last group does not yield a common binomial factor. We must rearrange the terms, searching for a grouping that produces a common factor. In this example, we have a workable grouping if we switch the terms a 3 and a b . Answer: ( a − 2 b ) ( a 2 + b )   Not all factorable four-term polynomials can be factored with this technique. For example, This four-term polynomial cannot be grouped in any way as to produce a common binomial factor. Despite this, the polynomial is not prime and can be written as a product of polynomials. It can be factored as follows: Factoring such polynomials is something that we will learn to do as we move further along in our study of algebra. For now, we will limit our attempt to factor four-term polynomials to using the factor by grouping technique.   Try this! Factor: x 3 − x 2 y − x y + y 2 . Answer: ( x − y ) ( x 2 − y ) Video Solution  || 