 || Multiplication Statements Statement, Multiplication Statement A statement is a sentence that is either true or false. A mathematical statement of the form product = (factor 1) ⋅ (factor 2) is a multiplication statement. Depending on the numbers that are used, it can be either true or false. Omitting exactly one of the three numbers in the statement will produce exactly one of the following three problems. For convenience, we'll represent the omitted (or missing) number with the letter M (M for Missing). M = (factor 1) ⋅ (factor 2) Missing product statement. M ⋅ (factor 2) = product Missing factor statement. (factor 1) ⋅ M = product Missing factor statement. We are interested in developing and working with methods to determine the missing number that makes the statement true. Fundamental to these methods is the ability to translate two words to mathematical symbols. The word of translates to times is translates to equals  || Missing Products Statements The equation M = 8 ⋅ 4 is a missing product statement. We can find the value of M that makes this statement true by multiplying the known factors. Missing product statements can be used to determine the answer to a question such as, "What number is fraction 1 of fraction 2? Sample Set A Find of . We are being asked the question, "What number is of ?" We must translate from words to mathematical symbols. Thus, of is . Thus, 18 is of 24. Practice Set A Exercise 4.7.1. (Go to Solution) Find of . Exercise 4.7.2. (Go to Solution) What number is of ? Exercise 4.7.3. (Go to Solution) of is what number?  || Missing Factor Statements The equation 8 ⋅ M = 32 is a missing factor statement. We can find the value of M that makes this statement true by dividing (since we know that 32 ÷ 8 = 4). Finding the Missing Factor To find the missing factor in a missing factor statement, divide the product by the known factor. missing factor = (product) ÷ (known factor) Missing factor statements can be used to answer such questions as of what number is ? What part of is ? Sample Set B Now, using missing factor = (product) ÷ (known factor) We get Thus, of 6 is . For convenience, let's convert the mixed numbers to improper fractions. Now, using missing factor = (product)÷(known factor) we get Thus, of is . Practice Set B Exercise 4.7.4. (Go to Solution) of what number is ? Exercise 4.7.5. (Go to Solution) of what number is ? Exercise 4.7.6. (Go to Solution) What part of is ? Exercise 4.7.7. (Go to Solution) What part of is ?  || 