Uniform Motion Problems Uniform motion Described by the formula D = r t , where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. problems, also referred to as distance problems, involve the formula where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. If we divide both sides by the average rate, r, then we obtain the formula For this reason, when the unknown quantity is time, the algebraic setup for distance problems often results in a rational equation. Similarly, when the unknown quantity is the rate, the setup also may result in a rational equation. We begin any uniform motion problem by first organizing our data with a chart. Use this information to set up an algebraic equation that models the application.   Example 5: Mary spent the first 120 miles of her road trip in traffic. When the traffic cleared, she was able to drive twice as fast for the remaining 300 miles. If the total trip took 9 hours, then how fast was she moving in traffic? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. To avoid introducing two more variables for the time column, use the formula t = D r . Here the time for each leg of the trip is calculated as follows: Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 9 hours: We begin solving this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, 2x. Answer: Mary averaged 30 miles per hour in traffic.   Example 6: A passenger train can travel, on average, 20 miles per hour faster than a freight train. If the passenger train covers 390 miles in the same time it takes the freight train to cover 270 miles, then how fast is each train? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantities and organize the data. Next, organize the given data in a chart. Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each train. Because the trains travel the same amount of time, finish the algebraic setup by equating the expressions that represent the times: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, x ( x + 20 ) . Use x + 20 to find the speed of the passenger train. Answer: The speed of the passenger train is 65 miles per hour and the speed of the freight train is 45 miles per hour.   Example 7: Brett lives on the river 8 miles upstream from town. When the current is 2 miles per hour, he can row his boat downstream to town for supplies and back in 3 hours. What is his average rowing speed in still water? Solution: Rowing downstream, the current increases his speed, and his rate is x + 2 miles per hour. Rowing upstream, the current decreases his speed, and his rate is x − 2 miles per hour. Begin by organizing the data in the following chart: Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each leg of the trip. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 3 hours: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 ) . Next, solve the resulting quadratic equation. Use only the positive solution, x = 6 miles per hour. Answer: His rowing speed is 6 miles per hour.   Try this! Dwayne drove 18 miles to the airport to pick up his father and then returned home. On the return trip he was able to drive an average of 15 miles per hour faster than he did on the trip there. If the total driving time was 1 hour, then what was his average speed driving to the airport? Answer: His average speed driving to the airport was 30 miles per hour. Video Solution Uniform Motion Problems Uniform motion Described by the formula D = r t , where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. problems, also referred to as distance problems, involve the formula where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. If we divide both sides by the average rate, r, then we obtain the formula For this reason, when the unknown quantity is time, the algebraic setup for distance problems often results in a rational equation. Similarly, when the unknown quantity is the rate, the setup also may result in a rational equation. We begin any uniform motion problem by first organizing our data with a chart. Use this information to set up an algebraic equation that models the application.   Example 5: Mary spent the first 120 miles of her road trip in traffic. When the traffic cleared, she was able to drive twice as fast for the remaining 300 miles. If the total trip took 9 hours, then how fast was she moving in traffic? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. To avoid introducing two more variables for the time column, use the formula t = D r . Here the time for each leg of the trip is calculated as follows: Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 9 hours: We begin solving this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, 2x. Answer: Mary averaged 30 miles per hour in traffic.   Example 6: A passenger train can travel, on average, 20 miles per hour faster than a freight train. If the passenger train covers 390 miles in the same time it takes the freight train to cover 270 miles, then how fast is each train? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantities and organize the data. Next, organize the given data in a chart. Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each train. Because the trains travel the same amount of time, finish the algebraic setup by equating the expressions that represent the times: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, x ( x + 20 ) . Use x + 20 to find the speed of the passenger train. Answer: The speed of the passenger train is 65 miles per hour and the speed of the freight train is 45 miles per hour.   Example 7: Brett lives on the river 8 miles upstream from town. When the current is 2 miles per hour, he can row his boat downstream to town for supplies and back in 3 hours. What is his average rowing speed in still water? Solution: Rowing downstream, the current increases his speed, and his rate is x + 2 miles per hour. Rowing upstream, the current decreases his speed, and his rate is x − 2 miles per hour. Begin by organizing the data in the following chart: Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each leg of the trip. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 3 hours: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 ) . Next, solve the resulting quadratic equation. Use only the positive solution, x = 6 miles per hour. Answer: His rowing speed is 6 miles per hour.   Try this! Dwayne drove 18 miles to the airport to pick up his father and then returned home. On the return trip he was able to drive an average of 15 miles per hour faster than he did on the trip there. If the total driving time was 1 hour, then what was his average speed driving to the airport? Answer: His average speed driving to the airport was 30 miles per hour. Video Solution  || 