Relations, Functions, Domain, and Range Relationships between sets occur often in everyday life. For example, for each month in Cape Canaveral, we can associate an average amount of rainfall. In this case, the amount of precipitation depends on the month of the year, and the data can be written in tabular form or as a set of ordered pairs. Month Precipitation Ordered pairs January 2.4 in (January, 2.4) February 3.3 in (February, 3.3) March 3.1 in (March, 3.1) April 2.0 in (April, 2.0) May 3.8 in (May, 3.8) June 6.8 in (June, 6.8) July 8.1 in (July, 8.1) August 7.6 in (August, 7.6) September 7.3 in (September, 7.3) October 4.1 in (October, 4.1) November 3.3 in (November, 3.3) December 2.4 in (December, 2.4) We define a relation Any set of ordered pairs. as any set of ordered pairs. Usually we write the independent component of the relation in the first column and the dependent component in the second column. In the opening example, notice that it makes sense to relate the average amount of precipitation as dependent on the month of year. The set of all elements in the first column of a relation is called the domain The set of first components of a relation. The x-values define the domain in relations consisting of points (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. . The set of all elements that compose the second column is called the range The set of second components of a relation. The y-values define the range in relations consisting of points (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. . In this example, the domain consists of the set of all months of the year, and the range consists of the values that represent the average rainfall for each month. In the context of algebra, the relations of interest are sets of ordered pairs (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. In this case, the x-values define the domain and the y-values define the range. Of special interest are relations where every x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value; these relations are called functions Relations where every x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value. With the definition comes new notation: f ( x ) = y , which is read “f of x is equal to y.” .   Example 1: Determine the domain and range of the following relation and state whether or not it is a function: {(−1, 4), (0, 7), (2, 3), (3, 3), (4, −2)}. Solution: Here we separate the domain and range and depict the correspondence between the values with arrows. Answer: The domain is {−1, 0, 2, 3, 4}, and the range is {−2, 3, 4, 7}. The relation is a function because each x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value.   Example 2: Determine the domain and range of the following relation and state whether or not it is a function: {(−4, −3), (−2, 6), (0, 3), (3, 5), (3, 7)}. Solution: Answer: The domain is {−4, −2, 0, 3}, and the range is {−3, 3, 5, 6, 7}. This relation is not a function because the x-value 3 has two corresponding y-values.   In the previous example, the relation is not a function because it contains ordered pairs with the same x-value, (3, 5) and (3, 7). We can recognize functions as relations where no x-values are repeated. In algebra, equations such as y = 3 4 x − 2 define relations. This linear equation can be graphed as follows: The graph is a relation since it represents the infinite set of ordered pair solutions to y = 3 4 x − 2 . The domain is the set of all x-values, and in this case consists of all real numbers. The range is the set of all possible y-values, and in this case also consists of all real numbers. Furthermore, the graph is a function because for each x-value there is only one corresponding y-value. In fact, any nonvertical or nonhorizontal line is a function with domain and range consisting of all real numbers. Any graph is a set of ordered pairs and thus defines a relation. Consider the following graph of a circle: Here the graph represents a relation where many x-values in the domain correspond to two y-values. If we draw a vertical line, as illustrated, we can see that (3, 2) and (3, −2) are two ordered pairs with the same x-value. Therefore, the x-value 3 corresponds to two y-values; hence the graph does not represent a function. The illustration suggests that if any vertical line intersects a graph more than once, then the graph does not represent a function. This is called the vertical line test If a vertical line intersects a graph more than once, then the graph does not represent a function. .   Example 3: Given the following graph, determine the domain and range and state whether or not it is a function. Solution: The given shape is called a parabola and extends indefinitely to the left and right as indicated by the arrows. This suggests that if we choose any x-value, then we will be able to find a corresponding point on the graph; therefore, the domain consists of all real numbers. Furthermore, the graph shows that −1 is the minimum y-value, and any y-value greater than that is represented in the relation. Hence the range consists of all y-values greater than or equal to −1, or in interval notation, [ − 1 ,   ∞ ) . Lastly, any vertical line will intersect the graph only once; therefore, it is a function. Answer: The domain is all real numbers R = (−∞, ∞), and the range is [ − 1 ,   ∞ ) . The graph represents a function because it passes the vertical line test.   Try this! Given the graph, determine the domain and range and state whether or not it is a function: Answer: Domain: [ − 4 ,   ∞ ) ; range: ( − ∞ ,   ∞ ) ; function: no Video Solution Relations, Functions, Domain, and Range Relationships between sets occur often in everyday life. For example, for each month in Cape Canaveral, we can associate an average amount of rainfall. In this case, the amount of precipitation depends on the month of the year, and the data can be written in tabular form or as a set of ordered pairs. Month Precipitation Ordered pairs January 2.4 in (January, 2.4) February 3.3 in (February, 3.3) March 3.1 in (March, 3.1) April 2.0 in (April, 2.0) May 3.8 in (May, 3.8) June 6.8 in (June, 6.8) July 8.1 in (July, 8.1) August 7.6 in (August, 7.6) September 7.3 in (September, 7.3) October 4.1 in (October, 4.1) November 3.3 in (November, 3.3) December 2.4 in (December, 2.4) We define a relation Any set of ordered pairs. as any set of ordered pairs. Usually we write the independent component of the relation in the first column and the dependent component in the second column. In the opening example, notice that it makes sense to relate the average amount of precipitation as dependent on the month of year. The set of all elements in the first column of a relation is called the domain The set of first components of a relation. The x-values define the domain in relations consisting of points (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. . The set of all elements that compose the second column is called the range The set of second components of a relation. The y-values define the range in relations consisting of points (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. . In this example, the domain consists of the set of all months of the year, and the range consists of the values that represent the average rainfall for each month. In the context of algebra, the relations of interest are sets of ordered pairs (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. In this case, the x-values define the domain and the y-values define the range. Of special interest are relations where every x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value; these relations are called functions Relations where every x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value. With the definition comes new notation: f ( x ) = y , which is read “f of x is equal to y.” .   Example 1: Determine the domain and range of the following relation and state whether or not it is a function: {(−1, 4), (0, 7), (2, 3), (3, 3), (4, −2)}. Solution: Here we separate the domain and range and depict the correspondence between the values with arrows. Answer: The domain is {−1, 0, 2, 3, 4}, and the range is {−2, 3, 4, 7}. The relation is a function because each x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value.   Example 2: Determine the domain and range of the following relation and state whether or not it is a function: {(−4, −3), (−2, 6), (0, 3), (3, 5), (3, 7)}. Solution: Answer: The domain is {−4, −2, 0, 3}, and the range is {−3, 3, 5, 6, 7}. This relation is not a function because the x-value 3 has two corresponding y-values.   In the previous example, the relation is not a function because it contains ordered pairs with the same x-value, (3, 5) and (3, 7). We can recognize functions as relations where no x-values are repeated. In algebra, equations such as y = 3 4 x − 2 define relations. This linear equation can be graphed as follows: The graph is a relation since it represents the infinite set of ordered pair solutions to y = 3 4 x − 2 . The domain is the set of all x-values, and in this case consists of all real numbers. The range is the set of all possible y-values, and in this case also consists of all real numbers. Furthermore, the graph is a function because for each x-value there is only one corresponding y-value. In fact, any nonvertical or nonhorizontal line is a function with domain and range consisting of all real numbers. Any graph is a set of ordered pairs and thus defines a relation. Consider the following graph of a circle: Here the graph represents a relation where many x-values in the domain correspond to two y-values. If we draw a vertical line, as illustrated, we can see that (3, 2) and (3, −2) are two ordered pairs with the same x-value. Therefore, the x-value 3 corresponds to two y-values; hence the graph does not represent a function. The illustration suggests that if any vertical line intersects a graph more than once, then the graph does not represent a function. This is called the vertical line test If a vertical line intersects a graph more than once, then the graph does not represent a function. .   Example 3: Given the following graph, determine the domain and range and state whether or not it is a function. Solution: The given shape is called a parabola and extends indefinitely to the left and right as indicated by the arrows. This suggests that if we choose any x-value, then we will be able to find a corresponding point on the graph; therefore, the domain consists of all real numbers. Furthermore, the graph shows that −1 is the minimum y-value, and any y-value greater than that is represented in the relation. Hence the range consists of all y-values greater than or equal to −1, or in interval notation, [ − 1 ,   ∞ ) . Lastly, any vertical line will intersect the graph only once; therefore, it is a function. Answer: The domain is all real numbers R = (−∞, ∞), and the range is [ − 1 ,   ∞ ) . The graph represents a function because it passes the vertical line test.   Try this! Given the graph, determine the domain and range and state whether or not it is a function: Answer: Domain: [ − 4 ,   ∞ ) ; range: ( − ∞ ,   ∞ ) ; function: no Video Solution  || 