 || The Properties Used in the Addition Method Another method of solving a system of two linear equations in two variables is called the method of elimination by addition. It is similar to the method of elimination by substitution in that the process eliminates one equation and one variable. The method of elimination by addition makes use of the following two properties. If A , B , and C are algebraic expressions such that a x + ( − a x ) = 0 Property 1 states that if we add the left sides of two equations together and the right sides of the same two equations together, the resulting sums will be equal. We call this adding equations. Property 2 states that the sum of two opposites is zero.  || The Addition Method To solve a system of two linear equations in two variables by addition, Write, if necessary, both equations in general form, a x + b y = c. If necessary, multiply one or both equations by factors that will produce opposite coefficients for one of the variables. Add the equations to eliminate one equation and one variable. Solve the equation obtained in step 3. Do one of the following: (a)  Substitute the value obtained in step 4 into either of the original equations and solve to obtain the value of the other variable, or (b)  Repeat steps 1-5 for the other variable. Check the solutions in both equations. Write the solution as an ordered pair. The addition method works well when the coefficient of one of the variables is 1 or a number other than 1.  || Addition And Parallel Or Coincident Lines When the lines of a system are parallel or coincident, the method of elimination produces results identical to that of the method of elimination by substitution. Addition and Parallel Lines If computations eliminate all variables and produce a contradiction, the two lines of the system are parallel and the system is called inconsistent. Addition and Coincident Lines If computations eliminate all variables and produce an identity, the two lines of the system are coincident and the system is called dependent.  || 