Raising Fractions to Higher Terms Equally as important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator than the original fraction. The fractions and are equivalent, that is, . Notice also, Notice that and that . We are not changing the value of . From these observations we can suggest the following method for converting one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. This method is called raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to an equivalent fraction that has higher terms in the numerator and denominator by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero whole number. The fraction can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8. Most often, we will want to convert a given fraction to an equivalent fraction with a higher specified denominator. For example, we may wish to convert to an equivalent fraction that has denominator 32, that is, This is possible to do because we know the process. We must multiply both the numerator and denominator of by the same nonzero whole number in order to 8 obtain an equivalent fraction. We have some information. The denominator 8 was raised to 32 by multiplying it by some nonzero whole number. Division will give us the proper factor. Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 32 ÷ 8 = 4 Now, multiply the numerator 5 by 4. 5 ⋅ 4 = 20 Thus, So, Sample Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Example 4.29.  . Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 35 ÷ 7 = 5 The quotient is 5. Multiply the original numerator by 5. The missing numerator is 15. Example 4.30.  . Divide the original numerator into the new numerator. 45 ÷ 5 = 9 The quotient is 9. Multiply the original denominator by 9. The missing denominator is 45. Practice Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Exercise 4.4.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.20. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.22. (Go to Solution) Raising Fractions to Higher Terms Equally as important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator than the original fraction. The fractions and are equivalent, that is, . Notice also, Notice that and that . We are not changing the value of . From these observations we can suggest the following method for converting one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. This method is called raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to an equivalent fraction that has higher terms in the numerator and denominator by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero whole number. The fraction can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8. Most often, we will want to convert a given fraction to an equivalent fraction with a higher specified denominator. For example, we may wish to convert to an equivalent fraction that has denominator 32, that is, This is possible to do because we know the process. We must multiply both the numerator and denominator of by the same nonzero whole number in order to 8 obtain an equivalent fraction. We have some information. The denominator 8 was raised to 32 by multiplying it by some nonzero whole number. Division will give us the proper factor. Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 32 ÷ 8 = 4 Now, multiply the numerator 5 by 4. 5 ⋅ 4 = 20 Thus, So, Sample Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Example 4.29.  . Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 35 ÷ 7 = 5 The quotient is 5. Multiply the original numerator by 5. The missing numerator is 15. Example 4.30.  . Divide the original numerator into the new numerator. 45 ÷ 5 = 9 The quotient is 9. Multiply the original denominator by 9. The missing denominator is 45. Practice Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Exercise 4.4.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.20. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.22. (Go to Solution)  || 