3. Inconsistent Equations Lines do not intersect (Parallel Lines; have the same slope) No solutions If two lines happen to have the same slope, but are not identically the same line, then they will never intersect. There is no pair (x, y) that could satisfy both equations, because there is no point (x, y) that is simultaneously on both lines. Thus these equations are said to be inconsistent, and there is no solution. The fact that they both have the same slope may not be obvious from the equations, because they are not written in one of the standard forms for straight lines. The slope is not readily evident in the form we use for writing systems of equations. (If you think about it you will see that the slope is the negative of the coefficient of x divided by the coefficient of y). Attempting to solve gives a false statement By attempting to solve such a system of equations algebraically, you are operating on a false assumption—namely that a solution exists. This will eventually lead you to a contradiction: a statement that is obviously false, regardless of the value(s) of the variable(s). At some point in your work you would get an obviously false equation like 3 = 4. This would tell you that the system of equations is inconsistent, and there is no solution.     Solution by Graphing For more complex systems, and especially those that contain non-linear equations, finding a solution by algebraic methods can be very difficult or even impossible. Using a graphing calculator (or a computer), you can graph the equations and actually see where they intersect. The calculator can then give you the coordinates of the intersection point. The only drawback to this method is that the solution is only an approximation, whereas the algebraic method gives the exact solution. In most practical situations, though, the precision of the calculator is sufficient. For more demanding scientific and engineering applications there are computer methods that can find approximate solutions to very high precision.   3. Inconsistent Equations Lines do not intersect (Parallel Lines; have the same slope) No solutions If two lines happen to have the same slope, but are not identically the same line, then they will never intersect. There is no pair (x, y) that could satisfy both equations, because there is no point (x, y) that is simultaneously on both lines. Thus these equations are said to be inconsistent, and there is no solution. The fact that they both have the same slope may not be obvious from the equations, because they are not written in one of the standard forms for straight lines. The slope is not readily evident in the form we use for writing systems of equations. (If you think about it you will see that the slope is the negative of the coefficient of x divided by the coefficient of y). Attempting to solve gives a false statement By attempting to solve such a system of equations algebraically, you are operating on a false assumption—namely that a solution exists. This will eventually lead you to a contradiction: a statement that is obviously false, regardless of the value(s) of the variable(s). At some point in your work you would get an obviously false equation like 3 = 4. This would tell you that the system of equations is inconsistent, and there is no solution.     Solution by Graphing For more complex systems, and especially those that contain non-linear equations, finding a solution by algebraic methods can be very difficult or even impossible. Using a graphing calculator (or a computer), you can graph the equations and actually see where they intersect. The calculator can then give you the coordinates of the intersection point. The only drawback to this method is that the solution is only an approximation, whereas the algebraic method gives the exact solution. In most practical situations, though, the precision of the calculator is sufficient. For more demanding scientific and engineering applications there are computer methods that can find approximate solutions to very high precision.    || 