Special Products In this section, the goal is to recognize certain special products that occur often in our study of algebra. We will develop three formulas that will be very useful as we move along. The three should be memorized. We begin by considering the following two calculations: This leads us to two formulas that describe perfect square trinomials The trinomials obtained by squaring the binomials and : We can use these formulas to quickly square a binomial.   Example 10: Multiply: . Solution: Here and . Apply the formula: Answer:   This process should become routine enough to be performed mentally.   Example 11: Multiply: . Solution: Here and . Apply the appropriate formula as follows: Answer:   Our third special product follows: This product is called difference of squares where a and b represent algebraic expressions. : The binomials and are called conjugate binomials The binomials and . . Therefore, when conjugate binomials are multiplied, the middle term eliminates, and the product is itself a binomial.   Example 12: Multiply: . Solution: Answer:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution Special Products In this section, the goal is to recognize certain special products that occur often in our study of algebra. We will develop three formulas that will be very useful as we move along. The three should be memorized. We begin by considering the following two calculations: This leads us to two formulas that describe perfect square trinomials The trinomials obtained by squaring the binomials and : We can use these formulas to quickly square a binomial.   Example 10: Multiply: . Solution: Here and . Apply the formula: Answer:   This process should become routine enough to be performed mentally.   Example 11: Multiply: . Solution: Here and . Apply the appropriate formula as follows: Answer:   Our third special product follows: This product is called difference of squares where a and b represent algebraic expressions. : The binomials and are called conjugate binomials The binomials and . . Therefore, when conjugate binomials are multiplied, the middle term eliminates, and the product is itself a binomial.   Example 12: Multiply: . Solution: Answer:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || 