 || The Product Rule for Exponents The first rule we wish to develop is the rule for multiplying two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. The following examples suggest this rule: Example 2.70.  Example 2.71.  PRODUCT RULE FOR EXPONENTS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers, x n x m = x n + m To multiply two exponential quantities having the same base, add the exponents. Keep in mind that the exponential quantities being multiplied must have the same base for this rule to apply.  || The Quotient Rule for Exponents The second rule we wish to develop is the rule for dividing two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. The following examples suggest a rule for dividing two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. Example 2.83.  Example 2.84.  QUOTIENT RULE FOR EXPONENTS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers,.To divide two exponential quantities having the same nonzero base, subtract the exponent of the denominator from the exponent of the numerator. Keep in mind that the exponential quantities being divided must have the same base for this rule to apply.  || Zero as an Exponent In Sample Set C, the exponents of the numerators were greater than the exponents of the denominators. Let’s study the case when the exponents are the same.When the exponents are the same, say n , the subtraction n − n produces 0.Thus, by the second rule of exponents, .But what real number, if any, does x 0 represent? Let’s think for a moment about our experience with division in arithmetic. We know that any nonzero number divided by itself is one. Since the letter x represents some nonzero real number, so does x n . Thus, represents some nonzero real number divided by itself. Then .But we have also established that if . We now have that and . This implies that x 0 = 1,x ≠ 0 .Exponents can now be natural numbers and zero. We have enlarged our collection of numbers that can be used as exponents from the collection of natural numbers to the collection of whole numbers. ZERO AS AN EXPONENT If Any number, other than 0, raised to the power of 0, is 1. 00 has no meaning (it does not represent a number).  || 