The Formula for the Slope of a Line We have observed that the slope is a measure of the steepness of a line. We wish to develop a formula for measuring this steepness. It seems reasonable to develop a slope formula that produces the following results: Steepness of line 1 > steepness of line 2. Consider a line on which we select any two points. We’ll denote these points with the ordered pairs (x 1,  y 1  ) and (x 2,  y 2  ) . The subscripts help us to identify the points. (x 1,  y 1  ) is the first point. Subscript 1 indicates the first point. (x 2,  y 2  ) is the second point. Subscript 2 indicates the second point. The difference in x values (x 2 − x 1 ) gives us the horizontal change, and the difference in y values (y 2 − y 1 ) gives us the vertical change. If the line is very steep, then when going from the first point to the second point, we would expect a large vertical change compared to the horizontal change. If the line is not very steep, then when going from the first point to the second point, we would expect a small vertical change compared to the horizontal change. We are comparing changes. We see that we are comparing This is a comparison and is therefore a ratio. Ratios can be expressed as fractions. Thus, a measure of the steepness of a line can be expressed as a ratio. The slope of a line is defined as the ratio Mathematically, we can write these changes as Finding the Slope of a Line The slope of a nonvertical line passing through the points (x 1,  y 1  ) and (x 2,  y 2  ) is found by the formula The Formula for the Slope of a Line We have observed that the slope is a measure of the steepness of a line. We wish to develop a formula for measuring this steepness. It seems reasonable to develop a slope formula that produces the following results: Steepness of line 1 > steepness of line 2. Consider a line on which we select any two points. We’ll denote these points with the ordered pairs (x 1,  y 1  ) and (x 2,  y 2  ) . The subscripts help us to identify the points. (x 1,  y 1  ) is the first point. Subscript 1 indicates the first point. (x 2,  y 2  ) is the second point. Subscript 2 indicates the second point. The difference in x values (x 2 − x 1 ) gives us the horizontal change, and the difference in y values (y 2 − y 1 ) gives us the vertical change. If the line is very steep, then when going from the first point to the second point, we would expect a large vertical change compared to the horizontal change. If the line is not very steep, then when going from the first point to the second point, we would expect a small vertical change compared to the horizontal change. We are comparing changes. We see that we are comparing This is a comparison and is therefore a ratio. Ratios can be expressed as fractions. Thus, a measure of the steepness of a line can be expressed as a ratio. The slope of a line is defined as the ratio Mathematically, we can write these changes as Finding the Slope of a Line The slope of a nonvertical line passing through the points (x 1,  y 1  ) and (x 2,  y 2  ) is found by the formula  || 