Converting Complex Fractions to Simple Fractions The goal here is to convert a complex fraction to a simple fraction. We can do so by employing the methods of adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing fractions. Recall from Section 4.2 that a fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol separating the fractional quantity into two individual groups. We proceed in simplifying a complex fraction to a simple fraction by simplifying the numerator and the denom­inator of the complex fraction separately. We will simplify the numerator and denominator completely before removing the fraction bar by dividing. This tech­nique is illustrated in problems 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Convert each of the following complex fractions to a simple fraction. Example 5.20.  Convert this complex fraction to a simple fraction by performing the indicated division. Example 5.21.  Example 5.22.  Example 5.23.  Example 5.24.  Example 5.25.  Practice Set A Convert each of the following complex fractions to a simple fraction. Exercise 5.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.6. (Go to Solution) Converting Complex Fractions to Simple Fractions The goal here is to convert a complex fraction to a simple fraction. We can do so by employing the methods of adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing fractions. Recall from Section 4.2 that a fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol separating the fractional quantity into two individual groups. We proceed in simplifying a complex fraction to a simple fraction by simplifying the numerator and the denom­inator of the complex fraction separately. We will simplify the numerator and denominator completely before removing the fraction bar by dividing. This tech­nique is illustrated in problems 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Convert each of the following complex fractions to a simple fraction. Example 5.20.  Convert this complex fraction to a simple fraction by performing the indicated division. Example 5.21.  Example 5.22.  Example 5.23.  Example 5.24.  Example 5.25.  Practice Set A Convert each of the following complex fractions to a simple fraction. Exercise 5.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.6. (Go to Solution)  || 