The Process Recall, from Section Section 8.2, the equality property of fractions. Equality Property Of Fractions If then a d = b c. Using the fact that , and that 1 is the multiplicative identity, it follows that if is a rational expression, then This equation asserts that a rational expression can be transformed into an equivalent rational expression by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number. Process of Building Rational Expressions This process is known as the process of building rational expressions and it is exactly the opposite of reducing rational expressions. The process is shown in these examples: Example 8.50.  can be built to since Example 8.51.  can be built to since Example 8.52.  can be built to since Example 8.53.  can be built to since Suppose we're given a rational expression and wish to build it into a rational expression with denominator Q b 2 , that is, Since we changed the denominator, we must certainly change the numerator in the same way. To determine how to change the numerator we need to know how the denominator was changed. Since one rational expression is built into another equivalent expression by multiplication by 1, the first denominator must have been multiplied by some quantity. Observation of tells us that Q was multiplied by b 2 . Hence, we must multiply the numerator P by b 2 . Thus, Quite often a simple comparison of the original denominator with the new denominator will tell us the factor being used. However, there will be times when the factor is unclear by simple observation. We need a method for finding the factor. Observe the following examples; then try to speculate on the method. Example 8.54.  The original denominator 4 was multiplied by 5 to yield 20. What arithmetic process will yield 5 using 4 and 20? Example 8.55.  The original denominator 10 was multiplied by y to yield 10y . Example 8.56.  The original denominator 2a 3 b was multiplied by 8a 2 b 2 to yield 16a 5 b 3 . Example 8.57.  The original denominator ( a + 1 ) 2 was multiplied by 4( a − 2 ) to yield 4 ( a + 1 ) 2 ( a − 2 ) . To determine the quantity that the original denominator was multiplied by to yield the new denominator, we ask, "What did I multiply the original denominator by to get the new denominator?" We find this factor by dividing the original denominator into the new denominator. It is precisely this quantity that we multiply the numerator by to build the rational expression. The Process Recall, from Section Section 8.2, the equality property of fractions. Equality Property Of Fractions If then a d = b c. Using the fact that , and that 1 is the multiplicative identity, it follows that if is a rational expression, then This equation asserts that a rational expression can be transformed into an equivalent rational expression by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number. Process of Building Rational Expressions This process is known as the process of building rational expressions and it is exactly the opposite of reducing rational expressions. The process is shown in these examples: Example 8.50.  can be built to since Example 8.51.  can be built to since Example 8.52.  can be built to since Example 8.53.  can be built to since Suppose we're given a rational expression and wish to build it into a rational expression with denominator Q b 2 , that is, Since we changed the denominator, we must certainly change the numerator in the same way. To determine how to change the numerator we need to know how the denominator was changed. Since one rational expression is built into another equivalent expression by multiplication by 1, the first denominator must have been multiplied by some quantity. Observation of tells us that Q was multiplied by b 2 . Hence, we must multiply the numerator P by b 2 . Thus, Quite often a simple comparison of the original denominator with the new denominator will tell us the factor being used. However, there will be times when the factor is unclear by simple observation. We need a method for finding the factor. Observe the following examples; then try to speculate on the method. Example 8.54.  The original denominator 4 was multiplied by 5 to yield 20. What arithmetic process will yield 5 using 4 and 20? Example 8.55.  The original denominator 10 was multiplied by y to yield 10y . Example 8.56.  The original denominator 2a 3 b was multiplied by 8a 2 b 2 to yield 16a 5 b 3 . Example 8.57.  The original denominator ( a + 1 ) 2 was multiplied by 4( a − 2 ) to yield 4 ( a + 1 ) 2 ( a − 2 ) . To determine the quantity that the original denominator was multiplied by to yield the new denominator, we ask, "What did I multiply the original denominator by to get the new denominator?" We find this factor by dividing the original denominator into the new denominator. It is precisely this quantity that we multiply the numerator by to build the rational expression.  || 