 || Rational Expressions, Evaluating, and Restrictions A rational number, or fraction a b , is a real number defined as a quotient of two integers a and b, where b ≠ 0 . Similarly, we define a rational expression The quotient P Q of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0. , or algebraic fraction Term used when referring to a rational expression. P Q , as the quotient of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0 . Some examples of rational expressions follow: The example x + 3 x − 5 consists of linear expressions in both the numerator and denominator. Because the denominator contains a variable, this expression is not defined for all values of x.   Example 1: Evaluate x + 3 x − 5 for the set of x-values {−3, 4, 5}. Solution: Substitute the values in for x. Answer: When x = − 3 , the value of the rational expression is 0; when x = 4 , the value of the rational expression is −7; and when x = 5 , the value of the rational expression is undefined.   This example illustrates that variables are restricted to values that do not make the denominator equal to 0. The domain of a rational expression The set of real numbers for which the rational expression is defined. is the set of real numbers for which it is defined, and restrictions The set of real numbers for which a rational expression is not defined. are the real numbers for which the expression is not defined. We often express the domain of a rational expression in terms of its restrictions.   Example 2: Find the domain of the following: x + 7 2 x 2 + x − 6 . Solution: In this example, the numerator x + 7 is a linear expression and the denominator 2 x 2 + x − 6 is a quadratic expression. If we factor the denominator, then we will obtain an equivalent expression. Because rational expressions are undefined when the denominator is 0, we wish to find the values for x that make it 0. To do this, apply the zero-product property. Set each factor in the denominator equal to 0 and solve. We conclude that the original expression is defined for any real number except 3/2 and −2. These two values are the restrictions to the domain. It is important to note that −7 is not a restriction to the domain because the expression is defined as 0 when the numerator is 0. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ 3 2 and x ≠ − 2 .   We can express the domain of the previous example using notation as follows: The restrictions to the domain of a rational expression are determined by the denominator. Ignore the numerator when finding those restrictions.   Example 3: Determine the domain: x 4 + x 3 − 2 x 2 − x x 2 − 1 . Solution: To find the restrictions to the domain, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve: These two values cause the denominator to be 0. Hence they are restricted from the domain. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ ± 1 .   Example 4: Determine the domain: x 2 − 25 4 . Solution: There is no variable in the denominator and thus no restriction to the domain. Answer: The domain consists of all real numbers, R.  || Simplifying Rational Expressions When simplifying fractions, look for common factors that cancel. For example, We say that the fraction 12/60 is equivalent to 1/5. Fractions are in simplest form if the numerator and denominator share no common factor other than 1. Similarly, when working with rational expressions, look for factors to cancel. For example, The resulting rational expression is equivalent if it shares the same domain. Therefore, we must make note of the restrictions and write In words, x + 4 ( x − 3 ) ( x + 4 ) is equivalent to 1 x − 3 , if x ≠ 3 and x ≠ − 4 . We can verify this by choosing a few values with which to evaluate both expressions to see if the results are the same. Here we choose x = 7 and evaluate as follows: It is important to state the restrictions before simplifying rational expressions because the simplified expression may be defined for restrictions of the original. In this case, the expressions are not equivalent. Here −4 is defined for the simplified equivalent but not for the original, as illustrated below:   Example 5: Simplify and state the restriction: 25 x 2 15 x 3 . Solution: In this example, the expression is undefined when x is 0. Therefore, the domain consists of all real numbers x, where x ≠ 0 . With this understanding, we can cancel common factors. Answer: 5 3 x , where x ≠ 0   Example 6: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x ( x − 5 ) ( 2 x + 1 ) ( x − 5 ) . Solution: To determine the restrictions, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except for −1/2 and 5. Next, we find an equivalent expression by canceling common factors. Answer: 3 x 2 x + 1 , where x ≠ − 1 2 and x ≠ 5   Typically, rational expressions are not given in factored form. If this is the case, factor first and then cancel. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 7: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x + 6 x 2 + x − 2 . Solution: Step 1: Completely factor the numerator and denominator. Step 2: Determine the restrictions to the domain. To do this, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except −2 and 1. Step 3: Cancel common factors, if any. Answer: 3 x − 1 , where x ≠ 1 and x ≠ − 2   Example 8: State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 + 7 x − 30 x 2 − 7 x + 12 . Solution: First, factor the numerator and denominator. Any value of x that results in a value of 0 in the denominator is a restriction. By inspection, we determine that the domain consists of all real numbers except 4 and 3. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: x + 10 x − 4 , where x ≠ 3 and x ≠ 4   It is important to remember that we can only cancel factors of a product. A common mistake is to cancel terms. For example,   Try this! State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 − 16 5 x 2 − 20 x . Answer: x + 4 5 x , where x ≠ 0 and x ≠ 4 Video Solution In some examples, we will make a broad assumption that the denominator is nonzero. When we make that assumption, we do not need to determine the restrictions.   Example 9: Simplify: x y + y 2 − 3 x − 3 y x 2 − y 2 . (Assume all denominators are nonzero.) Solution: Factor the numerator by grouping. Factor the denominator using the formula for a difference of squares. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: y − 3 x − y  || Opposite Binomial Factors Recall that the opposite of the real number a is −a. Similarly, we can define the opposite of a polynomial P to be −P. We first consider the opposite of the binomial a − b : This leads us to the opposite binomial property If given a binomial a − b , then the opposite is − ( a − b ) = b − a . : This is equivalent to factoring out a –1. If a ≠ b , then we can divide both sides by ( a − b ) and obtain the following:   Example 10: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 − x x − 3 . Solution: By inspection, we can see that the denominator is 0 if x = 3 . Therefore, 3 is the restriction to the domain. Apply the opposite binomial property to the numerator and then cancel. Answer: 3 − x x − 3 = − 1 , where x ≠ 3   Since addition is commutative, we have or Take care not to confuse this with the opposite binomial property. Also, it is important to recall that In other words, show a negative fraction by placing the negative sign in the numerator, in front of the fraction bar, or in the denominator. Generally, negative denominators are avoided.   Example 11: Simplify and state the restrictions: 4 − x 2 x 2 + 3 x − 10 . Solution: Begin by factoring the numerator and denominator. Answer: − x + 2 x + 5 , where x ≠ 2 and x ≠ − 5   Try this! Simplify and state the restrictions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 15 25 − x 2 . Answer: − 2 x + 3 x + 5 , where x ≠ ± 5 Video Solution  || Rational Functions Rational functions have the form where p ( x ) and q ( x ) are polynomials and q ( x ) ≠ 0 . The domain of a rational function consists of all real numbers x such that the denominator q ( x ) ≠ 0 .   Example 12: a. Simplify: r ( x ) = 2 x 2 + 5 x − 3 6 x 2 + 18 x . b. State the domain. c. Calculate r ( − 2 ) . Solution: a. To simplify the rational function, first factor and then cancel. b. To determine the restrictions, set the denominator of the original function equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers x, where x ≠ 0 and x ≠ − 3 . c. Since −2 is not a restriction, substitute it for the variable x using the simplified form. Answers: a. r ( x ) = 2 x − 1 6 x b. The domain is all real numbers except 0 and −3. c. r ( − 2 ) = 5 12   If a cost function A function that represents the cost of producing a certain number of units. C ( x ) represents the cost of producing x units, then the average cost The total cost divided by the number of units produced, which can be represented by c ( x ) = C ( x ) x , where C ( x ) is a cost function. c ( x ) is the cost divided by the number of units produced.   Example 13: The cost in dollars of producing t-shirts with a company logo is given by C ( x ) = 7 x + 200 , where x represents the number of shirts produced. Determine the average cost of producing a. 40 t-shirts b. 250 t-shirts c. 1,000 t-shirts Solution: Set up a function representing the average cost. Next, calculate c ( 40 ) , c ( 250 ) , and c ( 1000 ) . Answers: a. If 40 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $12.00. b. If 250 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $7.80. c. If 1,000 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $7.20.  || 