 || Definition of a Linear Inequality A linear inequality A mathematical statement relating a linear expression as either less than or greater than another. is a mathematical statement that relates a linear expression as either less than or greater than another. The following are some examples of linear inequalities, all of which are solved in this section: A solution to a linear inequality A real number that produces a true statement when its value is substituted for the variable. is a real number that will produce a true statement when substituted for the variable. Linear inequalities have either infinitely many solutions or no solution. If there are infinitely many solutions, graph the solution set on a number line and/or express the solution using interval notation.   Example 1: Are x = − 2 and x = 4 solutions to 3 x + 7 < 16 ? Solution: Substitute the values for x, simplify, and check to see if we obtain a true statement. Answer: x = − 2 is a solution and x = 4 is not.  || Algebra of Linear Inequalities All but one of the techniques learned for solving linear equations apply to solving linear inequalities. You may add or subtract any real number to both sides of an inequality, and you may multiply or divide both sides by any positive real number to create equivalent inequalities. For example, Both subtracting 7 from each side and dividing each side by +5 results in an equivalent inequality that is true.   Example 2: Solve and graph the solution set: 3 x + 7 < 16 . Solution: It is helpful to take a minute and choose a few values in and out of the solution set, substitute them into the original inequality, and then verify the results. As indicated, you should expect x = 0 to solve the original inequality, but x = 5 should not. Checking in this manner gives a good indication that the inequality is solved correctly. This can be done mentally. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   When working with linear inequalities, a different rule applies when multiplying or dividing by a negative number. To illustrate the problem, consider the true statement 10 > − 5 and divide both sides by −5. Dividing by −5 results in a false statement. To retain a true statement, the inequality must be reversed. The same problem occurs when multiplying by a negative number. This leads to the following new rule: when multiplying or dividing by a negative number, reverse the inequality. It is easy to forget to do this so take special care to watch for negative coefficients. In general, given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a positive nonzero real number, we have the following properties of inequalities Properties used to obtain equivalent inequalities and used as a means to solve them. : We use these properties to obtain an equivalent inequality Inequalities that share the same solution set. , one with the same solution set, where the variable is isolated. The process is similar to solving linear equations.   Example 3: Solve: − 2 x + 1 ≥ 21 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   − 10 ]   Example 4: Solve: − 7 ( 2 x + 1 ) < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4 7 ,   ∞ )   Example 5: Solve: 5 x − 3 ( 2 x − 1 ) ≥ 2 ( x − 3 ) . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ]   Try this! Solve: 3 − 5 ( x − 1 ) ≤ 28 . Answer: [ − 4 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution  || Compound Inequalities Following are some examples of compound linear inequalities: These compound inequalities Two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” are actually two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” For example, is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: Solve each inequality individually, and the intersection of the two solution sets solves the original compound inequality. While this method works, there is another method that usually requires fewer steps. Apply the properties of this section to all three parts of the compound inequality with the goal of isolating the variable in the middle of the statement to determine the bounds of the solution set.   Example 6: Solve: − 3 < 2 x + 5 < 17 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4, 6 )   Example 7: Solve: − 1 ≤ 1 2 x − 3 < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: [ 4, 8 )   It is important to note that when multiplying or dividing all three parts of a compound inequality by a negative number, you must reverse all of the inequalities in the statement. For example, The answer above can be written in an equivalent form, where smaller numbers lie to the left and the larger numbers lie to the right, as they appear on a number line. Using interval notation, write ( − 10 ,   5 ) .   Try this! Solve: − 8 ≤ 2 ( − 3 x + 5 ) < 34 . Answer: ( − 4 ,   3 ] Video Solution For compound inequalities with the word “or” you must work both inequalities separately and then consider the union of the solution sets. Values in this union solve either inequality.   Example 8: Solve: 3 x + 1 < 10   or   2 x − 1 ≥ 11 Solution: Solve each inequality and form the union by combining the solution sets. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ) ∪ [ 6 ,   ∞ )   Try this! Solve: 4 x − 1 < − 5   or   4 x − 1 > 5 . Answer: ( − ∞ , − 1 ) ∪ ( 3 2 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution  || Applications of Linear Inequalities Some of the key words and phrases that indicate inequalities are summarized below: Key Phrases Translation A number is at least 5. x ≥ 5 A number is 5 or more inclusive. A number is at most 3. x ≤ 3 A number is 3 or less inclusive. A number is strictly less than 4. x < 4 A number is less than 4, noninclusive. A number is greater than 7. x > 7 A number is more than 7, noninclusive. A number is in between 2 and 10. 2 < x < 10 A number is at least 5 and at most 15. 5 ≤ x ≤ 15 A number may range from 5 to 15. As with all applications, carefully read the problem several times and look for key words and phrases. Identify the unknowns and assign variables. Next, translate the wording into a mathematical inequality. Finally, use the properties you have learned to solve the inequality and express the solution graphically or in interval notation.   Example 9: Translate: Five less than twice a number is at most 25. Solution: First, choose a variable for the unknown number and identify the key words and phrases. Answer: 2 n − 5 ≤ 25 . The key phrase “is at most” indicates that the quantity has a maximum value of 25 or smaller.   Example 10: The temperature in the desert can range from 10°C to 45°C in one 24-hour period. Find the equivalent range in degrees Fahrenheit, F, given that C = 5 9 ( F − 32 ) . Solution: Set up a compound inequality where the temperature in Celsius is inclusively between 10°C and 45°C. Then substitute the expression equivalent to the Celsius temperature in the inequality and solve for F. Answer: The equivalent Fahrenheit range is from 50°F to 113°F.   Example 11: In the first four events of a meet, a gymnast scores 7.5, 8.2, 8.5, and 9.0. What must she score on the fifth event to average at least 8.5? Solution: The average must be at least 8.5; this means that the average must be greater than or equal to 8.5. Answer: She must score at least 9.3 on the fifth event.  || 