Geometry Problems When working with geometry problems, it is helpful to draw a picture. Below are some area formulas that you are expected to know. (Recall that π ≈ 3.14 .) Area of a rectangle A = l w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. : A = l ⋅ w Area of a square A = s 2 , where s represents the length of each side. : A = s 2 Area of a triangle A = 1 2 b h , where b represents the length of the base and h represents the height. : A = 1 2 b h Area of a circle A = π r 2 , where r represents the radius and the constant π ≈ 3.14 . : A = π r 2   Example 4: The floor of a rectangular room has a length that is 4 feet more than twice its width. If the total area of the floor is 240 square feet, then find the dimensions of the floor. Solution: Use the formula A = l ⋅ w and the fact that the area is 240 square feet to set up an algebraic equation. Solve by factoring. At this point we have two possibilities for the width of the rectangle. However, since a negative width is not defined, choose the positive solution, w = 10 . Back substitute to find the length. Answer: The width is 10 feet and the length is 24 feet.   It is important to include the correct units in the final presentation of the answer. In the previous example, it would not make much sense to say the width is 10. Make sure to indicate that the width is 10 feet.   Example 5: The height of a triangle is 3 inches less than twice the length of its base. If the total area of the triangle is 7 square inches, then find the lengths of the base and height. Solution: Use the formula A = 1 2 b h and the fact that the area is 7 square inches to set up an algebraic equation. To avoid fractional coefficients, multiply both sides by 2 and then rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form. Factor and then set each factor equal to zero. In this case, disregard the negative answer; the length of the base is 7/2 inches long. Use 2 b − 3 to determine the height of the triangle. Answer: The base measures 7/2 = 3½ inches and the height is 4 inches.   Try this! The base of a triangle is 5 units less than twice the height. If the area is 75 square units, then what is the length of the base and height? Answer: The height is 10 units and the base is 15 units. Video Solution Recall that a right triangle is a triangle where one of the angles measures 90°. The side opposite of the right angle is the longest side of the triangle and is called the hypotenuse. The Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . gives us a relationship between the legs and hypotenuse of any right triangle, where a and b are the lengths of the legs and c is the length of the hypotenuse: Given certain relationships, we use this theorem when determining the lengths of sides of right triangles.   Example 6: The hypotenuse of a right triangle is 10 inches. If the short leg is 2 inches less than the long leg, then find the lengths of the legs. Solution: Given that the hypotenuse measures 10 inches, substitute its value into the Pythagorean theorem and obtain a quadratic equation in terms of x. Multiply and rewrite the equation in standard form. Once it is in standard form, factor and set each variable factor equal to zero. Because lengths cannot be negative, disregard the negative answer. In this case, the long leg measures 8 inches. Use x − 2 to determine the length of the short leg. Answer: The short leg measures 6 inches and the long leg measures 8 inches.   Example 7: One leg of a right triangle measures 3 centimeters. The hypotenuse of the right triangle measures 3 centimeters less than twice the length of the unknown leg. Find the measure of all the sides of the triangle. Solution: To set up an algebraic equation, we use the Pythagorean theorem. Solve by factoring. Disregard 0. The length of the unknown leg is 4 centimeters. Use 2 x − 3 to determine the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: The sides of the triangle measure 3 centimeters, 4 centimeters, and 5 centimeters.   Try this! The hypotenuse of a right triangle measures 13 units. If one leg is 2 units more than twice that of the other, then find the length of each leg. Answer: The two legs measure 5 units and 12 units. Video Solution Geometry Problems When working with geometry problems, it is helpful to draw a picture. Below are some area formulas that you are expected to know. (Recall that π ≈ 3.14 .) Area of a rectangle A = l w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. : A = l ⋅ w Area of a square A = s 2 , where s represents the length of each side. : A = s 2 Area of a triangle A = 1 2 b h , where b represents the length of the base and h represents the height. : A = 1 2 b h Area of a circle A = π r 2 , where r represents the radius and the constant π ≈ 3.14 . : A = π r 2   Example 4: The floor of a rectangular room has a length that is 4 feet more than twice its width. If the total area of the floor is 240 square feet, then find the dimensions of the floor. Solution: Use the formula A = l ⋅ w and the fact that the area is 240 square feet to set up an algebraic equation. Solve by factoring. At this point we have two possibilities for the width of the rectangle. However, since a negative width is not defined, choose the positive solution, w = 10 . Back substitute to find the length. Answer: The width is 10 feet and the length is 24 feet.   It is important to include the correct units in the final presentation of the answer. In the previous example, it would not make much sense to say the width is 10. Make sure to indicate that the width is 10 feet.   Example 5: The height of a triangle is 3 inches less than twice the length of its base. If the total area of the triangle is 7 square inches, then find the lengths of the base and height. Solution: Use the formula A = 1 2 b h and the fact that the area is 7 square inches to set up an algebraic equation. To avoid fractional coefficients, multiply both sides by 2 and then rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form. Factor and then set each factor equal to zero. In this case, disregard the negative answer; the length of the base is 7/2 inches long. Use 2 b − 3 to determine the height of the triangle. Answer: The base measures 7/2 = 3½ inches and the height is 4 inches.   Try this! The base of a triangle is 5 units less than twice the height. If the area is 75 square units, then what is the length of the base and height? Answer: The height is 10 units and the base is 15 units. Video Solution Recall that a right triangle is a triangle where one of the angles measures 90°. The side opposite of the right angle is the longest side of the triangle and is called the hypotenuse. The Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . gives us a relationship between the legs and hypotenuse of any right triangle, where a and b are the lengths of the legs and c is the length of the hypotenuse: Given certain relationships, we use this theorem when determining the lengths of sides of right triangles.   Example 6: The hypotenuse of a right triangle is 10 inches. If the short leg is 2 inches less than the long leg, then find the lengths of the legs. Solution: Given that the hypotenuse measures 10 inches, substitute its value into the Pythagorean theorem and obtain a quadratic equation in terms of x. Multiply and rewrite the equation in standard form. Once it is in standard form, factor and set each variable factor equal to zero. Because lengths cannot be negative, disregard the negative answer. In this case, the long leg measures 8 inches. Use x − 2 to determine the length of the short leg. Answer: The short leg measures 6 inches and the long leg measures 8 inches.   Example 7: One leg of a right triangle measures 3 centimeters. The hypotenuse of the right triangle measures 3 centimeters less than twice the length of the unknown leg. Find the measure of all the sides of the triangle. Solution: To set up an algebraic equation, we use the Pythagorean theorem. Solve by factoring. Disregard 0. The length of the unknown leg is 4 centimeters. Use 2 x − 3 to determine the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: The sides of the triangle measure 3 centimeters, 4 centimeters, and 5 centimeters.   Try this! The hypotenuse of a right triangle measures 13 units. If one leg is 2 units more than twice that of the other, then find the length of each leg. Answer: The two legs measure 5 units and 12 units. Video Solution  || 