Distributive Property The properties of real numbers are important in our study of algebra because a variable is simply a letter that represents a real number. In particular, the distributive property Given any real numbers a, b, and c, a ( b + c ) = a b + a c or ( b + c ) a = b a + c a . states that given any real numbers a, b, and c, This property is applied when simplifying algebraic expressions. To demonstrate how it is used, we simplify 2 ( 5 − 3 ) in two ways, and observe the same correct result. Certainly, if the contents of the parentheses can be simplified, do that first. On the other hand, when the contents of parentheses cannot be simplified, multiply every term within the parentheses by the factor outside of the parentheses using the distributive property. Applying the distributive property allows you to multiply and remove the parentheses.   Example 1: Simplify: 5 ( 7 y + 2 ) . Solution: Multiply 5 times each term inside the parentheses. Answer: 35 y + 10   Example 2: Simplify: − 3 ( 2 x 2 + 5 x + 1 ) . Solution: Multiply −3 times each of the coefficients of the terms inside the parentheses. Answer: − 6 x 2 − 15 x − 3   Example 3: Simplify: 5 ( − 2 a + 5 b ) − 2 c . Solution: Apply the distributive property by multiplying only the terms grouped within the parentheses by 5. Answer: − 10 a + 25 b − 2 c   Because multiplication is commutative, we can also write the distributive property in the following manner: ( b + c ) a = b a + c a .   Example 4: Simplify: ( 3 x − 4 y + 1 ) ⋅ 3 . Solution: Multiply each term within the parentheses by 3. Answer: 9 x − 12 y + 3   Division in algebra is often indicated using the fraction bar rather than with the symbol (÷). And sometimes it is useful to rewrite expressions involving division as products: Rewriting algebraic expressions as products allows us to apply the distributive property.   Example 5: Divide: 25 x 2 − 5 x + 10 5 . Solution: First, treat this as 1 5 times the expression in the numerator and then distribute. Alternate Solution: Think of 5 as a common denominator and divide each of the terms in the numerator by 5: Answer: 5 x 2 − x + 2   We will discuss the division of algebraic expressions in more detail as we progress through the course.   Try this! Simplify: 1 3 ( − 9 x + 27 y − 3 ) . Answer: − 3 x + 9 y − 1 Video Solution Distributive Property The properties of real numbers are important in our study of algebra because a variable is simply a letter that represents a real number. In particular, the distributive property Given any real numbers a, b, and c, a ( b + c ) = a b + a c or ( b + c ) a = b a + c a . states that given any real numbers a, b, and c, This property is applied when simplifying algebraic expressions. To demonstrate how it is used, we simplify 2 ( 5 − 3 ) in two ways, and observe the same correct result. Certainly, if the contents of the parentheses can be simplified, do that first. On the other hand, when the contents of parentheses cannot be simplified, multiply every term within the parentheses by the factor outside of the parentheses using the distributive property. Applying the distributive property allows you to multiply and remove the parentheses.   Example 1: Simplify: 5 ( 7 y + 2 ) . Solution: Multiply 5 times each term inside the parentheses. Answer: 35 y + 10   Example 2: Simplify: − 3 ( 2 x 2 + 5 x + 1 ) . Solution: Multiply −3 times each of the coefficients of the terms inside the parentheses. Answer: − 6 x 2 − 15 x − 3   Example 3: Simplify: 5 ( − 2 a + 5 b ) − 2 c . Solution: Apply the distributive property by multiplying only the terms grouped within the parentheses by 5. Answer: − 10 a + 25 b − 2 c   Because multiplication is commutative, we can also write the distributive property in the following manner: ( b + c ) a = b a + c a .   Example 4: Simplify: ( 3 x − 4 y + 1 ) ⋅ 3 . Solution: Multiply each term within the parentheses by 3. Answer: 9 x − 12 y + 3   Division in algebra is often indicated using the fraction bar rather than with the symbol (÷). And sometimes it is useful to rewrite expressions involving division as products: Rewriting algebraic expressions as products allows us to apply the distributive property.   Example 5: Divide: 25 x 2 − 5 x + 10 5 . Solution: First, treat this as 1 5 times the expression in the numerator and then distribute. Alternate Solution: Think of 5 as a common denominator and divide each of the terms in the numerator by 5: Answer: 5 x 2 − x + 2   We will discuss the division of algebraic expressions in more detail as we progress through the course.   Try this! Simplify: 1 3 ( − 9 x + 27 y − 3 ) . Answer: − 3 x + 9 y − 1 Video Solution  || 