Definition of Percent A percent A representation of a number as part of 100: N % = N 100 . is a representation of a number as a part of one hundred. The word “percent” can be written “per cent” which means “per 100” or “/100.” We use the symbol ( % ) to denote a percentage: For example, Percents are an important part of our everyday life and show up often in our study of algebra. Percents can be visualized using a pie chart A circular graph divided into sectors whose area is proportional to the relative size of the ratio of the part to the total. (or circle graph), where each sector gives a visual representation of a percentage of the whole. For example, the following pie chart shows the percentage of students in certain age categories of all US community colleges. Source: American Association of Community Colleges. Each sector is proportional to the size of the part out of the whole. The sum of the percentages presented in a pie chart must be 100%. To work with percentages effectively, you have to know how to convert percents to decimals or fractions and back again. Definition of Percent A percent A representation of a number as part of 100: N % = N 100 . is a representation of a number as a part of one hundred. The word “percent” can be written “per cent” which means “per 100” or “/100.” We use the symbol ( % ) to denote a percentage: For example, Percents are an important part of our everyday life and show up often in our study of algebra. Percents can be visualized using a pie chart A circular graph divided into sectors whose area is proportional to the relative size of the ratio of the part to the total. (or circle graph), where each sector gives a visual representation of a percentage of the whole. For example, the following pie chart shows the percentage of students in certain age categories of all US community colleges. Source: American Association of Community Colleges. Each sector is proportional to the size of the part out of the whole. The sum of the percentages presented in a pie chart must be 100%. To work with percentages effectively, you have to know how to convert percents to decimals or fractions and back again.  || 