 || Preliminary Definitions In algebra, letters are used to represent numbers. The letters used to represent these numbers are called variables Letters or symbols used in algebra to represent numbers. . Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations form algebraic expressions Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations used to generalize specific arithmetic operations. , or just expressions. The following are some examples of expressions with one variable, x: Terms Components of an algebraic expression separated by addition operators. in an algebraic expression are separated by addition operators, and factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. are separated by multiplication operators. The numerical factor of a term is called the coefficient The numerical factor of a term. . For example, the algebraic expression 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 can be thought of as 3 x 2 + 2 x + ( − 1 ) and has three terms. The first term, 3 x 2 , represents the quantity 3 ⋅ x ⋅ x , where 3 is the coefficient and x is the variable. All of the variable factors, with their exponents, form the variable part of a term All the variable factors with their exponents. . If a term is written without a variable factor, then it is called a constant term A term written without a variable factor. . Consider the components of 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 , Terms Coefficient Variable Part 3 x 2 3 x 2 2 x 2 x −1 −1 The third term in this expression, −1, is a constant term because it is written without a variable factor. While a variable represents an unknown quantity and may change, the constant term does not change.   Example 1: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: 5 x 2 − 4 x y − y 2 . Solution: Think of the third term in this example, − y 2 , as − 1 y 2 . Terms Coefficient Variable Part 5 x 2 5 x 2 − 4 x y −4 x y − y 2 −1 y 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 4 ,   − 1 ,   5 } ; variable parts: { x 2 ,   x y ,   y 2 }   Some terms, such as y 2 and − y 2 , appear not to have a coefficient. The multiplicative identity property states that 1 times anything is itself and occurs so often that it is customary to omit this factor and write Therefore, the coefficient of y 2 is actually 1 and the coefficient of − y 2 is −1. In addition, you will encounter terms that have variable parts composed of algebraic expressions as factors.   Example 2: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: − 3 ( x + y ) 3 + ( x + y ) 2 . Solution: This is an expression with two terms: Terms Coefficient Variable Part − 3 ( x + y ) 3 −3 ( x + y ) 3 ( x + y ) 2 1 ( x + y ) 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 3 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { ( x + y ) 3 ,   ( x + y ) 2 }   In our study of algebra, we will encounter a wide variety of algebraic expressions. Typically, expressions use the two most common variables, x and y. However, expressions may use any letter (or symbol) for a variable, even Greek letters, such as alpha ( α ) and beta ( β ). Some letters and symbols are reserved for constants, such as π ≈ 3.14159 and e ≈ 2.71828 . Since there is only a limited number of letters, you will also use subscripts, x 1 ,   x 2 ,   x 3 ,   x 4 , … , to indicate different variables.   Try this! List all coefficients and variable parts of the expression: − 5 a 2 + a b − 2 b 2 − 3 . Answer: Coefficients: { − 5 ,   − 3 ,   − 2 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { a 2 ,   a b ,   b 2 } Video Solution  || Evaluating Algebraic Expressions Think of an algebraic expression as a generalization of particular arithmetic operations. Performing these operations after substituting given values for variables is called evaluating The process of performing the operations of an algebraic expression for given values of the variables. . In algebra, a variable represents an unknown value. However, if the problem specifically assigns a value to a variable, then you can replace that letter with the given number and evaluate using the order of operations.   Example 3: Evaluate: a. 2 x + 3 , where x = − 4 b. 2 3 y , where y = 9 Solution: To avoid common errors, it is a best practice to first replace all variables with parentheses and then replace, or substitute The act of replacing a variable with an equivalent quantity. , the given value. a. b. Answers: a. −5; b. 6   If parentheses are not used in part (a) of the previous example, the result is quite different: 2 x + 3 = 2 − 4 + 4 . Without parentheses, the first operation is subtraction, which leads to an incorrect result.   Example 4: Evaluate: − 2 x − y , where x = − 5 and y = − 3 . Solution: After substituting the given values for the variables, simplify using the order of operations. Answer: 13   Example 5: Evaluate: 9 a 2 − b 2 , where a = 2 and b = − 5 . Solution: Answer: 11   Example 6: Evaluate: − x 2 − 4 x + 1 , where x = − 1 2 . Solution: Answer: 11/4   The answer to the previous example is 11 4 , which can be written as a mixed number 2 3 4 . In algebra, improper fractions are generally preferred. Unless the original problem has mixed numbers in it, or it is an answer to a real-world application, solutions will be expressed as reduced improper fractions.   Example 7: Evaluate: ( 3 x − 2 ) ( x − 7 ) , where x = 2 3 . Solution: The order of operations requires us to perform the operations within the parentheses first. Answer: 0   Example 8: Evaluate: b 2 − 4 a c , where a = − 1 , b = − 3 , and c = 2 . Solution: The expression b 2 − 4 a c is called the discriminant The algebraic expression b 2 − 4 a c . ; it is an essential quantity seen later in our study of algebra. Answer: 17   Try this! Evaluate a 3 − b 3 , where a = 2 and b = − 3 . Answer: 35 Video Solution  || Using Formulas The main difference between algebra and arithmetic is the organized use of variables. This idea leads to reusable formulas A reusable mathematical model using algebraic expressions to describe a common application. , which are mathematical models using algebraic expressions to describe common applications. For example, the area of a rectangle is modeled by the formula: In this equation, variables are used to describe the relationship between the area of a rectangle and the length of its sides. The area is the product of the length and width of the rectangle. If the length of a rectangle measures 3 meters and the width measures 2 meters, then the area can be calculated using the formula as follows:   Example 9: The cost of a daily truck rental is $48.00 plus an additional $0.45 for every mile driven. This cost in dollars can be modeled by the formula c o s t = 0.45 x + 48 , where x represents the number of miles driven in one day. Use this formula to calculate the cost to rent the truck for a day and drive it 120 miles. Solution: Use the formula to find the cost when the number of miles x = 120 . Substitute 120 into the given formula for x and then simplify. Answer: The rental costs $102.   Uniform motion Described by the formula D = r t , where the distance D is given as the product of the average rate r and the time t traveled at that rate. is modeled by the formula D = r t , which expresses distance D in terms of the average rate r, or speed, and the time t traveled at that rate. This formula, D = r t , is used often and is read “distance equals rate times time.”   Example 10: Jim’s road trip takes 2 1 2 hours at an average speed of 66 miles per hour. How far does he travel? Solution: Substitute the appropriate values into the formula and then simplify. Answer: Jim travels 165 miles.   The volume in cubic units of a rectangular box is given by the formula V = l w h , where l represents the length, w represents the width, and h represents the height.   Example 11: A wooden box is 1 foot in length, 5 inches wide, and 6 inches high. Find the volume of the box in cubic inches. Solution: Take care to ensure that all the units are consistent and use 12 inches for the length instead of 1 foot. Answer: The volume of the box is 360 cubic inches.   Simple interest Modeled by the formula I = p r t , where p represents the principal amount invested at an annual interest rate r for t years. I is given by the formula I = p r t , where p represents the principal amount invested at an annual interest rate r for t years.   Example 12: Calculate the simple interest earned on a 2-year investment of $1,250 at an annual interest rate of 3 3 4 % . Solution: Convert 3 3 4 % to a decimal number before using it in the formula. Use this value for r and the fact that p = $1,250 and t = 2 years to calculate the simple interest. Answer: The simple interest earned is $93.75.   Try this! The perimeter of a rectangle is given by the formula P = 2 l + 2 w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. Use the formula to calculate the perimeter of a rectangle with a length of 5 feet and a width of 2 1 2 feet. Answer: 15 feet Video Solution  || 