Fractions of Whole Numbers The Nature of the Positive Fractions We can extend our collection of numbers, which now contains only the whole numbers, by including fractions of whole numbers. We can determine the nature of these fractions using the number line. If we place a pencil at some whole number and proceed to travel to the right to the next whole number, we see that our journey can be broken into different types of equal parts as shown in the following examples. 1 part. 2 equal parts. 3 equal parts. 4 equal parts. The Latin Word Fractio Notice that the number of parts, 2, 3, and 4, that we are breaking the original quantity into is always a nonzero whole number. The idea of breaking up a whole quantity gives us the word fraction. The word fraction comes from the Latin word "fractio" which means a breaking, or fracture. Suppose we break up the interval from some whole number to the next whole number into five equal parts. After starting to move from one whole number to the next, we decide to stop after covering only two parts. We have covered 2 parts of 5 equal parts. This situation is described by writing . Positive Fraction A number such as is called a positive fraction, or more simply, a fraction. Fractions of Whole Numbers The Nature of the Positive Fractions We can extend our collection of numbers, which now contains only the whole numbers, by including fractions of whole numbers. We can determine the nature of these fractions using the number line. If we place a pencil at some whole number and proceed to travel to the right to the next whole number, we see that our journey can be broken into different types of equal parts as shown in the following examples. 1 part. 2 equal parts. 3 equal parts. 4 equal parts. The Latin Word Fractio Notice that the number of parts, 2, 3, and 4, that we are breaking the original quantity into is always a nonzero whole number. The idea of breaking up a whole quantity gives us the word fraction. The word fraction comes from the Latin word "fractio" which means a breaking, or fracture. Suppose we break up the interval from some whole number to the next whole number into five equal parts. After starting to move from one whole number to the next, we decide to stop after covering only two parts. We have covered 2 parts of 5 equal parts. This situation is described by writing . Positive Fraction A number such as is called a positive fraction, or more simply, a fraction.  || 