 ||  || Preliminary Definitions In algebra, letters are used to represent numbers. The letters used to represent these numbers are called variables Letters or symbols used in algebra to represent numbers. . Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations form algebraic expressions Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations used to generalize specific arithmetic operations. , or just expressions. The following are some examples of expressions with one variable, x: Terms Components of an algebraic expression separated by addition operators. in an algebraic expression are separated by addition operators, and factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. are separated by multiplication operators. The numerical factor of a term is called the coefficient The numerical factor of a term. . For example, the algebraic expression 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 can be thought of as 3 x 2 + 2 x + ( − 1 ) and has three terms. The first term, 3 x 2 , represents the quantity 3 ⋅ x ⋅ x , where 3 is the coefficient and x is the variable. All of the variable factors, with their exponents, form the variable part of a term All the variable factors with their exponents. . If a term is written without a variable factor, then it is called a constant term A term written without a variable factor. . Consider the components of 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 , Terms Coefficient Variable Part 3 x 2 3 x 2 2 x 2 x −1 −1 The third term in this expression, −1, is a constant term because it is written without a variable factor. While a variable represents an unknown quantity and may change, the constant term does not change.   Example 1: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: 5 x 2 − 4 x y − y 2 . Solution: Think of the third term in this example, − y 2 , as − 1 y 2 . Terms Coefficient Variable Part 5 x 2 5 x 2 − 4 x y −4 x y − y 2 −1 y 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 4 ,   − 1 ,   5 } ; variable parts: { x 2 ,   x y ,   y 2 }   Some terms, such as y 2 and − y 2 , appear not to have a coefficient. The multiplicative identity property states that 1 times anything is itself and occurs so often that it is customary to omit this factor and write Therefore, the coefficient of y 2 is actually 1 and the coefficient of − y 2 is −1. In addition, you will encounter terms that have variable parts composed of algebraic expressions as factors.   Example 2: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: − 3 ( x + y ) 3 + ( x + y ) 2 . Solution: This is an expression with two terms: Terms Coefficient Variable Part − 3 ( x + y ) 3 −3 ( x + y ) 3 ( x + y ) 2 1 ( x + y ) 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 3 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { ( x + y ) 3 ,   ( x + y ) 2 }   In our study of algebra, we will encounter a wide variety of algebraic expressions. Typically, expressions use the two most common variables, x and y. However, expressions may use any letter (or symbol) for a variable, even Greek letters, such as alpha ( α ) and beta ( β ). Some letters and symbols are reserved for constants, such as π ≈ 3.14159 and e ≈ 2.71828 . Since there is only a limited number of letters, you will also use subscripts, x 1 ,   x 2 ,   x 3 ,   x 4 , … , to indicate different variables.   Try this! List all coefficients and variable parts of the expression: − 5 a 2 + a b − 2 b 2 − 3 . Answer: Coefficients: { − 5 ,   − 3 ,   − 2 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { a 2 ,   a b ,   b 2 } Video Solution  || Evaluating Algebraic Expressions Think of an algebraic expression as a generalization of particular arithmetic operations. Performing these operations after substituting given values for variables is called evaluating The process of performing the operations of an algebraic expression for given values of the variables. . In algebra, a variable represents an unknown value. However, if the problem specifically assigns a value to a variable, then you can replace that letter with the given number and evaluate using the order of operations.   Example 3: Evaluate: a. 2 x + 3 , where x = − 4 b. 2 3 y , where y = 9 Solution: To avoid common errors, it is a best practice to first replace all variables with parentheses and then replace, or substitute The act of replacing a variable with an equivalent quantity. , the given value. a. b. Answers: a. −5; b. 6   If parentheses are not used in part (a) of the previous example, the result is quite different: 2 x + 3 = 2 − 4 + 4 . Without parentheses, the first operation is subtraction, which leads to an incorrect result.   Example 4: Evaluate: − 2 x − y , where x = − 5 and y = − 3 . Solution: After substituting the given values for the variables, simplify using the order of operations. Answer: 13   Example 5: Evaluate: 9 a 2 − b 2 , where a = 2 and b = − 5 . Solution: Answer: 11   Example 6: Evaluate: − x 2 − 4 x + 1 , where x = − 1 2 . Solution: Answer: 11/4   The answer to the previous example is 11 4 , which can be written as a mixed number 2 3 4 . In algebra, improper fractions are generally preferred. Unless the original problem has mixed numbers in it, or it is an answer to a real-world application, solutions will be expressed as reduced improper fractions.   Example 7: Evaluate: ( 3 x − 2 ) ( x − 7 ) , where x = 2 3 . Solution: The order of operations requires us to perform the operations within the parentheses first. Answer: 0   Example 8: Evaluate: b 2 − 4 a c , where a = − 1 , b = − 3 , and c = 2 . Solution: The expression b 2 − 4 a c is called the discriminant The algebraic expression b 2 − 4 a c . ; it is an essential quantity seen later in our study of algebra. Answer: 17   Try this! Evaluate a 3 − b 3 , where a = 2 and b = − 3 . Answer: 35 Video Solution  || Using Formulas The main difference between algebra and arithmetic is the organized use of variables. This idea leads to reusable formulas A reusable mathematical model using algebraic expressions to describe a common application. , which are mathematical models using algebraic expressions to describe common applications. For example, the area of a rectangle is modeled by the formula: In this equation, variables are used to describe the relationship between the area of a rectangle and the length of its sides. The area is the product of the length and width of the rectangle. If the length of a rectangle measures 3 meters and the width measures 2 meters, then the area can be calculated using the formula as follows:   Example 9: The cost of a daily truck rental is $48.00 plus an additional $0.45 for every mile driven. This cost in dollars can be modeled by the formula c o s t = 0.45 x + 48 , where x represents the number of miles driven in one day. Use this formula to calculate the cost to rent the truck for a day and drive it 120 miles. Solution: Use the formula to find the cost when the number of miles x = 120 . Substitute 120 into the given formula for x and then simplify. Answer: The rental costs $102.   Uniform motion Described by the formula D = r t , where the distance D is given as the product of the average rate r and the time t traveled at that rate. is modeled by the formula D = r t , which expresses distance D in terms of the average rate r, or speed, and the time t traveled at that rate. This formula, D = r t , is used often and is read “distance equals rate times time.”   Example 10: Jim’s road trip takes 2 1 2 hours at an average speed of 66 miles per hour. How far does he travel? Solution: Substitute the appropriate values into the formula and then simplify. Answer: Jim travels 165 miles.   The volume in cubic units of a rectangular box is given by the formula V = l w h , where l represents the length, w represents the width, and h represents the height.   Example 11: A wooden box is 1 foot in length, 5 inches wide, and 6 inches high. Find the volume of the box in cubic inches. Solution: Take care to ensure that all the units are consistent and use 12 inches for the length instead of 1 foot. Answer: The volume of the box is 360 cubic inches.   Simple interest Modeled by the formula I = p r t , where p represents the principal amount invested at an annual interest rate r for t years. I is given by the formula I = p r t , where p represents the principal amount invested at an annual interest rate r for t years.   Example 12: Calculate the simple interest earned on a 2-year investment of $1,250 at an annual interest rate of 3 3 4 % . Solution: Convert 3 3 4 % to a decimal number before using it in the formula. Use this value for r and the fact that p = $1,250 and t = 2 years to calculate the simple interest. Answer: The simple interest earned is $93.75.   Try this! The perimeter of a rectangle is given by the formula P = 2 l + 2 w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. Use the formula to calculate the perimeter of a rectangle with a length of 5 feet and a width of 2 1 2 feet. Answer: 15 feet Video Solution  ||  || Distributive Property The properties of real numbers are important in our study of algebra because a variable is simply a letter that represents a real number. In particular, the distributive property Given any real numbers a, b, and c, a ( b + c ) = a b + a c or ( b + c ) a = b a + c a . states that given any real numbers a, b, and c, This property is applied when simplifying algebraic expressions. To demonstrate how it is used, we simplify 2 ( 5 − 3 ) in two ways, and observe the same correct result. Certainly, if the contents of the parentheses can be simplified, do that first. On the other hand, when the contents of parentheses cannot be simplified, multiply every term within the parentheses by the factor outside of the parentheses using the distributive property. Applying the distributive property allows you to multiply and remove the parentheses.   Example 1: Simplify: 5 ( 7 y + 2 ) . Solution: Multiply 5 times each term inside the parentheses. Answer: 35 y + 10   Example 2: Simplify: − 3 ( 2 x 2 + 5 x + 1 ) . Solution: Multiply −3 times each of the coefficients of the terms inside the parentheses. Answer: − 6 x 2 − 15 x − 3   Example 3: Simplify: 5 ( − 2 a + 5 b ) − 2 c . Solution: Apply the distributive property by multiplying only the terms grouped within the parentheses by 5. Answer: − 10 a + 25 b − 2 c   Because multiplication is commutative, we can also write the distributive property in the following manner: ( b + c ) a = b a + c a .   Example 4: Simplify: ( 3 x − 4 y + 1 ) ⋅ 3 . Solution: Multiply each term within the parentheses by 3. Answer: 9 x − 12 y + 3   Division in algebra is often indicated using the fraction bar rather than with the symbol (÷). And sometimes it is useful to rewrite expressions involving division as products: Rewriting algebraic expressions as products allows us to apply the distributive property.   Example 5: Divide: 25 x 2 − 5 x + 10 5 . Solution: First, treat this as 1 5 times the expression in the numerator and then distribute. Alternate Solution: Think of 5 as a common denominator and divide each of the terms in the numerator by 5: Answer: 5 x 2 − x + 2   We will discuss the division of algebraic expressions in more detail as we progress through the course.   Try this! Simplify: 1 3 ( − 9 x + 27 y − 3 ) . Answer: − 3 x + 9 y − 1 Video Solution  || Combining Like Terms Terms with the same variable parts are called like terms Constant terms or terms with the same variable parts. , or similar terms Used when referring to like terms. . Furthermore, constant terms are considered to be like terms. If an algebraic expression contains like terms, apply the distributive property as follows: In other words, if the variable parts of terms are exactly the same, then we may add or subtract the coefficients to obtain the coefficient of a single term with the same variable part. This process is called combining like terms Adding or subtracting like terms within an algebraic expression to obtain a single term with the same variable part. . For example, Notice that the variable factors and their exponents do not change. Combining like terms in this manner, so that the expression contains no other similar terms, is called simplifying the expression The process of combining like terms until the expression contains no more similar terms. . Use this idea to simplify algebraic expressions with multiple like terms.   Example 6: Simplify: 3 a + 2 b − 4 a + 9 b . Solution: Identify the like terms and combine them. Answer: − a + 11 b   In the previous example, rearranging the terms is typically performed mentally and is not shown in the presentation of the solution.   Example 7: Simplify: x 2 + 3 x + 2 + 4 x 2 − 5 x − 7 . Solution: Identify the like terms and add the corresponding coefficients. Answer: 5 x 2 − 2 x − 5   Example 8: Simplify: 5 x 2 y − 3 x y 2 + 4 x 2 y − 2 x y 2 . Solution: Remember to leave the variable factors and their exponents unchanged in the resulting combined term. Answer: 9 x 2 y − 5 x y 2   Example 9: Simplify: 1 2 a − 1 3 b + 3 4 a + b . Solution: To add the fractional coefficients, use equivalent coefficients with common denominators for each like term. Answer: 5 4 a + 2 3 b   Example 10: Simplify: − 12 x ( x + y ) 3 + 26 x ( x + y ) 3 . Solution: Consider the variable part to be x ( x + y ) 3 . Then this expression has two like terms with coefficients −12 and 26. Answer: 14 x ( x + y ) 3   Try this! Simplify: − 7 x + 8 y − 2 x − 3 y . Answer: − 9 x + 5 y Video Solution  || Distributive Property and Like Terms When simplifying, we will often have to combine like terms after we apply the distributive property. This step is consistent with the order of operations: multiplication before addition.   Example 11: Simplify: 2 ( 3 a − b ) − 7 ( − 2 a + 3 b ) . Solution: Distribute 2 and −7 and then combine like terms. Answer: 20 a − 23 b   In the example above, it is important to point out that you can remove the parentheses and collect like terms because you multiply the second quantity by −7, not just by 7. To correctly apply the distributive property, think of this as adding −7 times the given quantity, 2 ( 3 a − b ) + ( − 7 ) ( − 2 a + 3 b ) .   Try this! Simplify: − 5 ( 2 x − 3 ) + 7 x . Answer: − 3 x + 15 Video Solution Often we will encounter algebraic expressions like + ( a + b ) or − ( a + b ) . As we have seen, the coefficients are actually implied to be +1 and −1, respectively, and therefore, the distributive property applies using +1 or –1 as the factor. Multiply each term within the parentheses by these factors: This leads to two useful properties,   Example 12: Simplify: 5 x − ( − 2 x 2 + 3 x − 1 ) . Solution: Multiply each term within the parentheses by −1 and then combine like terms. Answer: 2 x 2 + 2 x + 1   When distributing a negative number, all of the signs within the parentheses will change. Note that 5 x in the example above is a separate term; hence the distributive property does not apply to it.   Example 13: Simplify: 5 − 2 ( x 2 − 4 x − 3 ) . Solution: The order of operations requires that we multiply before subtracting. Therefore, distribute −2 and then combine the constant terms. Subtracting 5 − 2 first leads to an incorrect result, as illustrated below: Answer: −2x2 + 8x + 11 Caution It is worth repeating that you must follow the order of operations: multiply and divide before adding and subtracting! Try this! Simplify: 8 − 3 ( − x 2 + 2 x − 7 ) . Answer: 3 x 2 − 6 x + 29 Video Solution   Example 14: Subtract 3 x − 2 from twice the quantity − 4 x 2 + 2 x − 8 . Solution: First, group each expression and treat each as a quantity: Next, identify the key words and translate them into a mathematical expression. Finally, simplify the resulting expression. Answer: − 8 x 2 + x − 14  ||  || Linear Equations with One Variable and Their Solutions Learning how to solve various algebraic equations is one of the main goals in algebra. This section introduces the basic techniques used for solving linear equations with one variable. An equation Statement indicating that two algebraic expressions are equal. is a statement indicating that two algebraic expressions are equal. A linear equation with one variable An equation that can be written in the general form a x + b = 0 , where a and b are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . , x, is an equation that can be written in the general form a x + b = 0 , where a and b are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . Here are some examples of linear equations, all of which are solved in this section: A solution Any value that can replace the variable in an equation to produce a true statement. to a linear equation is any value that can replace the variable to produce a true statement. The variable in the linear equation 2 x + 3 = 13 is x, and the solution is x = 5 . To verify this, substitute the value 5 for x and check that you obtain a true statement. Alternatively, when an equation is equal to a constant, we can verify a solution by substituting the value for the variable and show that the result is equal to that constant. In this sense, we say that solutions satisfy the equation After replacing the variable with a solution and simplifying, it produces a true statement. .   Example 1: Is x = 3 a solution to − 2 x − 3 = − 9 ? Answer: Yes, it is a solution, because x = 3 satisfies the equation.   Example 2: Is a = − 1 2 a solution to − 10 a + 5 = 25 ? Answer: No, it is not a solution, because a = − 1 2 does not satisfy the equation.   Recall that when evaluating expressions, it is a good practice to first replace all variables with parentheses, then substitute the appropriate values. By making use of parentheses we avoid some common errors when working the order of operations.   Example 3: Is y = − 3 a solution to 2 y − 5 = − y − 14 ? Solution: Answer: Yes, it is a solution, because y = − 3 produces a true statement.   Try this! Is x = − 3 a solution to − 2 x + 5 = − 1 ? Answer: No Video Solution  || Solving Basic Linear Equations We begin by defining equivalent equations Equations with the same solution set. as equations with the same solution set. Consider the following two linear equations and check to see if the solution is x = 7 . Here we can see that the two linear equations 3 x − 5 = 16 and 3 x = 21 are equivalent because they share the same solution set, namely, {7}. The goal is to develop a systematic process to find equivalent equations until the variable is isolated: To do this, use the properties of equality Properties that allow us to obtain equivalent equations by adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing both sides of an equation by nonzero real numbers. . Given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a real number, we have the following: Note Multiplying or dividing both sides of an equation by 0 is carefully avoided. Dividing by 0 is undefined and multiplying both sides by 0 results in the equation 0 = 0. To summarize, equality is retained and you obtain an equivalent equation if you add, subtract, multiply, or divide both sides of an equation by any nonzero real number. The technique for solving linear equations involves applying these properties in order to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. If the linear equation has a constant term, then we add to or subtract it from both sides of the equation to obtain an equivalent equation where the variable term is isolated.   Example 4: Solve: x + 3 = − 5 . Solution: To isolate the variable x on the left side, subtract 3 from both sides. Answer: The solution is x = − 8 . To check that this is true, substitute −8 into the original equation and simplify to see that it is satisfied: x + 3 = − 8 + 3 = − 5 ✓.   In the previous example, after subtracting 3 from both sides, you get x + 0 = − 8 . By the additive identity property of real numbers, this is equivalent to x = − 8 . This step is often left out in the presentation of the solution. If the variable term of the equation (including the coefficient) is isolated, then apply the multiplication or division property of equality to obtain an equivalent equation with the variable isolated. In other words, our goal is to obtain an equivalent equation with x or 1x isolated on one side of the equal sign.   Example 5: Solve: − 5 x = − 35 . Solution: The coefficient of x is –5, so divide both sides by −5. Answer: The solution is x = 7 . Perform the check mentally by substituting 7 for x in the original equation.   In the previous example, after dividing both sides by −5, x is left with a coefficient of 1, because − 5 − 5 = 1 . In fact, when we say “isolate the variable,” we mean to change the coefficient of the variable to 1, because 1 x = 7 is equivalent to x = 7 . This step is often left out of the instructional examples even though its omission is sometimes a source of confusion. Another important property is the symmetric property Allows you to solve for the variable on either side of the equal sign, because 5 = x is equivalent to x = 5 . : for any algebraic expressions A and B, The equation 2 = x is equivalent to x = 2 . It does not matter on which side we choose to isolate the variable.   Example 6: Solve: 2 = 5 + x . Solution: Isolate the variable x by subtracting 5 from both sides of the equation. Answer: The solution is −3, and checking the solution shows that 2 = 5 − 3.   Try this! Solve: 6 = x − 4 . Answer: x = 10 Video Solution  || Isolating the Variable in Two Steps A linear equation of the form a x + b = c takes two steps to solve. First, use the appropriate equality property of addition or subtraction to isolate the variable term. Next, isolate the variable using the equality property of multiplication or division. Checking solutions in the following examples is left to the reader.   Example 7: Solve: 2 x − 5 = 15 . Solution: Answer: The solution is 10.   Example 8: Solve: − 3 x − 2 = 9 . Solution: Answer: The solution is − 11 3 .   Example 9: Solve: 6 − 5 y = − 14 . Solution: When no sign precedes the term, it is understood to be positive. In other words, think of this as + 6 − 5 y = − 14 . Begin by subtracting 6 from both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is 4.   Example 10: Solve: 3 x + 1 2 = 2 3 . Solution: Answer: The solution is 1 18 .   Example 11: Solve: 3 − y = 1 . Solution: Recall that − y is equivalent to − 1 y ; divide both sides of the equation by −1. Alternatively, multiply both sides of − y = − 2 by −1 and achieve the same result: Answer: The solution is 2.   In summary, to retain equivalent equations, we must perform the same operation on both sides of the equation. First, apply the addition or subtraction property of equality to isolate the variable term and then apply the multiplication or division property of equality to isolate the variable on one side of the equation.   Try this! Solve: − 7 x + 6 = 27 . Answer: x = − 3 Video Solution  || Multiplying by the Reciprocal To solve an equation like 3 4 x = 1 , we can isolate the variable by dividing both sides by the coefficient. For example, On the left side of the equal sign, the fraction cancels. On the right side, we have a complex fraction and multiply by the reciprocal of the coefficient. You can save a step by recognizing this and start by multiplying both sides of the equation by the reciprocal of the coefficient. Recall that the product of reciprocals is 1, in this case , leaving the variable isolated.   Example 12: Solve: . Solution: Isolate the variable term using the addition property of equality and then multiply both sides of the equation by the reciprocal of the coefficient . Answer: The solution is −6.   Example 13: Solve: . Solution: The reciprocal of is because . Therefore, to isolate the variable x, multiply both sides by . Answer: The solution is −25.   Try this! Solve: . Answer: Video Solution  ||  || Combining Like Terms and Simplifying Linear equations typically are not given in standard form, so solving them requires additional steps. These additional steps include simplifying expressions on each side of the equal sign using the order of operations. Same-Side Like Terms We will often encounter linear equations where the expressions on each side of the equal sign can be simplified. Typically, this involves combining same-side like terms Like terms of an equation on the same side of the equal sign. . If this is the case, then it is best to simplify each side first before solving.   Example 1: Solve: − 4 a + 2 − a = 3 − 2 . Solution: First, combine the like terms on each side of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is 1 5 . Opposite-Side Like Terms Given a linear equation in the form a x + b = c x + d , we begin by combining like terms on opposite sides of the equal sign. To combine opposite-side like terms Like terms of an equation on opposite sides of the equal sign. , use the addition or subtraction property of equality to effectively “move terms” from one side to the other so that they can be combined.   Example 2: Solve: − 2 y − 3 = 5 y + 11 . Solution: To “move” the term 5 y to the left side, subtract it on both sides. From here, solve using the techniques developed previously. Always check to see that the solution is correct by substituting the solution back into the original equation and simplifying to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is −2. General Guidelines for Solving Linear Equations When solving linear equations, the goal is to determine what value, if any, will produce a true statement when substituted in the original equation. Do this by isolating the variable using the following steps: Step 1: Simplify both sides of the equation using the order of operations and combine all same-side like terms. Step 2: Use the appropriate properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms with the variable term on one side of the equation and the constant term on the other. Step 3: Divide or multiply as needed to isolate the variable. Step 4: Check to see if the answer solves the original equation.   Example 3: Solve: − 1 2 ( 10 y − 2 ) + 3 = 14 . Solution: Simplify the linear expression on the left side before solving. To check, Answer: The solution is −2.   Example 4: Solve: 5 ( 3 x + 2 ) − 2 = − 2 ( 1 − 7 x ) . Solution: First, simplify the expressions on both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is −10. The check is left as an exercise.   Try this! Solve: 6 − 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) = 4 x − 7 . Answer: x = 1 Video Solution  || Opposite-Side Like Terms Given a linear equation in the form a x + b = c x + d , we begin by combining like terms on opposite sides of the equal sign. To combine opposite-side like terms Like terms of an equation on opposite sides of the equal sign. , use the addition or subtraction property of equality to effectively “move terms” from one side to the other so that they can be combined.   Example 2: Solve: − 2 y − 3 = 5 y + 11 . Solution: To “move” the term 5 y to the left side, subtract it on both sides. From here, solve using the techniques developed previously. Always check to see that the solution is correct by substituting the solution back into the original equation and simplifying to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is −2.  || General Guidelines for Solving Linear Equations When solving linear equations, the goal is to determine what value, if any, will produce a true statement when substituted in the original equation. Do this by isolating the variable using the following steps: Step 1: Simplify both sides of the equation using the order of operations and combine all same-side like terms. Step 2: Use the appropriate properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms with the variable term on one side of the equation and the constant term on the other. Step 3: Divide or multiply as needed to isolate the variable. Step 4: Check to see if the answer solves the original equation.   Example 3: Solve: − 1 2 ( 10 y − 2 ) + 3 = 14 . Solution: Simplify the linear expression on the left side before solving. To check, Answer: The solution is −2.   Example 4: Solve: 5 ( 3 x + 2 ) − 2 = − 2 ( 1 − 7 x ) . Solution: First, simplify the expressions on both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is −10. The check is left as an exercise.   Try this! Solve: 6 − 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) = 4 x − 7 . Answer: x = 1 Video Solution  || Conditional Equations, Identities, and Contradictions There are three different types of equations. Up to this point, we have been solving conditional equations Equations that are true for particular values. . These are equations that are true for particular values. An identity An equation that is true for all possible values. is an equation that is true for all possible values of the variable. For example, has a solution set consisting of all real numbers, R. A contradiction An equation that is never true and has no solution. is an equation that is never true and thus has no solutions. For example, has no solution. We use the empty set, ∅ , to indicate that there are no solutions. If the end result of solving an equation is a true statement, like 0 = 0, then the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution. If solving results in a false statement, like 0 = 1, then the equation is a contradiction and there is no solution.   Example 5: Solve: 4 ( x + 5 ) + 6 = 2 ( 2 x + 3 ) . Solution: Answer: ∅ . Solving leads to a false statement; therefore, the equation is a contradiction and there is no solution.   Example 6: Solve: 3 ( 3 y + 5 ) + 5 = 10 ( y + 2 ) − y . Solution: Answer: R. Solving leads to a true statement; therefore, the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution.   If it is hard to believe that any real number is a solution to the equation in the previous example, then choose your favorite real number, and substitute it in the equation to see that it leads to a true statement. Choose x = 7 and check:   Try this! Solve: − 2 ( 3 x + 1 ) − ( x − 3 ) = − 7 x + 1 . Answer: R Video Solution  || Clearing Decimals and Fractions The coefficients of linear equations may be any real number, even decimals and fractions. When decimals and fractions are used, it is possible to use the multiplication property of equality to clear the coefficients in a single step. If given decimal coefficients, then multiply by an appropriate power of 10 to clear the decimals. If given fractional coefficients, then multiply both sides of the equation by the least common multiple of the denominators (LCD).   Example 7: Solve: 2.3 x + 2.8 = − 1.2 x + 9.8 . Solution: Notice that all decimal coefficients are expressed with digits in the tenths place; this suggests that we can clear the decimals by multiplying both sides by 10. Take care to distribute 10 to each term on both sides of the equation. Answer: The solution is 2.   Example 8: Solve: 1 3 x + 1 5 = 1 5 x − 1 . Solution: Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides by the least common multiple of the given denominators. In this case, the LCM ( 3, 5 ) = 15 . Answer: The solution is −9.   It is important to know that these techniques only work for equations. Do not try to clear fractions when simplifying expressions. As a reminder, Solve equations and simplify expressions. If you multiply an expression by 6, you will change the problem. However, if you multiply both sides of an equation by 6, you obtain an equivalent equation.  || Literal Equations (Linear Formulas) Algebra lets us solve whole classes of applications using literal equations A formula that summarizes whole classes of problems. , or formulas. Formulas often have more than one variable and describe, or model, a particular real-world problem. For example, the familiar formula D = r t describes the distance traveled in terms of the average rate and time; given any two of these quantities, we can determine the third. Using algebra, we can solve the equation for any one of the variables and derive two more formulas. If we divide both sides by r, we obtain the formula t = D r . Use this formula to find the time, given the distance and the rate. If we divide both sides by t, we obtain the formula r = D t . Use this formula to find the rate, given the distance traveled and the time it takes to travel that distance. Using the techniques learned up to this point, we now have three equivalent formulas relating distance, average rate, and time: When given a literal equation, it is often necessary to solve for one of the variables in terms of the others. Use the properties of equality to isolate the indicated variable.   Example 9: Solve for a:    P = 2 a + b . Solution: The goal is to isolate the variable a. Answer: a = P − b 2   Example 10: Solve for y:    z = x + y 2 . Solution: The goal is to isolate the variable y. Answer: y = 2 z − x   Try this! Solve for b:    2 a − 3 b = c . Answer: b = 2 a − c 3 Video Solution  ||  || Key Words, Translation, and Strategy Algebra simplifies the process of solving real-world problems. This is done by using letters to represent unknowns, restating problems in the form of equations, and offering systematic techniques for solving those equations. To solve problems using algebra, first translate the wording of the problem into mathematical statements that describe the relationships between the given information and the unknowns. Usually, this translation to mathematical statements is the difficult step in the process. The key to the translation is to carefully read the problem and identify certain key words and phrases. Key Words Translation Sum, increased by, more than, plus, added to, total + Difference, decreased by, subtracted from, less, minus − Product, multiplied by, of, times, twice * Quotient, divided by, ratio, per / Is, total, result = Here are some examples of translated key phrases. Key Phrases Translation The sum of a number and 7. x + 7 Seven more than a number. The difference of a number and 7. x − 7 Seven less than a number. Seven subtracted from a number. The product of 2 and a number. 2 x Twice a number. One-half of a number. 1 2 x The quotient of a number and 7. x / 7 When translating sentences into mathematical statements, be sure to read the sentence several times and identify the key words and phrases.   Example 1: Translate: Four less than twice some number is 16. Solution: First, choose a variable for the unknown number and identify the key words and phrases. Let x represent the unknown indicated by “some number.” Remember that subtraction is not commutative. For this reason, take care when setting up differences. In this example, 4 − 2 x = 16 is an incorrect translation. Answer: 2 x − 4 = 16   It is important to first identify the variable—let x represent…—and state in words what the unknown quantity is. This step not only makes your work more readable but also forces you to think about what you are looking for. Usually, if you know what you are asked to find, then the task of finding it is achievable.   Example 2: Translate: When 7 is subtracted from 3 times the sum of a number and 12, the result is 20. Solution: Let n represent the unknown number. Answer: 3 ( n + 12 ) − 7 = 20   To understand why parentheses are needed, study the structures of the following two sentences and their translations: “3 times the sum of a number and 12” 3 ( n + 12 ) “the sum of 3 times a number and 12” 3 n + 12 The key is to focus on the phrase “3 times the sum.” This prompts us to group the sum within parentheses and then multiply by 3. Once an application is translated into an algebraic equation, solve it using the techniques you have learned. Guidelines for Setting Up and Solving Word Problems Step 1: Read the problem several times, identify the key words and phrases, and organize the given information. Step 2: Identify the variables by assigning a letter or expression to the unknown quantities. Step 3: Translate and set up an algebraic equation that models the problem. Step 4: Solve the resulting algebraic equation. Step 5: Finally, answer the question in sentence form and make sure it makes sense (check it). For now, set up all of your equations using only one variable. Avoid two variables by looking for a relationship between the unknowns.  || Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We classify applications involving relationships between real numbers broadly as number problems. These problems can sometimes be solved using some creative arithmetic, guessing, and checking. Solving in this manner is not a good practice and should be avoided. Begin by working through the basic steps outlined in the general guidelines for solving word problems.   Example 3: A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller integer. The sum of the two integers is 18. Find the integers. Solution: Identify variables: Begin by assigning a variable to the smaller integer. Use the first sentence to identify the larger integer in terms of the variable x: “A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller.” Set up an equation: Add the expressions that represent the two integers, and set the resulting expression equal to 18 as indicated in the second sentence: “The sum of the two integers is 18.” Solve: Solve the equation to obtain the smaller integer x. Back substitute: Use the expression 3 x − 2 to find the larger integer—this is called back substituting The process of finding the answers to other unknowns after one has been found. . Answer the question: The two integers are 5 and 13. Check: 5 + 13 = 18. The answer makes sense.   Example 4: The difference between two integers is 2. The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller. Find the integers. Solution: Use the relationship between the two integers in the second sentence, “The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller,” to identify the unknowns in terms of one variable. Since the difference is positive, subtract the smaller integer from the larger. Solve. Use 2x − 6 to find the larger integer. Answer: The two integers are 8 and 10. These integers clearly solve the problem.   It is worth mentioning again that you can often find solutions to simple problems by guessing and checking. This is so because the numbers are chosen to simplify the process of solving, so that the algebraic steps are not too tedious. You learn how to set up algebraic equations with easier problems, so that you can use these ideas to solve more difficult problems later.   Example 5: The sum of two consecutive even integers is 46. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive even integers.” Add the even integers and set them equal to 46. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next even integer. Answer: The consecutive even integers are 22 and 24.   It should be clear that consecutive even integers are separated by two units. However, it may not be so clear that odd integers are as well.   Example 6: The sum of two consecutive odd integers is 36. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive odd integers.” Add the two odd integers and set the expression equal to 36. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next odd integer. Answer: The consecutive odd integers are 17 and 19.   The algebraic setup for even and odd integer problems is the same. A common mistake is to use x and x + 3 when identifying the variables for consecutive odd integers. This is incorrect because adding 3 to an odd number yields an even number: for example, 5 + 3 = 8. An incorrect setup is very likely to lead to a decimal answer, which may be an indication that the problem was set up incorrectly.   Example 7: The sum of three consecutive integers is 24. Find the integers. Solution: Consecutive integers are separated by one unit. Add the integers and set the sum equal to 24. Solve. Back substitute to find the other two integers. Answer: The three consecutive integers are 7, 8 and 9, where 7 + 8 + 9 = 24.   Try this! The sum of three consecutive odd integers is 87. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 27, 29, and 31. Video Solution  || Geometry Problems (Perimeter) Recall that the perimeter The sum of the lengths of all the outside edges of a polygon. of a polygon is the sum of the lengths of all the outside edges. In addition, it is helpful to review the following perimeter formulas ( π ≈ 3.14159 ). Perimeter of a rectangle P = 2 l + 2 w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. : P = 2 l + 2 w Perimeter of a square P = 4 s , where s represents the length of a side. : P = 4 s Perimeter of a triangle P = a + b + c , where a, b, and c each represents the length of a different side. : P = a + b + c Perimeter of a circle ( circumference The perimeter of a circle given by C = 2 π r , where r represents the radius of the circle and π ≈ 3.14159 . ): C = 2 π r Keep in mind that you are looking for a relationship between the unknowns so that you can set up algebraic equations using only one variable. When working with geometry problems, it is often helpful to draw a picture.   Example 8: A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet. The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width. Find the dimensions of the rectangle. Solution: The sentence “The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width” gives the relationship between the two variables. The sentence “A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet” suggests an algebraic setup. Substitute 64 for the perimeter and the expression for the length into the appropriate formula as follows: Once you have set up an algebraic equation with one variable, solve for the width, w. Use 3w + 4 to find the length. Answer: The rectangle measures 7 feet by 25 feet. To check, add all of the sides:   Example 9: Two sides of a triangle are 5 and 7 inches longer than the third side. If the perimeter measures 21 inches, find the length of each side. Solution: The first sentence describes the relationships between the unknowns. Substitute these expressions into the appropriate formula and use 21 for the perimeter P. You now have an equation with one variable to solve. Back substitute. Answer: The three sides of the triangle measure 3 inches, 8 inches, and 10 inches. The check is left to the reader.   Try this! The length of a rectangle is 1 foot less than twice its width. If the perimeter is 46 feet, find the dimensions. Answer: Width: 8 feet; length: 15 feet Video Solution  || Problems Involving Money and Percents Whenever setting up an equation involving a percentage, we usually need to convert the percentage to a decimal or fraction. If the question asks for a percentage, then do not forget to convert your answer to a percent at the end. Also, when money is involved, be sure to round off to two decimal places.   Example 10: If a pair of shoes costs $52.50 including a 7 1 4 % tax, what is the original cost of the item before taxes are added? Solution: Begin by converting 7 1 4 % to a decimal. The amount of tax is this rate times the original cost of the item. The original cost of the item is what you are asked to find. Use this equation to solve for c, the original cost of the item. Answer: The cost of the item before taxes is $48.95. Check this by multiplying $48.95 by 0.0725 to obtain the tax and add it to this cost.   Example 11: Given a 5 1 8 % annual interest rate, how long will it take $1,200 to yield $307.50 in simple interest? Solution: Organize the data needed to use the simple interest formula I = p r t . Given interest for the time period: I = $ 307.50 Given principal: p = $ 1200 Given rate: r = 5 1 8 % = 5.125 % = 0.05125 Next, substitute all of the known quantities into the formula and then solve for the only unknown, t. Answer: It takes 5 years for $1,200 invested at 5 1 8 % to earn $307.50 in simple interest.   Example 12: Mary invested her total savings of $3,400 in two accounts. Her mutual fund account earned 8% last year and her CD earned 5%. If her total interest for the year was $245, how much was in each account? Solution: The relationship between the two unknowns is that they total $3,400. When a total is involved, a common technique used to avoid two variables is to represent the second unknown as the difference of the total and the first unknown. The total interest is the sum of the interest earned from each account. Interest earned in the mutual fund: I = P r t = x ⋅ 0.08 ⋅ 1 = 0.08 x Interest earned in the CD: I = P r t = ( 3,400 − x ) ⋅ 0.05 ⋅ 1 = 0.05 ( 3,400 − x ) This equation models the problem with one variable. Solve for x. Back substitute. Answer: Mary invested $2,500 at 8% in a mutual fund and $900 at 5% in a CD.   Example 13: Joe has a handful of dimes and quarters that values $5.30. He has one fewer than twice as many dimes than quarters. How many of each coin does he have? Solution: Begin by identifying the variables. To determine the total value of a number of coins, multiply the number of coins by the value of each coin. For example, 5 quarters have a value $0.25 ⋅ 5 = $1.25. Solve for the number of quarters, q. Back substitute into 2q − 1 to find the number of dimes. Answer: Joe has 12 quarters and 23 dimes. Check by multiplying $0.25 ⋅ 12 = $3.00 and $0.10 ⋅ 23 = $2.30. Then add to obtain the correct amount: $3.00 + $2.30 = $5.30.   Try this! A total amount of $5,900 is invested in two accounts. One account earns 3.5% interest and another earns 4.5%. If the interest for 1 year is $229.50, then how much is invested in each account? Answer: $3,600 is invested at 3.5% and $2,300 at 4.5%. Video Solution  || Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Uniform motion refers to movement at a speed, or rate, that does not change. We can determine the distance traveled by multiplying the average rate by the time traveled at that rate with the formula D = r ⋅ t . Applications involving uniform motion usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize the data in a chart and then set up an algebraic equation that models the problem.   Example 14: Two trains leave the station at the same time traveling in opposite directions. One travels at 70 miles per hour and the other at 60 miles per hour. How long does it take for the distance between them to reach 390 miles? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in on the following chart. The time for each train is equal. To avoid introducing two more variables, use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances traveled by each train. We can now completely fill in the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the distance column. The problem asks for the time it takes for the total distance to reach 390 miles. Solve for t. Answer: It takes 3 hours for the distance between the trains to reach 390 miles.   Example 15: A train traveling nonstop to its destination is able to make the trip at an average speed of 72 miles per hour. On the return trip, the train makes several stops and is only able to average 48 miles per hour. If the return trip takes 2 hours longer than the initial trip to the destination, then what is the travel time each way? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in the following chart: Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is again defined by the distance column. In this case, the distance to the destination and back is the same, and the equation is Solve for t. The return trip takes t + 2 = 4 + 2 = 6 hours. Answer: It takes 4 hours to arrive at the destination and 6 hours to return.   Try this! Mary departs for school on a bicycle at an average rate of 6 miles per hour. Her sister Kate, running late, leaves 15 minutes later and cycles at twice that speed. How long will it take Kate to catch up to Mary? Be careful! Pay attention to the units given in the problem. Answer: It takes 15 minutes for Kate to catch up. Video Solution  ||  || Definitions A ratio Relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. is a relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. Ratios are typically expressed using the following notation: All of the above are equivalent forms used to express a ratio. However, the most familiar way to express a ratio is in the form of a fraction. When writing ratios, it is important to pay attention to the units. If the units are the same, then the ratio can be written without them.   Example 1: Express the ratio 12 feet to 48 feet in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 1 to 4   If the units are different, then we must be sure to include them because the ratio represents a rate A ratio where the units for the numerator and the denominator are different. .   Example 2: Express the ratio 220 miles to 4 hours in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 55 miles to 1 hour (or 55 miles per hour)   Rates are useful when determining unit cost The price of each unit. , or the price of each unit. We use the unit cost to compare values when the quantities are not the same. To determine the unit cost, divide the cost by the number of units.   Example 3: A local supermarket offers a pack of 12 sodas for $3.48 on sale, and the local discount warehouse offers the soda in a 36-can case for $11.52. Which is the better value? Solution: Divide the cost by the number of cans to obtain the unit price. Supermarket Discount warehouse $ 3.48 12     cans = $ 0.29 / can $ 11.52 36     cans = $ 0.32 / can Answer: The supermarket sale price of $3.48 for a 12-pack is a better value at $0.29 per can.   A proportion A statement of the equality of two ratios. is a statement of equality of two ratios. This proportion is often read “a is to b as c is to d.” Here is an example of a simple proportion, If we clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the proportion by the product of the denominators, 8, then we obtain the following true statement: Given any nonzero real numbers a, b, c, and d that satisfy a proportion, multiply both sides by the product of the denominators to obtain the following: This shows that cross products are equal, and is commonly referred to as cross multiplication If a b = c d , then a d = b c . .  || Solving Proportions Cross multiply to solve proportions where terms are unknown.   Example 4: Solve: 5 8 = n 4 . Solution: Cross multiply and then solve for n. Answer: n = 5 2   Example 5: Solve: 15 x = 5 6 . Solution: Cross multiply then solve for x. Answer: x = 18   Example 6: Solve: n + 3 5 = 7 2 . Solution: When cross multiplying, be sure to group n + 3 . Apply the distributive property in the next step. Answer: n = 29 2   Try this! Solve: 5 3 = 3 n − 1 2 . Answer: n = 13 9 Video Solution  || Applications When setting up proportions, consistency with the units of each ratio is critical. Units for the numerators should be the same and units for the denominators should also be the same.   Example 7: It is claimed that 2 out of 3 dentists prefer a certain brand of toothpaste. If 600 dentists are surveyed, then how many will say they prefer that brand? Solution: First, identify the unknown and assign it a variable. Since you are looking for the number of dentists who prefer the brand name out of a total of 600 surveyed, construct the ratios with the number of dentists who prefer the brand in the numerator and the total number surveyed in the denominator. Cross multiply and solve for n, Answer: The claim suggests that 400 out of 600 dentists surveyed prefer the brand name.   Example 8: In Tulare County, 3 out of every 7 voters said yes to Proposition 40. If 42,000 people voted, how many said no to Proposition 40? Solution: The problem gives the ratio of voters who said yes, but it asks for the number who said no. If 3 out of 7 said yes, then we can assume 4 out of 7 said no. Set up the ratios with the number of voters who said no in the numerator and the total number of voters in the denominator. Cross multiply and solve for n. Answer: 24,000 voters out of 42,000 said no.   Example 9: The sum of two integers in the ratio of 4 to 5 is 27. Find the integers. Solution: The sum of two integers is 27; use this relationship to avoid two variables. The integers are given to be in the ratio of 4 to 5. Set up the following proportion: Use 27 − n to determine the other integer. Answer: The integers are 12 and 15.   Try this! A recipe calls for 5 tablespoons of sugar for every 8 cups of flour. How many tablespoons of sugar are required for 32 cups of flour? Answer: 20 tablespoons of sugar Video Solution  || Similar Triangles We will often encounter proportion problems in geometry and trigonometry. One application involves similar triangles Triangles with the same shape but not necessarily the same size. The measures of corresponding angles are equal and the corresponding sides are proportional. , which have the same shape, but not necessarily the same size. The measures of the corresponding angles of similar triangles are equal, and the measures of the corresponding sides are proportional. Given similar triangles ABC and RST, We may write A B C   ~   R S T and conclude that all of the corresponding angles are equal. The notation indicates that angle A corresponds to angle R and that the measures of these angles are equal: A = R. In addition, the measures of other pairs of corresponding angles are equal: B = S and C = T. Use uppercase letters for angles and a lowercase letter to denote the side opposite of the given angle. Denote the proportionality of the sides as follows:   Example 10: If triangle ABC is similar to RST, where a = 3 , b = 4 , c = 5 , and r = 9 , then find the remaining two sides. Solution: Draw a picture and identify the variables pictorially. Represent the remaining unknown sides by s and t. Set up proportions and solve for the missing sides. Answer: The two remaining sides measure 12 units and 15 units.   The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles is called the scale factor The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles. . In the previous example, the ratio of the two given sides a and r is Therefore, triangle ABC is similar to triangle RST with a scale factor of 1/3. This means that each leg of triangle ABC is 1/3 of the measure of the corresponding legs of triangle RST. Also, another interesting fact is that the perimeters of similar triangles are in the same proportion as their sides and share the same scale factor.   Example 11: If a triangle ABC has a perimeter of 12 units and is similar to RST with a scale factor of 1/3, then find the perimeter of triangle RST. Solution: Scale factor 1/3 implies that the perimeters are in proportion to this ratio. Set up a proportion as follows: Cross multiply and solve for x. Answer: The perimeter of triangle RST is 36 units.  ||  || Unbounded Intervals An algebraic inequality Expressions related with the symbols ≤ , <, ≥ , and >. , such as x ≥ 2 , is read “x is greater than or equal to 2.” This inequality has infinitely many solutions for x. Some of the solutions are 2, 3, 3.5, 5, 20, and 20.001. Since it is impossible to list all of the solutions, a system is needed that allows a clear communication of this infinite set. Two common ways of expressing solutions to an inequality are by graphing them on a number line Solutions to an algebraic inequality expressed by shading the solution on a number line. and using interval notation A textual system of expressing solutions to an algebraic inequality. . To express the solution graphically, draw a number line and shade in all the values that are solutions to the inequality. Interval notation is textual and uses specific notation as follows: Determine the interval notation after graphing the solution set on a number line. The numbers in interval notation should be written in the same order as they appear on the number line, with smaller numbers in the set appearing first. In this example, there is an inclusive inequality An inequality that includes the boundary point indicated by the “or equal” part of the symbols ≤ and ≥ and a closed dot on the number line. , which means that the lower-bound 2 is included in the solution. Denote this with a closed dot on the number line and a square bracket in interval notation. The symbol (∞) is read as infinity The symbol (∞) indicates the interval is unbounded to the right. and indicates that the set is unbounded to the right on a number line. Interval notation requires a parenthesis to enclose infinity. The square bracket indicates the boundary is included in the solution. The parentheses indicate the boundary is not included. Infinity is an upper bound to the real numbers, but is not itself a real number: it cannot be included in the solution set. Now compare the interval notation in the previous example to that of the strict, or noninclusive, inequality that follows: Strict inequalities Express ordering relationships using the symbol < for “less than” and > for “greater than.” imply that solutions may get very close to the boundary point, in this case 2, but not actually include it. Denote this idea with an open dot on the number line and a round parenthesis in interval notation.   Example 1: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3 . Solution: Use an open dot at 3 and shade all real numbers strictly less than 3. Use negative infinity The symbol (−∞) indicates the interval is unbounded to the left. (−∞) to indicate that the solution set is unbounded to the left on a number line. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   Example 2: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x ≤ 5 . Solution: Use a closed dot and shade all numbers less than and including 5. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   5 ]   It is important to see that 5 ≥ x is the same as x ≤ 5 . Both require values of x to be smaller than or equal to 5. To avoid confusion, it is good practice to rewrite all inequalities with the variable on the left. Also, when using text, use “inf” as a shortened form of infinity. For example, ( − ∞ ,   5 ] can be expressed textually as (−inf, 5]. A compound inequality Two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” is actually two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” Compound inequalities with the logical “or” require that either condition must be satisfied. Therefore, the solution set of this type of compound inequality consists of all the elements of the solution sets of each inequality. When we join these individual solution sets it is called the union The set formed by joining the individual solution sets indicated by the logical use of the word “or” and denoted with the symbol ∪ . , denoted ∪ . For example, the solutions to the compound inequality x < 3   o r   x ≥ 6 can be graphed as follows: Sometimes we encounter compound inequalities where the separate solution sets overlap. In the case where the compound inequality contains the word “or,” we combine all the elements of both sets to create one set containing all the elements of each.   Example 3: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x ≤ − 1   or   x < 3 . Solution: Combine all solutions of both inequalities. The solutions to each inequality are sketched above the number line as a means to determine the union, which is graphed on the number line below. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   Any real number less than 3 in the shaded region on the number line will satisfy at least one of the two given inequalities.   Example 4: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3   or   x ≥ − 1 . Solution: Both solution sets are graphed above the union, which is graphed below. Answer: Interval notation: R = (−∞, ∞)   When you combine both solution sets and form the union, you can see that all real numbers satisfy the original compound inequality. In summary, and  || Bounded Intervals An inequality such as reads “−1 one is less than or equal to x and x is less than three.” This is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: The logical “and” requires that both conditions must be true. Both inequalities are satisfied by all the elements in the intersection The set formed by the shared values of the individual solution sets that is indicated by the logical use of the word “and,” denoted with the symbol ∩ . , denoted ∩ , of the solution sets of each.   Example 5: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3   and   x ≥ − 1 . Solution: Determine the intersection, or overlap, of the two solution sets. The solutions to each inequality are sketched above the number line as a means to determine the intersection, which is graphed on the number line below. Here x = 3 is not a solution because it solves only one of the inequalities. Answer: Interval notation: [ − 1 ,   3 )   Alternatively, we may interpret − 1 ≤ x < 3 as all possible values for x between or bounded by −1 and 3 on a number line. For example, one such solution is x = 1 . Notice that 1 is between −1 and 3 on a number line, or that −1 < 1 < 3. Similarly, we can see that other possible solutions are −1, −0.99, 0, 0.0056, 1.8, and 2.99. Since there are infinitely many real numbers between −1 and 3, we must express the solution graphically and/or with interval notation, in this case [ − 1 ,   3 ) .   Example 6: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: − 3 2 < x < 2 . Solution: Shade all real numbers bounded by, or strictly between, − 3 2 = − 1 1 2 and 2. Answer: Interval notation: ( − 3 2 ,   2 )   Example 7: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: − 5 < x ≤ 15 . Solution: Shade all real numbers between −5 and 15, and indicate that the upper bound, 15, is included in the solution set by using a closed dot. Answer: Interval notation: ( − 5 ,   15 ]   In the previous two examples, we did not decompose the inequalities; instead we chose to think of all real numbers between the two given bounds. In summary,  || Set-Builder Notation In this text, we use interval notation. However, other resources that you are likely to encounter use an alternate method for describing sets called set-builder notation A system for describing sets using familiar mathematical notation. . We have used set notation to list the elements such as the integers The braces group the elements of the set and the ellipsis marks indicate that the integers continue forever. In this section, we wish to describe intervals of real numbers—for example, the real numbers greater than or equal to 2. Since the set is too large to list, set-builder notation allows us to describe it using familiar mathematical notation. An example of set-builder notation follows: Here x∈R describes the type of number, where the symbol (∈) is read “element of.” This implies that the variable x represents a real number. The vertical bar (|) is read “such that.” Finally, the statement x ≥ 2 is the condition that describes the set using mathematical notation. At this point in our study of algebra, it is assumed that all variables represent real numbers. For this reason, you can omit the “∈R” and write { x | x ≥ 2 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal to 2.” To describe compound inequalities such as x < 3   or   x ≥ 6 , write { x | x < 3   or   x ≥ 6 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is less than 3 or x is greater than or equal to 6.” Write bounded intervals, such as − 1 ≤ x < 3 , as { x | − 1 ≤ x < 3 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal to −1 and less than 3.”  ||  || Definition of a Linear Inequality A linear inequality A mathematical statement relating a linear expression as either less than or greater than another. is a mathematical statement that relates a linear expression as either less than or greater than another. The following are some examples of linear inequalities, all of which are solved in this section: A solution to a linear inequality A real number that produces a true statement when its value is substituted for the variable. is a real number that will produce a true statement when substituted for the variable. Linear inequalities have either infinitely many solutions or no solution. If there are infinitely many solutions, graph the solution set on a number line and/or express the solution using interval notation.   Example 1: Are x = − 2 and x = 4 solutions to 3 x + 7 < 16 ? Solution: Substitute the values for x, simplify, and check to see if we obtain a true statement. Answer: x = − 2 is a solution and x = 4 is not.  || Algebra of Linear Inequalities All but one of the techniques learned for solving linear equations apply to solving linear inequalities. You may add or subtract any real number to both sides of an inequality, and you may multiply or divide both sides by any positive real number to create equivalent inequalities. For example, Both subtracting 7 from each side and dividing each side by +5 results in an equivalent inequality that is true.   Example 2: Solve and graph the solution set: 3 x + 7 < 16 . Solution: It is helpful to take a minute and choose a few values in and out of the solution set, substitute them into the original inequality, and then verify the results. As indicated, you should expect x = 0 to solve the original inequality, but x = 5 should not. Checking in this manner gives a good indication that the inequality is solved correctly. This can be done mentally. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   When working with linear inequalities, a different rule applies when multiplying or dividing by a negative number. To illustrate the problem, consider the true statement 10 > − 5 and divide both sides by −5. Dividing by −5 results in a false statement. To retain a true statement, the inequality must be reversed. The same problem occurs when multiplying by a negative number. This leads to the following new rule: when multiplying or dividing by a negative number, reverse the inequality. It is easy to forget to do this so take special care to watch for negative coefficients. In general, given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a positive nonzero real number, we have the following properties of inequalities Properties used to obtain equivalent inequalities and used as a means to solve them. : We use these properties to obtain an equivalent inequality Inequalities that share the same solution set. , one with the same solution set, where the variable is isolated. The process is similar to solving linear equations.   Example 3: Solve: − 2 x + 1 ≥ 21 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   − 10 ]   Example 4: Solve: − 7 ( 2 x + 1 ) < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4 7 ,   ∞ )   Example 5: Solve: 5 x − 3 ( 2 x − 1 ) ≥ 2 ( x − 3 ) . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ]   Try this! Solve: 3 − 5 ( x − 1 ) ≤ 28 . Answer: [ − 4 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution  || Compound Inequalities Following are some examples of compound linear inequalities: These compound inequalities Two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” are actually two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” For example, is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: Solve each inequality individually, and the intersection of the two solution sets solves the original compound inequality. While this method works, there is another method that usually requires fewer steps. Apply the properties of this section to all three parts of the compound inequality with the goal of isolating the variable in the middle of the statement to determine the bounds of the solution set.   Example 6: Solve: − 3 < 2 x + 5 < 17 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4, 6 )   Example 7: Solve: − 1 ≤ 1 2 x − 3 < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: [ 4, 8 )   It is important to note that when multiplying or dividing all three parts of a compound inequality by a negative number, you must reverse all of the inequalities in the statement. For example, The answer above can be written in an equivalent form, where smaller numbers lie to the left and the larger numbers lie to the right, as they appear on a number line. Using interval notation, write ( − 10 ,   5 ) .   Try this! Solve: − 8 ≤ 2 ( − 3 x + 5 ) < 34 . Answer: ( − 4 ,   3 ] Video Solution For compound inequalities with the word “or” you must work both inequalities separately and then consider the union of the solution sets. Values in this union solve either inequality.   Example 8: Solve: 3 x + 1 < 10   or   2 x − 1 ≥ 11 Solution: Solve each inequality and form the union by combining the solution sets. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ) ∪ [ 6 ,   ∞ )   Try this! Solve: 4 x − 1 < − 5   or   4 x − 1 > 5 . Answer: ( − ∞ , − 1 ) ∪ ( 3 2 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution  || Applications of Linear Inequalities Some of the key words and phrases that indicate inequalities are summarized below: Key Phrases Translation A number is at least 5. x ≥ 5 A number is 5 or more inclusive. A number is at most 3. x ≤ 3 A number is 3 or less inclusive. A number is strictly less than 4. x < 4 A number is less than 4, noninclusive. A number is greater than 7. x > 7 A number is more than 7, noninclusive. A number is in between 2 and 10. 2 < x < 10 A number is at least 5 and at most 15. 5 ≤ x ≤ 15 A number may range from 5 to 15. As with all applications, carefully read the problem several times and look for key words and phrases. Identify the unknowns and assign variables. Next, translate the wording into a mathematical inequality. Finally, use the properties you have learned to solve the inequality and express the solution graphically or in interval notation.   Example 9: Translate: Five less than twice a number is at most 25. Solution: First, choose a variable for the unknown number and identify the key words and phrases. Answer: 2 n − 5 ≤ 25 . The key phrase “is at most” indicates that the quantity has a maximum value of 25 or smaller.   Example 10: The temperature in the desert can range from 10°C to 45°C in one 24-hour period. Find the equivalent range in degrees Fahrenheit, F, given that C = 5 9 ( F − 32 ) . Solution: Set up a compound inequality where the temperature in Celsius is inclusively between 10°C and 45°C. Then substitute the expression equivalent to the Celsius temperature in the inequality and solve for F. Answer: The equivalent Fahrenheit range is from 50°F to 113°F.   Example 11: In the first four events of a meet, a gymnast scores 7.5, 8.2, 8.5, and 9.0. What must she score on the fifth event to average at least 8.5? Solution: The average must be at least 8.5; this means that the average must be greater than or equal to 8.5. Answer: She must score at least 9.3 on the fifth event.  || 