Ordering Real Numbers When comparing real numbers on a number line, the larger number will always lie to the right of the smaller one. It is clear that 15 is greater than 5, but it may not be so clear to see that −1 is greater than −5 until we graph each number on a number line. We use symbols to help us efficiently communicate relationships between numbers on the number line. The symbols used to describe an equality relationship Express equality with the symbol =. If two quantities are not equal, use the symbol ≠ . between numbers follow: These symbols are used and interpreted in the following manner: We next define symbols that denote an order relationship between real numbers. These symbols allow us to compare two numbers. For example, Since the graph of −120 is to the left of the graph of –10 on the number line, that number is less than −10. We could write an equivalent statement as follows: Similarly, since the graph of zero is to the right of the graph of any negative number on the number line, zero is greater than any negative number. The symbols < and > are used to denote strict inequalities Express ordering relationships using the symbol < for “less than” and > for “greater than.” , and the symbols ≤ and ≥ are used to denote inclusive inequalities Use the symbol ≤ to express quantities that are “less than or equal to” and ≥ for quantities that are “greater than or equal to” each other. . In some situations, more than one symbol can be correctly applied. For example, the following two statements are both true: In addition, the “or equal to” component of an inclusive inequality allows us to correctly write the following: The logical use of the word “or” requires that only one of the conditions need be true: the “less than” or the “equal to.”   Example 2: Fill in the blank with <, =, or >: −2 ____ −12. Solution: Use > because the graph of −2 is to the right of the graph of −12 on a number line. Therefore, −2 > −12, which reads “negative two is greater than negative twelve.” Answer: −2 > −12   In this text, we will often point out the equivalent notation used to express mathematical quantities electronically using the standard symbols available on a keyboard. We begin with the equivalent textual notation for inequalities: Many calculators, computer algebra systems, and programming languages use this notation. Ordering Real Numbers When comparing real numbers on a number line, the larger number will always lie to the right of the smaller one. It is clear that 15 is greater than 5, but it may not be so clear to see that −1 is greater than −5 until we graph each number on a number line. We use symbols to help us efficiently communicate relationships between numbers on the number line. The symbols used to describe an equality relationship Express equality with the symbol =. If two quantities are not equal, use the symbol ≠ . between numbers follow: These symbols are used and interpreted in the following manner: We next define symbols that denote an order relationship between real numbers. These symbols allow us to compare two numbers. For example, Since the graph of −120 is to the left of the graph of –10 on the number line, that number is less than −10. We could write an equivalent statement as follows: Similarly, since the graph of zero is to the right of the graph of any negative number on the number line, zero is greater than any negative number. The symbols < and > are used to denote strict inequalities Express ordering relationships using the symbol < for “less than” and > for “greater than.” , and the symbols ≤ and ≥ are used to denote inclusive inequalities Use the symbol ≤ to express quantities that are “less than or equal to” and ≥ for quantities that are “greater than or equal to” each other. . In some situations, more than one symbol can be correctly applied. For example, the following two statements are both true: In addition, the “or equal to” component of an inclusive inequality allows us to correctly write the following: The logical use of the word “or” requires that only one of the conditions need be true: the “less than” or the “equal to.”   Example 2: Fill in the blank with <, =, or >: −2 ____ −12. Solution: Use > because the graph of −2 is to the right of the graph of −12 on a number line. Therefore, −2 > −12, which reads “negative two is greater than negative twelve.” Answer: −2 > −12   In this text, we will often point out the equivalent notation used to express mathematical quantities electronically using the standard symbols available on a keyboard. We begin with the equivalent textual notation for inequalities: Many calculators, computer algebra systems, and programming languages use this notation.  || 