Horizontal and Vertical Lines We need to recognize by inspection linear equations that represent a vertical or horizontal line.   Example 7: Graph by plotting five points: . Solution: Since the given equation does not have a variable x, we can rewrite it with a 0 coefficient for x. Choose any five values for x and see that the corresponding y-value is always −2. We now have five ordered pair solutions to plot {(−2, −2), (−1, −2), (0, −2), (1, −2), (2, −2)}. Answer: When the coefficient for the variable x is 0, the graph is a horizontal line. In general, the equation for a horizontal line Any line whose equation can be written in the form y = k, where k is a real number. can be written in the form , where k represents any real number.   Example 8: Graph by plotting five points: x = 3. Solution: Since the given equation does not have a variable y, rewrite it with a 0 coefficient for y. Choose any five values for y and see that the corresponding x-value is always 3. We now have five ordered pair solutions to plot: {(3, −2), (3, −1), (3, 0), (3, 1), (3, 2)}. Answer: When the coefficient for the variable y is 0, the graph is a vertical line. In general, the equation for a vertical line Any line whose equation can be written in the form x = k, where k is a real number. can be written as , where k represents any real number. To summarize, if k is a real number,   Try this! Graph and on the same set of axes and determine where they intersect. Answer: (−2, 5) Video Solution Horizontal and Vertical Lines We need to recognize by inspection linear equations that represent a vertical or horizontal line.   Example 7: Graph by plotting five points: . Solution: Since the given equation does not have a variable x, we can rewrite it with a 0 coefficient for x. Choose any five values for x and see that the corresponding y-value is always −2. We now have five ordered pair solutions to plot {(−2, −2), (−1, −2), (0, −2), (1, −2), (2, −2)}. Answer: When the coefficient for the variable x is 0, the graph is a horizontal line. In general, the equation for a horizontal line Any line whose equation can be written in the form y = k, where k is a real number. can be written in the form , where k represents any real number.   Example 8: Graph by plotting five points: x = 3. Solution: Since the given equation does not have a variable y, rewrite it with a 0 coefficient for y. Choose any five values for y and see that the corresponding x-value is always 3. We now have five ordered pair solutions to plot: {(3, −2), (3, −1), (3, 0), (3, 1), (3, 2)}. Answer: When the coefficient for the variable y is 0, the graph is a vertical line. In general, the equation for a vertical line Any line whose equation can be written in the form x = k, where k is a real number. can be written as , where k represents any real number. To summarize, if k is a real number,   Try this! Graph and on the same set of axes and determine where they intersect. Answer: (−2, 5) Video Solution  || 