Method 1: Simplify Using Division We begin our discussion on simplifying complex rational expressions using division. Before we can multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor, we must simplify the numerator and denominator separately. The goal is to first obtain single algebraic fractions in the numerator and the denominator. The steps for simplifying a complex algebraic fraction are illustrated in the following example.   Example 1: Simplify: 1 2 + 1 x 1 4 − 1 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Simplify the numerator and denominator. The goal is to obtain a single algebraic fraction divided by another single algebraic fraction. In this example, find equivalent terms with a common denominator in both the numerator and denominator before adding and subtracting. At this point we have a single algebraic fraction divided by a single algebraic fraction. Step 2: Multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the divisor. Step 3: Factor all numerators and denominators completely. Step 4: Cancel all common factors. Answer: 2 x x − 2   Example 2: Simplify: 1 x − 1 x − 2 4 x 2 − 2 x . Solution: Answer: − 1 2   Example 3: Simplify   1 − 4 x − 21 x 2   1 − 2 x − 15 x 2 . Solution: The LCD of the rational expressions in both the numerator and denominator is x 2 . Multiply by the appropriate factors to obtain equivalent terms with this as the denominator and then subtract. We now have a single rational expression divided by another single rational expression. Next, multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the divisor and then factor and cancel. Answer: x − 7 x − 5   Example 4: Simplify:     1 − 1 x 2     1 x − 1 . Solution: Answer: − x + 1 x   Try this! Simplify:   1 81 − 1 x 2   1 9 + 1 x . Answer: x − 9 9 x Video Solution Method 1: Simplify Using Division We begin our discussion on simplifying complex rational expressions using division. Before we can multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor, we must simplify the numerator and denominator separately. The goal is to first obtain single algebraic fractions in the numerator and the denominator. The steps for simplifying a complex algebraic fraction are illustrated in the following example.   Example 1: Simplify: 1 2 + 1 x 1 4 − 1 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Simplify the numerator and denominator. The goal is to obtain a single algebraic fraction divided by another single algebraic fraction. In this example, find equivalent terms with a common denominator in both the numerator and denominator before adding and subtracting. At this point we have a single algebraic fraction divided by a single algebraic fraction. Step 2: Multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the divisor. Step 3: Factor all numerators and denominators completely. Step 4: Cancel all common factors. Answer: 2 x x − 2   Example 2: Simplify: 1 x − 1 x − 2 4 x 2 − 2 x . Solution: Answer: − 1 2   Example 3: Simplify   1 − 4 x − 21 x 2   1 − 2 x − 15 x 2 . Solution: The LCD of the rational expressions in both the numerator and denominator is x 2 . Multiply by the appropriate factors to obtain equivalent terms with this as the denominator and then subtract. We now have a single rational expression divided by another single rational expression. Next, multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the divisor and then factor and cancel. Answer: x − 7 x − 5   Example 4: Simplify:     1 − 1 x 2     1 x − 1 . Solution: Answer: − x + 1 x   Try this! Simplify:   1 81 − 1 x 2   1 9 + 1 x . Answer: x − 9 9 x Video Solution  || 