Direct Variation Consider a freight train moving at a constant speed of 30 miles per hour. The equation that expresses the distance traveled at that speed in terms of time is given by After 1 hour the train has traveled 30 miles, after 2 hours the train has traveled 60 miles, and so on. We can construct a chart and graph this relation. In this example, we can see that the distance varies over time as the product of the constant rate, 30 miles per hour, and the variable, t. This relationship is described as direct variation Describes two quantities x and y that are constant multiples of each other: y = k x . and 30 is called the variation constant. In addition, if we divide both sides of D = 30 t by t we have In this form, it is reasonable to say that D is proportional to t, where 30 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies directly as x” y = k x “y is directly proportional Used when referring to direct variation. to x” “y is proportional to x” Here k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation The nonzero multiple k, when quantities vary directly or inversely. or the constant of proportionality Used when referring to the constant of variation. .   Example 1: The circumference of a circle is directly proportional to its diameter, and the constant of proportionality is π . If the circumference is measured to be 20 inches, then what is the radius of the circle? Solution: Use the fact that “the circumference is directly proportional to the diameter” to write an equation that relates the two variables. We are given that “the constant of proportionality is π ,” or k = π . Therefore, we write Now use this formula to find d when the circumference is 20 inches. The radius of the circle, r, is one-half of its diameter. Answer: The radius is 10 π inches, or approximately 3.18 inches.   Typically, we will not be given the constant of variation. Instead, we will be given information from which it can be determined.   Example 2: An object’s weight on earth varies directly to its weight on the moon. If a man weighs 180 pounds on earth, then he will weigh 30 pounds on the moon. Set up an algebraic equation that expresses the weight on earth in terms of the weight on the moon and use it to determine the weight of a woman on the moon if she weighs 120 pounds on earth. Solution: We are given that the “weight on earth varies directly to the weight on the moon.” To find the constant of variation k, use the given information. A 180-pound man on earth weighs 30 pounds on the moon, or y = 180 when x = 30 . Solve for k. Next, set up a formula that models the given information. This implies that a person’s weight on earth is 6 times her weight on the moon. To answer the question, use the woman’s weight on earth, y = 120   pounds , and solve for x. Answer: The woman weighs 20 pounds on the moon. Direct Variation Consider a freight train moving at a constant speed of 30 miles per hour. The equation that expresses the distance traveled at that speed in terms of time is given by After 1 hour the train has traveled 30 miles, after 2 hours the train has traveled 60 miles, and so on. We can construct a chart and graph this relation. In this example, we can see that the distance varies over time as the product of the constant rate, 30 miles per hour, and the variable, t. This relationship is described as direct variation Describes two quantities x and y that are constant multiples of each other: y = k x . and 30 is called the variation constant. In addition, if we divide both sides of D = 30 t by t we have In this form, it is reasonable to say that D is proportional to t, where 30 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies directly as x” y = k x “y is directly proportional Used when referring to direct variation. to x” “y is proportional to x” Here k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation The nonzero multiple k, when quantities vary directly or inversely. or the constant of proportionality Used when referring to the constant of variation. .   Example 1: The circumference of a circle is directly proportional to its diameter, and the constant of proportionality is π . If the circumference is measured to be 20 inches, then what is the radius of the circle? Solution: Use the fact that “the circumference is directly proportional to the diameter” to write an equation that relates the two variables. We are given that “the constant of proportionality is π ,” or k = π . Therefore, we write Now use this formula to find d when the circumference is 20 inches. The radius of the circle, r, is one-half of its diameter. Answer: The radius is 10 π inches, or approximately 3.18 inches.   Typically, we will not be given the constant of variation. Instead, we will be given information from which it can be determined.   Example 2: An object’s weight on earth varies directly to its weight on the moon. If a man weighs 180 pounds on earth, then he will weigh 30 pounds on the moon. Set up an algebraic equation that expresses the weight on earth in terms of the weight on the moon and use it to determine the weight of a woman on the moon if she weighs 120 pounds on earth. Solution: We are given that the “weight on earth varies directly to the weight on the moon.” To find the constant of variation k, use the given information. A 180-pound man on earth weighs 30 pounds on the moon, or y = 180 when x = 30 . Solve for k. Next, set up a formula that models the given information. This implies that a person’s weight on earth is 6 times her weight on the moon. To answer the question, use the woman’s weight on earth, y = 120   pounds , and solve for x. Answer: The woman weighs 20 pounds on the moon.  || 