Graphing Whole Numbers Number Line Whole numbers may be visualized by constructing a number line. To construct a number line, we simply draw a straight line and choose any point on the line and label it 0. Origin This point is called the origin. We then choose some convenient length, and moving to the right, mark off consecutive intervals (parts) along the line starting at 0. We label each new interval endpoint with the next whole number. Graphing We can visually display a whole number by drawing a closed circle at the point labeled with that whole number. Another phrase for visually displaying a whole number is graphing the whole number. The word graph means to "visually display." Sample Set C Example 1.4.  Graph the following whole numbers: 3, 5, 9. Example 1.5.  Specify the whole numbers that are graphed on the following number line. The break in the number line indicates that we are aware of the whole numbers between 0 and 106, and 107 and 872, but we are not listing them due to space limitations. The numbers that have been graphed are 0, 106, 873, 874 Practice Set C Exercise 1.2.5. (Go to Solution) Graph the following whole numbers: 46, 47, 48, 325, 327. Exercise 1.2.6. (Go to Solution) Specify the whole numbers that are graphed on the following number line. A line is composed of an endless number of points. Notice that we have labeled only some of them. As we proceed, we will discover new types of numbers and determine their location on the number line. Graphing Whole Numbers Number Line Whole numbers may be visualized by constructing a number line. To construct a number line, we simply draw a straight line and choose any point on the line and label it 0. Origin This point is called the origin. We then choose some convenient length, and moving to the right, mark off consecutive intervals (parts) along the line starting at 0. We label each new interval endpoint with the next whole number. Graphing We can visually display a whole number by drawing a closed circle at the point labeled with that whole number. Another phrase for visually displaying a whole number is graphing the whole number. The word graph means to "visually display." Sample Set C Example 1.4.  Graph the following whole numbers: 3, 5, 9. Example 1.5.  Specify the whole numbers that are graphed on the following number line. The break in the number line indicates that we are aware of the whole numbers between 0 and 106, and 107 and 872, but we are not listing them due to space limitations. The numbers that have been graphed are 0, 106, 873, 874 Practice Set C Exercise 1.2.5. (Go to Solution) Graph the following whole numbers: 46, 47, 48, 325, 327. Exercise 1.2.6. (Go to Solution) Specify the whole numbers that are graphed on the following number line. A line is composed of an endless number of points. Notice that we have labeled only some of them. As we proceed, we will discover new types of numbers and determine their location on the number line.  || 