Square Root and Cube Root Functions We begin with the square root function The function . : We know that the square root is not a real number when the radicand x is negative. Therefore, we conclude that the domain consists of all real numbers greater than or equal to 0. Here we choose 0 and some positive values for x, calculate the corresponding y-values, and plot the resulting ordered pairs. After plotting the points, we can then sketch the graph of the square root function.   Example 11: Given the function , find , , and . Solution: Replace x with each of the given values. Answer: , , and   Next, consider the cube root function The function . : Since the cube root could be either negative or positive, we conclude that the domain consists of all real numbers. For completeness, choose some positive and negative values for x, as well as 0, and then calculate the corresponding y-values. Plot the points and sketch the graph of the cube root function.   Example 12: Given the function , find , , and . Solution: Replace x with each of the given values. Answer: , , and Square Root and Cube Root Functions We begin with the square root function The function . : We know that the square root is not a real number when the radicand x is negative. Therefore, we conclude that the domain consists of all real numbers greater than or equal to 0. Here we choose 0 and some positive values for x, calculate the corresponding y-values, and plot the resulting ordered pairs. After plotting the points, we can then sketch the graph of the square root function.   Example 11: Given the function , find , , and . Solution: Replace x with each of the given values. Answer: , , and   Next, consider the cube root function The function . : Since the cube root could be either negative or positive, we conclude that the domain consists of all real numbers. For completeness, choose some positive and negative values for x, as well as 0, and then calculate the corresponding y-values. Plot the points and sketch the graph of the cube root function.   Example 12: Given the function , find , , and . Solution: Replace x with each of the given values. Answer: , , and  || 