 || Measurement There are two major systems of measurement in use today. They are the United States system and the metric system. Before we describe these systems, let's gain a clear understanding of the concept of measurement. Measurement Measurement is comparison to some standard. Standard Unit of Measure The concept of measurement is based on the idea of direct comparison. This means that measurement is the result of the comparison of two quantities. The quantity that is used for comparison is called the standard unit of measure. Over the years, standards have changed. Quite some time in the past, the stan­dard unit of measure was determined by a king. For example, 1 inch was the distance between the tip of the thumb and the knuckle of the king. 1 inch was also the length of 16 barley grains placed end to end. Today, standard units of measure rarely change. Standard units of measure are the responsibility of the Bureau of Standards in Washington D.C. Some desirable properties of a standard are the following: Accessibility. We should have access to the standard so we can make comparisons. Invariance. We should be confident that the standard is not subject to change. Reproducibility. We should be able to reproduce the standard so that measure­ments are convenient and accessible to many people.  || The United States System of Measurement Some of the common units (along with their abbreviations) for the United States system of measurement are listed in the following table. Table 9.1. Unit Conversion Table Length 1 foot (ft) = 12 inches (in.) 1 yard (yd) = 3 feet (ft) 1 mile (mi) = 5,280 feet Weight 1 pound (lb) =16 ounces (oz) 1 ton (T) = 2,000 pounds Liquid Volume 1 tablespoon (tbsp) = 3 teaspoons (tsp) 1 fluid ounce (fl oz) = 2 tablespoons 1 cup (c) = 8 fluid ounces 1 pint (pt) = 2 cups1 quart (qt) = 2 pints1 gallon (gal) = 4 quarts Time 1 minute (min) = 60 seconds (sec) 1 hour ( hr) = 60 minutes1 day (da) = 24 hours1 week (wk) = 7 days  || Conversions in the United States System It is often convenient or necessary to convert from one unit of measure to another. For example, it may be convenient to convert a measurement of length that is given in feet to one that is given in inches. Such conversions can be made using unit fractions. Unit Fraction A unit fraction is a fraction with a value of 1. Unit fractions are formed by using two equal measurements. One measurement is placed in the numerator of the fraction, and the other in the denominator. Place­ment depends on the desired conversion. Placement of Units Place the unit being converted to in the numerator. Place the unit being converted from in the denominator. For example, Table 9.2. Equal Measurements Unit Fraction 1ft = 12in. 1pt = 16 fl oz 1wk = 7da Sample Set A Make the following conversions. If a fraction occurs, convert it to a decimal rounded to two decimal places. Example 9.1.  Convert 11 yards to feet. Looking in the unit conversion table under length, we see that 1 yd = 3 ft. There are two corresponding unit fractions, and . Which one should we use? Look to see which unit we wish to convert to. Choose the unit fraction with this unit in the numerator. We will choose since this unit fraction has feet in the numerator. Now, multiply 11 yd by the unit fraction. Notice that since the unit fraction has the value of 1, multiplying by it does not change the value of 11 yd. Thus, 11 yd = 33ft. Example 9.2.  Convert 36 fl oz to pints. Looking in the unit conversion table under liquid volume, we see that 1 pt = 16 fl oz. Since we are to convert to pints, we will construct a unit fraction with pints in the numerator. Thus, 36 fl oz = 2.25 pt. Example 9.3.  Convert 2,016 hr to weeks. Looking in the unit conversion table under time, we see that 1wk = 7da and that 1 da = 24 hr. To convert from hours to weeks, we must first convert from hours to days and then from days to weeks. We need two unit fractions. The unit fraction needed for converting from hours to days is . The unit fraction needed for converting from days to weeks is . Thus, 2,016 hr = 12 wk. Practice Set A Make the following conversions. If a fraction occurs, convert it to a decimal rounded to two decimal places. Exercise 9.2.1. (Go to Solution) Convert 18 ft to yards. Exercise 9.2.2. (Go to Solution) Convert 2 mi to feet. Exercise 9.2.3. (Go to Solution) Convert 26 ft to yards. Exercise 9.2.4. (Go to Solution) Convert 9 qt to pints. Exercise 9.2.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 52 min to hours. Exercise 9.2.6. (Go to Solution) Convert 412 hr to weeks.  || 