Inverse Variation Next, consider the relationship between time and rate, If we wish to travel a fixed distance, then we can determine the average speed required to travel that distance in a given amount of time. For example, if we wish to drive 240 miles in 4 hours, we can determine the required average speed as follows: The average speed required to drive 240 miles in 4 hours is 60 miles per hour. If we wish to drive the 240 miles in 5 hours, then determine the required speed using a similar equation: In this case, we would only have to average 48 miles per hour. We can make a chart and view this relationship on a graph. This is an example of an inverse relationship. We say that r is inversely proportional to the time t, where 240 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies inversely Describes two quantities x and y, where one variable is directly proportional to the reciprocal of the other: y = k x . as x” y = k x “y is inversely proportional Used when referring to inverse variation. to x” Again, k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation or the constant of proportionality.   Example 3: If y varies inversely as x and y = 5 when x = 2 , then find the constant of proportionality and an equation that relates the two variables. Solution: If we let k represent the constant of proportionality, then the statement “y varies inversely as x” can be written as follows: Use the given information, y = 5 when x = 2 , to find k. Solve for k. Therefore, the formula that models the problem is Answer: The constant of proportionality is 10, and the equation is y = 10 x .   Example 4: The weight of an object varies inversely as the square of its distance from the center of earth. If an object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth (approximately 4,000 miles from the center), then how much will it weigh at 1,000 miles above earth’s surface? Solution: Since “w varies inversely as the square of d,” we can write Use the given information to find k. An object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth, approximately 4,000 miles from the center. In other words, w = 100 when d = 4,000: Solve for k. Therefore, we can model the problem with the following formula: To use the formula to find the weight, we need the distance from the center of earth. Since the object is 1,000 miles above the surface, find the distance from the center of earth by adding 4,000 miles: To answer the question, use the formula with d = 5,000. Answer: The object will weigh 64 pounds at a distance 1,000 miles above the surface of earth. Inverse Variation Next, consider the relationship between time and rate, If we wish to travel a fixed distance, then we can determine the average speed required to travel that distance in a given amount of time. For example, if we wish to drive 240 miles in 4 hours, we can determine the required average speed as follows: The average speed required to drive 240 miles in 4 hours is 60 miles per hour. If we wish to drive the 240 miles in 5 hours, then determine the required speed using a similar equation: In this case, we would only have to average 48 miles per hour. We can make a chart and view this relationship on a graph. This is an example of an inverse relationship. We say that r is inversely proportional to the time t, where 240 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies inversely Describes two quantities x and y, where one variable is directly proportional to the reciprocal of the other: y = k x . as x” y = k x “y is inversely proportional Used when referring to inverse variation. to x” Again, k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation or the constant of proportionality.   Example 3: If y varies inversely as x and y = 5 when x = 2 , then find the constant of proportionality and an equation that relates the two variables. Solution: If we let k represent the constant of proportionality, then the statement “y varies inversely as x” can be written as follows: Use the given information, y = 5 when x = 2 , to find k. Solve for k. Therefore, the formula that models the problem is Answer: The constant of proportionality is 10, and the equation is y = 10 x .   Example 4: The weight of an object varies inversely as the square of its distance from the center of earth. If an object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth (approximately 4,000 miles from the center), then how much will it weigh at 1,000 miles above earth’s surface? Solution: Since “w varies inversely as the square of d,” we can write Use the given information to find k. An object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth, approximately 4,000 miles from the center. In other words, w = 100 when d = 4,000: Solve for k. Therefore, we can model the problem with the following formula: To use the formula to find the weight, we need the distance from the center of earth. Since the object is 1,000 miles above the surface, find the distance from the center of earth by adding 4,000 miles: To answer the question, use the formula with d = 5,000. Answer: The object will weigh 64 pounds at a distance 1,000 miles above the surface of earth.  || 