Zero as an Exponent In Sample Set C, the exponents of the numerators were greater than the exponents of the denominators. Let’s study the case when the exponents are the same.When the exponents are the same, say n , the subtraction n − n produces 0.Thus, by the second rule of exponents, .But what real number, if any, does x 0 represent? Let’s think for a moment about our experience with division in arithmetic. We know that any nonzero number divided by itself is one. Since the letter x represents some nonzero real number, so does x n . Thus, represents some nonzero real number divided by itself. Then .But we have also established that if . We now have that and . This implies that x 0 = 1,x ≠ 0 .Exponents can now be natural numbers and zero. We have enlarged our collection of numbers that can be used as exponents from the collection of natural numbers to the collection of whole numbers. ZERO AS AN EXPONENT If Any number, other than 0, raised to the power of 0, is 1. 00 has no meaning (it does not represent a number). Zero as an Exponent In Sample Set C, the exponents of the numerators were greater than the exponents of the denominators. Let’s study the case when the exponents are the same.When the exponents are the same, say n , the subtraction n − n produces 0.Thus, by the second rule of exponents, .But what real number, if any, does x 0 represent? Let’s think for a moment about our experience with division in arithmetic. We know that any nonzero number divided by itself is one. Since the letter x represents some nonzero real number, so does x n . Thus, represents some nonzero real number divided by itself. Then .But we have also established that if . We now have that and . This implies that x 0 = 1,x ≠ 0 .Exponents can now be natural numbers and zero. We have enlarged our collection of numbers that can be used as exponents from the collection of natural numbers to the collection of whole numbers. ZERO AS AN EXPONENT If Any number, other than 0, raised to the power of 0, is 1. 00 has no meaning (it does not represent a number).  || 