Algebra of Linear Inequalities All but one of the techniques learned for solving linear equations apply to solving linear inequalities. You may add or subtract any real number to both sides of an inequality, and you may multiply or divide both sides by any positive real number to create equivalent inequalities. For example, Both subtracting 7 from each side and dividing each side by +5 results in an equivalent inequality that is true.   Example 2: Solve and graph the solution set: 3 x + 7 < 16 . Solution: It is helpful to take a minute and choose a few values in and out of the solution set, substitute them into the original inequality, and then verify the results. As indicated, you should expect x = 0 to solve the original inequality, but x = 5 should not. Checking in this manner gives a good indication that the inequality is solved correctly. This can be done mentally. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   When working with linear inequalities, a different rule applies when multiplying or dividing by a negative number. To illustrate the problem, consider the true statement 10 > − 5 and divide both sides by −5. Dividing by −5 results in a false statement. To retain a true statement, the inequality must be reversed. The same problem occurs when multiplying by a negative number. This leads to the following new rule: when multiplying or dividing by a negative number, reverse the inequality. It is easy to forget to do this so take special care to watch for negative coefficients. In general, given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a positive nonzero real number, we have the following properties of inequalities Properties used to obtain equivalent inequalities and used as a means to solve them. : We use these properties to obtain an equivalent inequality Inequalities that share the same solution set. , one with the same solution set, where the variable is isolated. The process is similar to solving linear equations.   Example 3: Solve: − 2 x + 1 ≥ 21 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   − 10 ]   Example 4: Solve: − 7 ( 2 x + 1 ) < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4 7 ,   ∞ )   Example 5: Solve: 5 x − 3 ( 2 x − 1 ) ≥ 2 ( x − 3 ) . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ]   Try this! Solve: 3 − 5 ( x − 1 ) ≤ 28 . Answer: [ − 4 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution Algebra of Linear Inequalities All but one of the techniques learned for solving linear equations apply to solving linear inequalities. You may add or subtract any real number to both sides of an inequality, and you may multiply or divide both sides by any positive real number to create equivalent inequalities. For example, Both subtracting 7 from each side and dividing each side by +5 results in an equivalent inequality that is true.   Example 2: Solve and graph the solution set: 3 x + 7 < 16 . Solution: It is helpful to take a minute and choose a few values in and out of the solution set, substitute them into the original inequality, and then verify the results. As indicated, you should expect x = 0 to solve the original inequality, but x = 5 should not. Checking in this manner gives a good indication that the inequality is solved correctly. This can be done mentally. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   When working with linear inequalities, a different rule applies when multiplying or dividing by a negative number. To illustrate the problem, consider the true statement 10 > − 5 and divide both sides by −5. Dividing by −5 results in a false statement. To retain a true statement, the inequality must be reversed. The same problem occurs when multiplying by a negative number. This leads to the following new rule: when multiplying or dividing by a negative number, reverse the inequality. It is easy to forget to do this so take special care to watch for negative coefficients. In general, given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a positive nonzero real number, we have the following properties of inequalities Properties used to obtain equivalent inequalities and used as a means to solve them. : We use these properties to obtain an equivalent inequality Inequalities that share the same solution set. , one with the same solution set, where the variable is isolated. The process is similar to solving linear equations.   Example 3: Solve: − 2 x + 1 ≥ 21 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   − 10 ]   Example 4: Solve: − 7 ( 2 x + 1 ) < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4 7 ,   ∞ )   Example 5: Solve: 5 x − 3 ( 2 x − 1 ) ≥ 2 ( x − 3 ) . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ]   Try this! Solve: 3 − 5 ( x − 1 ) ≤ 28 . Answer: [ − 4 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution  || 