Combining Like Terms and Simplifying Linear equations typically are not given in standard form, so solving them requires additional steps. These additional steps include simplifying expressions on each side of the equal sign using the order of operations. Same-Side Like Terms We will often encounter linear equations where the expressions on each side of the equal sign can be simplified. Typically, this involves combining same-side like terms Like terms of an equation on the same side of the equal sign. . If this is the case, then it is best to simplify each side first before solving.   Example 1: Solve: − 4 a + 2 − a = 3 − 2 . Solution: First, combine the like terms on each side of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is 1 5 . Opposite-Side Like Terms Given a linear equation in the form a x + b = c x + d , we begin by combining like terms on opposite sides of the equal sign. To combine opposite-side like terms Like terms of an equation on opposite sides of the equal sign. , use the addition or subtraction property of equality to effectively “move terms” from one side to the other so that they can be combined.   Example 2: Solve: − 2 y − 3 = 5 y + 11 . Solution: To “move” the term 5 y to the left side, subtract it on both sides. From here, solve using the techniques developed previously. Always check to see that the solution is correct by substituting the solution back into the original equation and simplifying to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is −2. General Guidelines for Solving Linear Equations When solving linear equations, the goal is to determine what value, if any, will produce a true statement when substituted in the original equation. Do this by isolating the variable using the following steps: Step 1: Simplify both sides of the equation using the order of operations and combine all same-side like terms. Step 2: Use the appropriate properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms with the variable term on one side of the equation and the constant term on the other. Step 3: Divide or multiply as needed to isolate the variable. Step 4: Check to see if the answer solves the original equation.   Example 3: Solve: − 1 2 ( 10 y − 2 ) + 3 = 14 . Solution: Simplify the linear expression on the left side before solving. To check, Answer: The solution is −2.   Example 4: Solve: 5 ( 3 x + 2 ) − 2 = − 2 ( 1 − 7 x ) . Solution: First, simplify the expressions on both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is −10. The check is left as an exercise.   Try this! Solve: 6 − 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) = 4 x − 7 . Answer: x = 1 Video Solution Combining Like Terms and Simplifying Linear equations typically are not given in standard form, so solving them requires additional steps. These additional steps include simplifying expressions on each side of the equal sign using the order of operations. Same-Side Like Terms We will often encounter linear equations where the expressions on each side of the equal sign can be simplified. Typically, this involves combining same-side like terms Like terms of an equation on the same side of the equal sign. . If this is the case, then it is best to simplify each side first before solving.   Example 1: Solve: − 4 a + 2 − a = 3 − 2 . Solution: First, combine the like terms on each side of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is 1 5 . Opposite-Side Like Terms Given a linear equation in the form a x + b = c x + d , we begin by combining like terms on opposite sides of the equal sign. To combine opposite-side like terms Like terms of an equation on opposite sides of the equal sign. , use the addition or subtraction property of equality to effectively “move terms” from one side to the other so that they can be combined.   Example 2: Solve: − 2 y − 3 = 5 y + 11 . Solution: To “move” the term 5 y to the left side, subtract it on both sides. From here, solve using the techniques developed previously. Always check to see that the solution is correct by substituting the solution back into the original equation and simplifying to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is −2. General Guidelines for Solving Linear Equations When solving linear equations, the goal is to determine what value, if any, will produce a true statement when substituted in the original equation. Do this by isolating the variable using the following steps: Step 1: Simplify both sides of the equation using the order of operations and combine all same-side like terms. Step 2: Use the appropriate properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms with the variable term on one side of the equation and the constant term on the other. Step 3: Divide or multiply as needed to isolate the variable. Step 4: Check to see if the answer solves the original equation.   Example 3: Solve: − 1 2 ( 10 y − 2 ) + 3 = 14 . Solution: Simplify the linear expression on the left side before solving. To check, Answer: The solution is −2.   Example 4: Solve: 5 ( 3 x + 2 ) − 2 = − 2 ( 1 − 7 x ) . Solution: First, simplify the expressions on both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is −10. The check is left as an exercise.   Try this! Solve: 6 − 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) = 4 x − 7 . Answer: x = 1 Video Solution  || 