Solutions to Linear Inequalities We know that a linear equation with two variables has infinitely many ordered pair solutions that form a line when graphed. A linear inequality with two variables An inequality relating linear expressions with two variables. The solution set is a region defining half of the plane. , on the other hand, has a solution set consisting of a region that defines half of the plane. For the inequality, the line defines one boundary of the region that is shaded. This indicates that any ordered pair that is in the shaded region, including the boundary line, will satisfy the inequality. To see that this is the case, choose a few test points A point not on the boundary of the linear inequality used as a means to determine in which half-plane the solutions lie. and substitute them into the inequality. Also, we can see that ordered pairs outside the shaded region do not solve the linear inequality. The graph of the solution set to a linear inequality is always a region. However, the boundary may not always be included in that set. In the previous example, the line was part of the solution set because of the “or equal to” part of the inclusive inequality ≤ . If we have a strict inequality < , we would then use a dashed line to indicate that those points are not included in the solution set. Consider the point (0, 3) on the boundary; this ordered pair satisfies the linear equation. It is the “or equal to” part of the inclusive inequality that makes it part of the solution set. So far, we have seen examples of inequalities that were “less than.” Now consider the following graphs with the same boundary: Given the graphs above, what might we expect if we use the origin (0, 0) as a test point?   Try this! Which of the ordered pairs (−2, −1), (0, 0), (−2, 8), (2, 1), and (4, 2) solve the inequality y > − 1 2 x + 2 ? Answer: (−2, 8) and (4, 2) Video Solution Solutions to Linear Inequalities We know that a linear equation with two variables has infinitely many ordered pair solutions that form a line when graphed. A linear inequality with two variables An inequality relating linear expressions with two variables. The solution set is a region defining half of the plane. , on the other hand, has a solution set consisting of a region that defines half of the plane. For the inequality, the line defines one boundary of the region that is shaded. This indicates that any ordered pair that is in the shaded region, including the boundary line, will satisfy the inequality. To see that this is the case, choose a few test points A point not on the boundary of the linear inequality used as a means to determine in which half-plane the solutions lie. and substitute them into the inequality. Also, we can see that ordered pairs outside the shaded region do not solve the linear inequality. The graph of the solution set to a linear inequality is always a region. However, the boundary may not always be included in that set. In the previous example, the line was part of the solution set because of the “or equal to” part of the inclusive inequality ≤ . If we have a strict inequality < , we would then use a dashed line to indicate that those points are not included in the solution set. Consider the point (0, 3) on the boundary; this ordered pair satisfies the linear equation. It is the “or equal to” part of the inclusive inequality that makes it part of the solution set. So far, we have seen examples of inequalities that were “less than.” Now consider the following graphs with the same boundary: Given the graphs above, what might we expect if we use the origin (0, 0) as a test point?   Try this! Which of the ordered pairs (−2, −1), (0, 0), (−2, 8), (2, 1), and (4, 2) solve the inequality y > − 1 2 x + 2 ? Answer: (−2, 8) and (4, 2) Video Solution  || 