Solve by Graphing Geometrically, a linear system consists of two lines, where a solution is a point of intersection. To illustrate this, we will graph the following linear system with a solution of (3, 2): First, rewrite the equations in slope-intercept form so that we may easily graph them. Next, replace these forms of the original equations in the system to obtain what is called an equivalent system A system consisting of equivalent equations that share the same solution set. . Equivalent systems share the same solution set. If we graph both of the lines on the same set of axes, then we can see that the point of intersection is indeed (3, 2), the solution to the system. To summarize, linear systems described in this section consist of two linear equations each with two variables. A solution is an ordered pair that corresponds to a point where the two lines in the rectangular coordinate plane intersect. Therefore, we can solve linear systems by graphing both lines on the same set of axes and determining the point where they cross. When graphing the lines, take care to choose a good scale and use a straightedge to draw the line through the points; accuracy is very important here. The steps for solving linear systems using the graphing method A means of solving a system by graphing the equations on the same set of axes and determining where they intersect. are outlined in the following example.   Example 2: Solve by graphing: { x − y = − 4 2 x + y = 1 . Solution: Step 1: Rewrite the linear equations in slope-intercept form. Step 2: Write the equivalent system and graph the lines on the same set of axes. Step 3: Use the graph to estimate the point where the lines intersect and check to see if it solves the original system. In the above graph, the point of intersection appears to be (−1, 3). Answer: (−1, 3)   Example 3: Solve by graphing: { 2 x + y = 2 − 2 x + 3 y = − 18 . Solution: We first solve each equation for y to obtain an equivalent system where the lines are in slope-intercept form. Graph the lines and determine the point of intersection. Answer: (3, −4)   Example 4: Solve by graphing: { 3 x + y = 6 y = − 3 . Solution: Answer: (3, −3)   The graphing method for solving linear systems is not ideal when the solution consists of coordinates that are not integers. There will be more accurate algebraic methods in sections to come, but for now, the goal is to understand the geometry involved when solving systems. It is important to remember that the solutions to a system correspond to the point, or points, where the graphs of the equations intersect.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { − x + y = 6   5 x + 2 y = − 2 . Answer: (−2, 4) Video Solution Solve by Graphing Geometrically, a linear system consists of two lines, where a solution is a point of intersection. To illustrate this, we will graph the following linear system with a solution of (3, 2): First, rewrite the equations in slope-intercept form so that we may easily graph them. Next, replace these forms of the original equations in the system to obtain what is called an equivalent system A system consisting of equivalent equations that share the same solution set. . Equivalent systems share the same solution set. If we graph both of the lines on the same set of axes, then we can see that the point of intersection is indeed (3, 2), the solution to the system. To summarize, linear systems described in this section consist of two linear equations each with two variables. A solution is an ordered pair that corresponds to a point where the two lines in the rectangular coordinate plane intersect. Therefore, we can solve linear systems by graphing both lines on the same set of axes and determining the point where they cross. When graphing the lines, take care to choose a good scale and use a straightedge to draw the line through the points; accuracy is very important here. The steps for solving linear systems using the graphing method A means of solving a system by graphing the equations on the same set of axes and determining where they intersect. are outlined in the following example.   Example 2: Solve by graphing: { x − y = − 4 2 x + y = 1 . Solution: Step 1: Rewrite the linear equations in slope-intercept form. Step 2: Write the equivalent system and graph the lines on the same set of axes. Step 3: Use the graph to estimate the point where the lines intersect and check to see if it solves the original system. In the above graph, the point of intersection appears to be (−1, 3). Answer: (−1, 3)   Example 3: Solve by graphing: { 2 x + y = 2 − 2 x + 3 y = − 18 . Solution: We first solve each equation for y to obtain an equivalent system where the lines are in slope-intercept form. Graph the lines and determine the point of intersection. Answer: (3, −4)   Example 4: Solve by graphing: { 3 x + y = 6 y = − 3 . Solution: Answer: (3, −3)   The graphing method for solving linear systems is not ideal when the solution consists of coordinates that are not integers. There will be more accurate algebraic methods in sections to come, but for now, the goal is to understand the geometry involved when solving systems. It is important to remember that the solutions to a system correspond to the point, or points, where the graphs of the equations intersect.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { − x + y = 6   5 x + 2 y = − 2 . Answer: (−2, 4) Video Solution  || 