Geometry Problems (Perimeter) Recall that the perimeter The sum of the lengths of all the outside edges of a polygon. of a polygon is the sum of the lengths of all the outside edges. In addition, it is helpful to review the following perimeter formulas ( π ≈ 3.14159 ). Perimeter of a rectangle P = 2 l + 2 w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. : P = 2 l + 2 w Perimeter of a square P = 4 s , where s represents the length of a side. : P = 4 s Perimeter of a triangle P = a + b + c , where a, b, and c each represents the length of a different side. : P = a + b + c Perimeter of a circle ( circumference The perimeter of a circle given by C = 2 π r , where r represents the radius of the circle and π ≈ 3.14159 . ): C = 2 π r Keep in mind that you are looking for a relationship between the unknowns so that you can set up algebraic equations using only one variable. When working with geometry problems, it is often helpful to draw a picture.   Example 8: A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet. The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width. Find the dimensions of the rectangle. Solution: The sentence “The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width” gives the relationship between the two variables. The sentence “A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet” suggests an algebraic setup. Substitute 64 for the perimeter and the expression for the length into the appropriate formula as follows: Once you have set up an algebraic equation with one variable, solve for the width, w. Use 3w + 4 to find the length. Answer: The rectangle measures 7 feet by 25 feet. To check, add all of the sides:   Example 9: Two sides of a triangle are 5 and 7 inches longer than the third side. If the perimeter measures 21 inches, find the length of each side. Solution: The first sentence describes the relationships between the unknowns. Substitute these expressions into the appropriate formula and use 21 for the perimeter P. You now have an equation with one variable to solve. Back substitute. Answer: The three sides of the triangle measure 3 inches, 8 inches, and 10 inches. The check is left to the reader.   Try this! The length of a rectangle is 1 foot less than twice its width. If the perimeter is 46 feet, find the dimensions. Answer: Width: 8 feet; length: 15 feet Video Solution Geometry Problems (Perimeter) Recall that the perimeter The sum of the lengths of all the outside edges of a polygon. of a polygon is the sum of the lengths of all the outside edges. In addition, it is helpful to review the following perimeter formulas ( π ≈ 3.14159 ). Perimeter of a rectangle P = 2 l + 2 w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. : P = 2 l + 2 w Perimeter of a square P = 4 s , where s represents the length of a side. : P = 4 s Perimeter of a triangle P = a + b + c , where a, b, and c each represents the length of a different side. : P = a + b + c Perimeter of a circle ( circumference The perimeter of a circle given by C = 2 π r , where r represents the radius of the circle and π ≈ 3.14159 . ): C = 2 π r Keep in mind that you are looking for a relationship between the unknowns so that you can set up algebraic equations using only one variable. When working with geometry problems, it is often helpful to draw a picture.   Example 8: A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet. The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width. Find the dimensions of the rectangle. Solution: The sentence “The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width” gives the relationship between the two variables. The sentence “A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet” suggests an algebraic setup. Substitute 64 for the perimeter and the expression for the length into the appropriate formula as follows: Once you have set up an algebraic equation with one variable, solve for the width, w. Use 3w + 4 to find the length. Answer: The rectangle measures 7 feet by 25 feet. To check, add all of the sides:   Example 9: Two sides of a triangle are 5 and 7 inches longer than the third side. If the perimeter measures 21 inches, find the length of each side. Solution: The first sentence describes the relationships between the unknowns. Substitute these expressions into the appropriate formula and use 21 for the perimeter P. You now have an equation with one variable to solve. Back substitute. Answer: The three sides of the triangle measure 3 inches, 8 inches, and 10 inches. The check is left to the reader.   Try this! The length of a rectangle is 1 foot less than twice its width. If the perimeter is 46 feet, find the dimensions. Answer: Width: 8 feet; length: 15 feet Video Solution  || 