 ||  || 2. Dependent Equations ·        Equations describe the same line ·        Infinite number of solutions Sometimes two equations might look different but actually describe the same line. For example, in The second equation is just two times the first equation, so they are actually equivalent and would both be equations of the same line. Because the two equations describe the same line, they have all their points in common; hence there are an infinite number of solutions to the system. Attempting to solve gives an identity If you try to solve a dependent system by algebraic methods, you will eventually run into an equation that is an identity. An identity is an equation that is always true, independent of the value(s) of any variable(s). For example, you might get an equation that looks like x = x, or 3 = 3. This would tell you that the system is a dependent system, and you could stop right there because you will never find a unique solution.  || 3. Inconsistent Equations Lines do not intersect (Parallel Lines; have the same slope) No solutions If two lines happen to have the same slope, but are not identically the same line, then they will never intersect. There is no pair (x, y) that could satisfy both equations, because there is no point (x, y) that is simultaneously on both lines. Thus these equations are said to be inconsistent, and there is no solution. The fact that they both have the same slope may not be obvious from the equations, because they are not written in one of the standard forms for straight lines. The slope is not readily evident in the form we use for writing systems of equations. (If you think about it you will see that the slope is the negative of the coefficient of x divided by the coefficient of y). Attempting to solve gives a false statement By attempting to solve such a system of equations algebraically, you are operating on a false assumption—namely that a solution exists. This will eventually lead you to a contradiction: a statement that is obviously false, regardless of the value(s) of the variable(s). At some point in your work you would get an obviously false equation like 3 = 4. This would tell you that the system of equations is inconsistent, and there is no solution.     Solution by Graphing For more complex systems, and especially those that contain non-linear equations, finding a solution by algebraic methods can be very difficult or even impossible. Using a graphing calculator (or a computer), you can graph the equations and actually see where they intersect. The calculator can then give you the coordinates of the intersection point. The only drawback to this method is that the solution is only an approximation, whereas the algebraic method gives the exact solution. In most practical situations, though, the precision of the calculator is sufficient. For more demanding scientific and engineering applications there are computer methods that can find approximate solutions to very high precision.    || The whole problem with solving a system of equations is that you cannot solve an equation that has two unknowns in it. You need an equation with only one variable so that you can isolate the variable on one side of the equation. Both methods that we will look at are techniques for eliminating one of the variables to give you an equation in just one unknown, which you can then solve by the usual methods.The first method of solving systems of linear equations is the addition method, in which the two equations are added together to eliminate one of the variables.Adding the equations means that we add the left sides of the two equations together, and we add the right sides together. This is legal because of the Addition Principle, which says that we can add the same amount to both sides of an equation. Since the left and right sides of any equation are equal to each other, we are indeed adding the same amount to both sides of an equation.Consider this simple example:Example:If we add these equations together, the terms containing y will add up to zero (2y plus -2y), and we will getor5x = 5 x = 1However, we are not finished yet—we know x, but we still don’t know y. We can solve for y by substituting the now known value for x into either of our original equations. This will produce an equation that can be solved for y:Now that we know both x and y, we can say that the solution to the system is the pair (1, 1/2).This last example was easy to see because of the fortunate presence of both a positive and a negative 2y. One is not always this lucky. ConsiderExample:Now there is nothing so obvious, but there is still something we can do. If we multiply the first equation by -3, we get(Don’t forget to multiply every term in the equation, on both sides of the equal sign). Now if we add them together the terms containing x will cancel:orAs in the previous example, now that we know y we can solve for x by substituting into either original equation. The first equation looks like the easiest to solve for x, so we will use it:And so the solution point is (-4, 7/2).Now we look at an even less obvious example:Example:Here there is nothing particularly attractive about going after either the x or the y. In either case, both equations will have to be multiplied by some factor to arrive at a common coefficient. This is very much like the situation you face trying to find a least common denominator for adding fractions, except that here we call it a Least Common Multiple (LCM). As a general rule, it is easiest to eliminate the variable with the smallest LCM. In this case that would be the y, because the LCM of 2 and 3 is 6. If we wanted to eliminate the x we would have to use a LCM of 10 (5 times 2). So, we choose to make the coefficients of y into plus and minus 6. To do this, the first equation must be multiplied by 3, and the second equation by 2:orNow adding these two together will eliminate the terms containing y:orx = 2We still need to substitute this value into one of the original equations to solve for y:Thus the solution is the point (2, 2). || When we used the Addition Method to solve a system of equations, we still had to do a substitution to solve for the remaining variable. With the substitution method, we solve one of the equations for one variable in terms of the other, and then substitute that into the other equation. This makes more sense with an example:Example:2y + x = 3 (1) 4y – 3x = 1 (2)Equation 1 looks like it would be easy to solve for x, so we take it and isolate x:2y + x = 3   x = 3 – 2y (3)Now we can use this result and substitute 3 - 2y in for x in equation 2:Now that we have y, we still need to substitute back in to get x. We could substitute back into any of the previous equations, but notice that equation 3 is already conveniently solved for x:And so the solution is (1, 1).As a rule, the substitution method is easier and quicker than the addition method when one of the equations is very simple and can readily be solved for one of the variables. || 