Subtraction of Fractions With Like Denominators We can picture the concept of subtraction of fractions in much the same way we pictured addition. From this observation, we can suggest the following rule for subtracting fractions having like denominators: Subtraction of Fractions with Like Denominators To subtract two fractions that have like denominators, subtract the numerators and place the resulting difference over the common denominator. Reduce, if possible. Sample Set B Find the following differences. Example 5.6.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 5. Example 5.7.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 6. Example 5.8.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract numerators and place the difference over 9. Example 5.9.  To see what happens if we mistakenly subtract the denominators, let's consider We get division by zero, which is undefined. We do not subtract denominators. Practice Set B Find the following differences. Exercise 5.2.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.10. (Go to Solution) Show why subtracting both the numerators and the denominators is in error by performing the subtraction . Subtraction of Fractions With Like Denominators We can picture the concept of subtraction of fractions in much the same way we pictured addition. From this observation, we can suggest the following rule for subtracting fractions having like denominators: Subtraction of Fractions with Like Denominators To subtract two fractions that have like denominators, subtract the numerators and place the resulting difference over the common denominator. Reduce, if possible. Sample Set B Find the following differences. Example 5.6.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 5. Example 5.7.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 6. Example 5.8.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract numerators and place the difference over 9. Example 5.9.  To see what happens if we mistakenly subtract the denominators, let's consider We get division by zero, which is undefined. We do not subtract denominators. Practice Set B Find the following differences. Exercise 5.2.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.10. (Go to Solution) Show why subtracting both the numerators and the denominators is in error by performing the subtraction .  || 