 ||  || Algebraic Expressions Numerical Expression In arithmetic, a numerical expression results when numbers are connected by arithmetic operation signs (+, -, ⋅ , ÷). For example, , , , and are numerical expressions. Algebraic Expression In algebra, letters are used to represent numbers, and an algebraic expression results when an arithmetic operation sign associates a letter with a number or a letter with a letter. For example, , , , , and are algebraic expressions. Expressions Numerical expressions and algebraic expressions are often referred to simply as expressions.  || Terms and Factors In algebra, it is extremely important to be able to distinguish between terms and factors. Distinction Between Terms and Factors Terms are parts of sums and are therefore connected by + signs. Factors are parts of products and are therefore separated by ⋅ signs. Note While making the distinction between sums and products, we must re­member that subtraction and division are functions of these operations. In some expressions it will appear that terms are separated by minus signs. We must keep in mind that subtraction is addition of the opposite, that is, In some expressions it will appear that factors are separated by division signs. We must keep in mind that Sample Set A State the number of terms in each expression and name them. Example 11.1.  . In this expression, x and 4 are connected by a "+" sign. Therefore, they are terms. This expression consists of two terms. Example 11.2.  . The expression can be expressed as . We can now see that this expres­sion consists of the two terms and . Rather than rewriting the expression when a subtraction occurs, we can identify terms more quickly by associating the + or - sign with the individual quantity. Example 11.3.  . Associating the sign with the individual quantities, we see that this expression consists of the four terms , 7, , . Example 11.4.  . This expression consists of the two terms, and . Notice that the term is composed of the two factors 5 and . The term is composed of the two factors and . Example 11.5.  . This expression consists of one term. Notice that can be expressed as or (indicating the connecting signs of arithmetic). Note that no operation sign is necessary for multiplication. Practice Set A Specify the terms in each expression. Exercise 11.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.5. (Go to Solution)  || Coefficients We know that multiplication is a description of repeated addition. For example, describes Suppose some quantity is represented by the letter . The multiplication de­scribes . It is now easy to see that specifies 5 of the quantities represented by . In the expression , 5 is called the numerical coefficient, or more simply, the coefficient of . Coefficient The coefficient of a quantity records how many of that quantity there are. Since constants alone do not record the number of some quantity, they are not usually considered as numerical coefficients. For example, in the expression , the coefficient of is 7. (There are 7 x's.) is 2. (There are 2 y 's.) is . (There are z 's.) The constant 12 is not considered a numerical coefficient.  When the numerical coefficient of a variable is 1, we write only the variable and not the coefficient. For example, we write rather than . It is clear just by looking at that there is only one.  || Numerical Evaluation We know that a variable represents an unknown quantity. Therefore, any expres­sion that contains a variable represents an unknown quantity. For example, if the value of is unknown, then the value of is unknown. The value of depends on the value of . Numerical Evaluation Numerical evaluation is the process of determining the numerical value of an algebraic expression by replacing the variables in the expression with specified numbers. Sample Set B Find the value of each expression. Example 11.6.  , if and Replace x with –4 and y with 2. Thus, when and , . Example 11.7.  , if and = . Replace a with 6 and b with –3. Thus, when a = 6 and b = –3, . Example 11.8.  , if and Replace with –5 and with –1. Thus, when and , . Example 11.9.  , if Replace x with 4. Thus, when , . Example 11.10.  , if Replace x with 3. Example 11.11.  , if . Replace x with 3. The exponent is connected to –3, not 3 as in the problem above. Practice Set B Find the value of each expression. Exercise 11.2.6. (Go to Solution) if and Exercise 11.2.7. (Go to Solution) , if , , Exercise 11.2.8. (Go to Solution) , if , and Exercise 11.2.9. (Go to Solution) , if and Exercise 11.2.10. (Go to Solution) , if and Exercise 11.2.11. (Go to Solution) , if Exercise 11.2.12. (Go to Solution) , if Exercise 11.2.13. (Go to Solution) , if  ||  || Combining Like Terms From our examination of terms in Section 11.2, we know that like terms are terms in which the variable parts are identical. Like terms is an appropriate name since terms with identical variable parts and different numerical coefficients represent different amounts of the same quantity. When we are dealing with quantities of the same type, we may combine them using addition and subtraction. Simplifying an Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression may be simplified by combining like terms. This concept is illustrated in the following examples. Eight and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. We have combined quantities of the same type. Eight and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. Thus, we have 13 of one type and 3 of another type. We have combined only quantities of the same type. Suppose we let the letter represent "record." Then, . The terms and are like terms. So, 8 and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. We have combined like terms. Suppose we let the letter represent "record" and represent "tape." Then, We have combined only the like terms. After observing the problems in these examples, we can suggest a method for simplifying an algebraic expression by combining like terms. Combining Like Terms Like terms may be combined by adding or subtracting their coefficients and affixing the result to the common variable. Sample Set A Simplify each expression by combining like terms. Example 11.12.  . All three terms are alike. Combine their coefficients and affix this result to : . Thus, . Example 11.13.  The terms and are like terms. Combine their coefficients: . Thus, . Example 11.14.  The like terms are Thus, Example 11.15.  . The like terms are Thus, . Practice Set A Simplify each expression by combining like terms. Exercise 11.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.5. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Equations Equation An equation is a statement that two algebraic expressions are equal. The following are examples of equations: Notice that , , and are not equations. They are expressions. They are not equations because there is no statement that each of these expressions is equal to another expression.  || Solutions and Equivalent Equations Conditional Equations The truth of some equations is conditional upon the value chosen for the variable. Such equations are called conditional equations. There are two additional types of equations. They are examined in courses in algebra, so we will not consider them now. Solutions and Solving an Equation The set of values that, when substituted for the variables, make the equation true, are called the solutions of the equation. An equation has been solved when all its solutions have been found. Sample Set A Example 11.16.  Verify that 3 is a solution to . When , Example 11.17.  Verify that is a solution to When , Example 11.18.  Verify that 5 is not a solution to . When , Example 11.19.  Verify that -2 is a solution to . When , Practice Set A Exercise 11.4.1. (Go to Solution) Verify that 5 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.2. (Go to Solution) Verify that is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.3. (Go to Solution) Verify that 0 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.4. (Go to Solution) Verify that 3 is not a solution to . Exercise 11.4.5. (Go to Solution) Verify that -1 is a solution to . Equivalent Equations Some equations have precisely the same collection of solutions. Such equations are called equivalent equations. For example, , , and are all equivalent equations since the only solution to each is . (Can you verify this?)  || Solving Equations We know that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. Table 11.1. This number is the same as this number ↓ ↓ ↓ = 4 = 11 = -1 Addition/Subtraction Property of Equality From this, we can suggest the addition/subtraction property of equality. Given any equation, We can obtain an equivalent equation by adding the same number to both sides of the equation. We can obtain an equivalent equation by subtracting the same number from both sides of the equation. The Idea Behind Equation Solving The idea behind equation solving is to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. Signs of operation (+, -, ⋅,÷) are used to associate two numbers. For example, in the expression , the numbers 5 and 3 are associated by addition. An association can be undone by performing the opposite operation. The addition/subtraction property of equality can be used to undo an association that is made by addition or subtraction. Subtraction is used to undo an addition. Addition is used to undo a subtraction. The procedure is illustrated in the problems of id1163760715212. Sample Set B Use the addition/subtraction property of equality to solve each equation. Example 11.20.  . 4 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 4 from both sides. Check: When , becomes The solution to is . Example 11.21.  . 8 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 8 to both sides. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.22.  . Before we use the addition/subtraction property, we should simplify as much as possible. 6 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 6 from both sides. This is equivalent to . Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.23.  . Begin by simplifying the left side of the equation. 1 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 1 from both sides. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.24.  . In this equation, the variable appears on both sides. We need to isolate it on one side. Although we can choose either side, it will be more convenient to choose the side with the larger coefficient. Since 8 is greater than 6, we’ll isolate on the left side. Since represents , subtract from each side. 4 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 4 to both sides. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.25.  . -8 is associated with by addition. Undo the by subtracting -8 from both sides. Subtracting -8 we get . We actually add 8 to both sides. Check: When becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Practice Set B Exercise 11.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.11. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Multiplication/ Division Property of Equality Recall that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. From this, we can suggest the multiplication/division property of equality. Multiplication/Division Property of Equality Given any equation, We can obtain an equivalent equation by multiplying both sides of the equa­tion by the same nonzero number, that is, if , then is equivalent to We can obtain an equivalent equation by dividing both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if , then is equivalent to The multiplication/division property of equality can be used to undo an association with a number that multiplies or divides the variable. Sample Set A Use the multiplication / division property of equality to solve each equation. Example 11.26.  6 is associated with y by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6 Check: When becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.27.  . -2 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by -2. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is Example 11.28.  . We will examine two methods for solving equations such as this one. Method 1: Use of dividing out common factors. 7 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by 7. Divide out the 7’s. 3 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dviding both sides by 3. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Method 2: Use of reciprocals Recall that if the product of two numbers is 1, the numbers are reciprocals. Thus and are reciprocals. Multiply both sides of the equation by , the reciprocal of . Notice that we get the same solution using either method. Example 11.29.  -8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by -8. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. Example 11.30.  Since is actually and , we can isolate by multiplying both sides of the equation by . Check: When , becomes The solution to is . Practice Set A Use the multiplication/division property of equality to solve each equation. Be sure to check each solution. Exercise 11.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.6. (Go to Solution)  || Combining Techniques in Equation Solving Having examined solving equations using the addition/subtraction and the multi­plication/division principles of equality, we can combine these techniques to solve more complicated equations. When beginning to solve an equation such as , it is helpful to know which property of equality to use first, addition/subtraction or multiplication/di­vision. Recalling that in equation solving we are trying to isolate the variable (disas­sociate numbers from it), it is helpful to note the following. To associate numbers and letters, we use the order of operations. Multiply/divide Add/subtract To undo an association between numbers and letters, we use the order of opera­tions in reverse. Add/subtract Multiply/divide Sample Set B Solve each equation. (In these example problems, we will not show the checks.) Example 11.31.  -4 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 4 to both sides. 6 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6 Example 11.32.  3 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 3 from both sides. -8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by -8. Example 11.33.  Begin by solving this equation by combining like terms. Choose a side on which to isolate m. Since 7 is greater than 1, we'll isolate m on the right side. Subtract m from both sides. 8 is associated with m by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 8 to both sides. 6 is associated with m by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6. Reduce. Notice that if we had chosen to isolate m on the left side of the equation rather than the right side, we would have proceeded as follows: Subtract from both sides. Add 6 to both sides, Divide both sides by -6. This is the same result as with the previous approach. Example 11.34.  7 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by 7. 8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 8. Practice Set B Solve each equation. Be sure to check each solution. Exercise 11.5.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.12. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Translating Words to Symbols Practical problems seldom, if ever, come in equation form. The job of the problem solver is to translate the problem from phrases and statements into mathematical expressions and equations, and then to solve the equations. As problem solvers, our job is made simpler if we are able to translate verbal phrases to mathematical expressions and if we follow the five-step method of solving applied problems. To help us translate from words to symbols, we can use the following Mathematics Dictionary. Table 11.2. MATHEMATICS DICTIONARY Word or Phrase Mathematical Operation Sum, sum of, added to, increased by, more than, and, plus + Difference, minus, subtracted from, decreased by, less, less than - Product, the product of, of, multiplied by, times, per ⋅ Quotient, divided by, ratio, per ÷ Equals, is equal to, is, the result is, becomes = A number, an unknown quantity, an unknown, a quantity (or any symbol) Sample Set A Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Example 11.35.  Translation: . Example 11.36.  Translation: . Example 11.37.  Translation: . Example 11.38.  Translation: . Example 11.39.  Translation: , or . Example 11.40.  Translation: . Practice Set A Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Exercise 11.6.1. (Go to Solution) Twelve more than a number. Exercise 11.6.2. (Go to Solution) Eight minus a number. Exercise 11.6.3. (Go to Solution) An unknown quantity less fourteen. Exercise 11.6.4. (Go to Solution) Six times a number is fifty-four. Exercise 11.6.5. (Go to Solution) Two ninths of a number is eleven. Exercise 11.6.6. (Go to Solution) Three more than seven times a number is nine more than five times the number. Exercise 11.6.7. (Go to Solution) Twice a number less eight is equal to one more than three times the number. Sample Set B Example 11.41.  Sometimes the structure of the sentence indicates the use of grouping symbols. We’ll be alert for commas. They set off terms. Translation: . Example 11.42.  Some phrases and sentences do not translate directly. We must be careful to read them properly. The word from often appears in such phrases and sentences. The word from means “a point of departure for motion.” The following translation will illustrate this use. Translation: . The word from indicated the motion (subtraction) is to begin at the point of “some number.” Example 11.43.  Ten less than some number. Notice that less than can be replaced by from. Ten from some number. Translation: . Practice Set B Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Exercise 11.6.8. (Go to Solution) A number divided by eight, plus seven, is fifty. Exercise 11.6.9. (Go to Solution) A number divided by three, minus the same number multiplied by six, is one more than the number. Exercise 11.6.10. (Go to Solution) Nine from some number is four. Exercise 11.6.11. (Go to Solution) Five less than some quantity is eight.  ||  || The Five Step Method We are now in a position to solve some applied problems using algebraic methods. The problems we shall solve are intended as logic developers. Although they may not seem to reflect real situations, they do serve as a basis for solving more complex, real situation, applied problems. To solve problems algebraically, we will use the five-step method. Strategy for Reading Word Problems When solving mathematical word problems, you may wish to apply the following "reading strategy." Read the problem quickly to get a feel for the situation. Do not pay close attention to details. At the first reading, too much attention to details may be overwhelming and lead to confusion and discouragement. After the first, brief reading, read the problem carefully in phrases. Reading phrases introduces information more slowly and allows us to absorb and put together important information. We can look for the unknown quantity by reading one phrase at a time. Five-Step Method for Solving Word Problems Let (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Draw a picture if possible. Solve the equation. Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement, not equation, of the problem. Write a conclusion. If it has been your experience that word problems are difficult, then follow the five-step method carefully. Most people have trouble with word problems for two reasons: They are not able to translate the words to mathematical symbols. (See Section 11.5.) They neglect step 1. After working through the problem phrase by phrase, to become familiar with the situation, INTRODUCE A VARIABLE  || Number Problems Sample Set A Example 11.44.  What number decreased by six is five? Let represent the unknown number. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Read phrases. Solve this equation. Add 6 to both sides. Check the result. When 11 is decreased by 6, the result is , which is equal to 5. The solution checks. The number is 11. Example 11.45.  When three times a number is increased by four, the result is eight more than five times the number. Let the unknown number. Translate the phrases to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Check this result. Three times is . Increasing by 4 results in . Now, five times is . Increasing by results in . The results agree, and the solution checks. The number is Example 11.46.  Consecutive integers have the property that if Consecutive odd or even integers have the property that if The sum of three consecutive odd integers is equal to one less than twice the first odd integer. Find the three integers. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Read phrases. Check this result. The sum of the three integers is One less than twice the first integer is . Since these two results are equal, the solution checks. The three odd integers are -7, -5, -3. Practice Set A Exercise 11.7.1. (Go to Solution) When three times a number is decreased by 5, the result is -23. Find the number. Let Check: The number is __________. Exercise 11.7.2. (Go to Solution) When five times a number is increased by 7, the result is five less than seven times the number. Find the number. Let Check: The number is __________. Exercise 11.7.3. (Go to Solution) Two consecutive numbers add to 35. Find the numbers. Check: The numbers are __________ and __________. Exercise 11.7.4. (Go to Solution) The sum of three consecutive even integers is six more than four times the middle integer. Find the integers. Let smallest integer. __________= next integer. __________= largest integer. Check: The integers are __________, __________, and __________.  || Geometry Problems Sample Set B Example 11.47.  The perimeter (length around) of a rectangle is 20 meters. If the length is 4 meters longer than the width, find the length and width of the rectangle. Let the width of the rectangle. Then, the length of the rectangle. We can draw a picture. The length around the rectangle is Check: The length of the rectangle is 7 meters. The width of the rectangle is 3 meters. Practice Set B Exercise 11.7.5. (Go to Solution) The perimeter of a triangle is 16 inches. The second leg is 2 inches longer than the first leg, and the third leg is 5 inches longer than the first leg. Find the length of each leg. Let length of the first leg. __________= length of the second leg. __________= length of the third leg. We can draw a picture. Check: The lengths of the legs are__________,__________, and__________.  || 