Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions Now that complex numbers are defined, we can complete our study of solutions to quadratic equations. Often solutions to quadratic equations are not real.   Example 9: Solve using the quadratic formula: Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Check these solutions by substituting them into the original equation. Answer: The solutions are and .   The equation may not be given in standard form. The general steps for solving using the quadratic formula are outlined in the following example.   Example 10: Solve: . Solution: Step 1: Write the quadratic equation in standard form. Step 2: Identify a, b, and c for use in the quadratic formula. Here Step 3: Substitute the appropriate values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Answer: The solution is . The check is optional.   Example 11: Solve: . Solution: Begin by rewriting the equation in standard form. Here , , and . Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are and . Notation Note Consider the following: Both numbers are equivalent and is in standard form, where the real part is −1 and the imaginary part is . However, this number is often expressed as , even though this expression is not in standard form. Again, this is done to avoid the possibility of misinterpreting the imaginary unit as part of the radicand.   Try this! Solve: . Answer: Video Solution Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions Now that complex numbers are defined, we can complete our study of solutions to quadratic equations. Often solutions to quadratic equations are not real.   Example 9: Solve using the quadratic formula: Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Check these solutions by substituting them into the original equation. Answer: The solutions are and .   The equation may not be given in standard form. The general steps for solving using the quadratic formula are outlined in the following example.   Example 10: Solve: . Solution: Step 1: Write the quadratic equation in standard form. Step 2: Identify a, b, and c for use in the quadratic formula. Here Step 3: Substitute the appropriate values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Answer: The solution is . The check is optional.   Example 11: Solve: . Solution: Begin by rewriting the equation in standard form. Here , , and . Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are and . Notation Note Consider the following: Both numbers are equivalent and is in standard form, where the real part is −1 and the imaginary part is . However, this number is often expressed as , even though this expression is not in standard form. Again, this is done to avoid the possibility of misinterpreting the imaginary unit as part of the radicand.   Try this! Solve: . Answer: Video Solution  || 