Positive and Negative Numbers When we studied the number line in Section Section 2.3 we noted that Each point on the number line corresponds to a real number, and each real number is located at a unique point on the number line. Positive and Negative Numbers Each real number has a sign inherently associated with it. A real number is said to be a positive number if it is located to the right of 0 on the number line. It is a negative number if it is located to the left of 0 on the number line. THE NOTATION OF SIGNED NUMBERS A number is denoted as positive if it is directly preceded by a " + " sign or no sign at all.A number is denoted as negative if it is directly preceded by a " − " sign. The " + " and " – " signs now have two meanings: + can denote the operation of addition or a positive number. − can denote the operation of subtraction or a negative number. Read the "-" Sign as "Negative" To avoid any confusion between "sign" and "operation," it is preferable to read the sign of a number as "positive" or "negative." Positive and Negative Numbers When we studied the number line in Section Section 2.3 we noted that Each point on the number line corresponds to a real number, and each real number is located at a unique point on the number line. Positive and Negative Numbers Each real number has a sign inherently associated with it. A real number is said to be a positive number if it is located to the right of 0 on the number line. It is a negative number if it is located to the left of 0 on the number line. THE NOTATION OF SIGNED NUMBERS A number is denoted as positive if it is directly preceded by a " + " sign or no sign at all.A number is denoted as negative if it is directly preceded by a " − " sign. The " + " and " – " signs now have two meanings: + can denote the operation of addition or a positive number. − can denote the operation of subtraction or a negative number. Read the "-" Sign as "Negative" To avoid any confusion between "sign" and "operation," it is preferable to read the sign of a number as "positive" or "negative."  || 