Compound Inequalities Following are some examples of compound linear inequalities: These compound inequalities Two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” are actually two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” For example, is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: Solve each inequality individually, and the intersection of the two solution sets solves the original compound inequality. While this method works, there is another method that usually requires fewer steps. Apply the properties of this section to all three parts of the compound inequality with the goal of isolating the variable in the middle of the statement to determine the bounds of the solution set.   Example 6: Solve: − 3 < 2 x + 5 < 17 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4, 6 )   Example 7: Solve: − 1 ≤ 1 2 x − 3 < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: [ 4, 8 )   It is important to note that when multiplying or dividing all three parts of a compound inequality by a negative number, you must reverse all of the inequalities in the statement. For example, The answer above can be written in an equivalent form, where smaller numbers lie to the left and the larger numbers lie to the right, as they appear on a number line. Using interval notation, write ( − 10 ,   5 ) .   Try this! Solve: − 8 ≤ 2 ( − 3 x + 5 ) < 34 . Answer: ( − 4 ,   3 ] Video Solution For compound inequalities with the word “or” you must work both inequalities separately and then consider the union of the solution sets. Values in this union solve either inequality.   Example 8: Solve: 3 x + 1 < 10   or   2 x − 1 ≥ 11 Solution: Solve each inequality and form the union by combining the solution sets. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ) ∪ [ 6 ,   ∞ )   Try this! Solve: 4 x − 1 < − 5   or   4 x − 1 > 5 . Answer: ( − ∞ , − 1 ) ∪ ( 3 2 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution Compound Inequalities Following are some examples of compound linear inequalities: These compound inequalities Two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” are actually two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” For example, is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: Solve each inequality individually, and the intersection of the two solution sets solves the original compound inequality. While this method works, there is another method that usually requires fewer steps. Apply the properties of this section to all three parts of the compound inequality with the goal of isolating the variable in the middle of the statement to determine the bounds of the solution set.   Example 6: Solve: − 3 < 2 x + 5 < 17 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4, 6 )   Example 7: Solve: − 1 ≤ 1 2 x − 3 < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: [ 4, 8 )   It is important to note that when multiplying or dividing all three parts of a compound inequality by a negative number, you must reverse all of the inequalities in the statement. For example, The answer above can be written in an equivalent form, where smaller numbers lie to the left and the larger numbers lie to the right, as they appear on a number line. Using interval notation, write ( − 10 ,   5 ) .   Try this! Solve: − 8 ≤ 2 ( − 3 x + 5 ) < 34 . Answer: ( − 4 ,   3 ] Video Solution For compound inequalities with the word “or” you must work both inequalities separately and then consider the union of the solution sets. Values in this union solve either inequality.   Example 8: Solve: 3 x + 1 < 10   or   2 x − 1 ≥ 11 Solution: Solve each inequality and form the union by combining the solution sets. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ) ∪ [ 6 ,   ∞ )   Try this! Solve: 4 x − 1 < − 5   or   4 x − 1 > 5 . Answer: ( − ∞ , − 1 ) ∪ ( 3 2 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution  || 