Zero and Division Recall the relationship between multiplication and division: In this case, the dividend The numerator of a quotient. 12 is evenly divided by the divisor The denominator of a quotient. 6 to obtain the quotient, 2. It is true in general that if we multiply the divisor by the quotient we obtain the dividend. Now consider the case where the dividend is zero and the divisor is nonzero: This demonstrates that zero divided by any nonzero real number must be zero. Now consider a nonzero number divided by zero: The zero-factor property of multiplication states that any real number times 0 is 0. We conclude that there is no real number such that 0 ⋅ ? = 12 and thus, the quotient is left undefined A quotient such as 5 0 , which is left without meaning and is not assigned an interpretation. . Try 12 ÷ 0 on a calculator. What does it say? For our purposes, we will simply write “undefined.” To summarize, given any real number a ≠ 0 , then We are left to consider the case where the dividend and divisor are both zero. Here any real number seems to work. For example, 0 ⋅ 5 = 0 and 0 ⋅ 3 = 0 . Therefore, the quotient is uncertain or indeterminate A quotient such as 0 0 , which is a quantity that is uncertain or ambiguous. . In this course, we state that 0 ÷ 0 is undefined. Zero and Division Recall the relationship between multiplication and division: In this case, the dividend The numerator of a quotient. 12 is evenly divided by the divisor The denominator of a quotient. 6 to obtain the quotient, 2. It is true in general that if we multiply the divisor by the quotient we obtain the dividend. Now consider the case where the dividend is zero and the divisor is nonzero: This demonstrates that zero divided by any nonzero real number must be zero. Now consider a nonzero number divided by zero: The zero-factor property of multiplication states that any real number times 0 is 0. We conclude that there is no real number such that 0 ⋅ ? = 12 and thus, the quotient is left undefined A quotient such as 5 0 , which is left without meaning and is not assigned an interpretation. . Try 12 ÷ 0 on a calculator. What does it say? For our purposes, we will simply write “undefined.” To summarize, given any real number a ≠ 0 , then We are left to consider the case where the dividend and divisor are both zero. Here any real number seems to work. For example, 0 ⋅ 5 = 0 and 0 ⋅ 3 = 0 . Therefore, the quotient is uncertain or indeterminate A quotient such as 0 0 , which is a quantity that is uncertain or ambiguous. . In this course, we state that 0 ÷ 0 is undefined.  || 