Literal Equations (Linear Formulas) Algebra lets us solve whole classes of applications using literal equations A formula that summarizes whole classes of problems. , or formulas. Formulas often have more than one variable and describe, or model, a particular real-world problem. For example, the familiar formula D = r t describes the distance traveled in terms of the average rate and time; given any two of these quantities, we can determine the third. Using algebra, we can solve the equation for any one of the variables and derive two more formulas. If we divide both sides by r, we obtain the formula t = D r . Use this formula to find the time, given the distance and the rate. If we divide both sides by t, we obtain the formula r = D t . Use this formula to find the rate, given the distance traveled and the time it takes to travel that distance. Using the techniques learned up to this point, we now have three equivalent formulas relating distance, average rate, and time: When given a literal equation, it is often necessary to solve for one of the variables in terms of the others. Use the properties of equality to isolate the indicated variable.   Example 9: Solve for a:    P = 2 a + b . Solution: The goal is to isolate the variable a. Answer: a = P − b 2   Example 10: Solve for y:    z = x + y 2 . Solution: The goal is to isolate the variable y. Answer: y = 2 z − x   Try this! Solve for b:    2 a − 3 b = c . Answer: b = 2 a − c 3 Video Solution Literal Equations (Linear Formulas) Algebra lets us solve whole classes of applications using literal equations A formula that summarizes whole classes of problems. , or formulas. Formulas often have more than one variable and describe, or model, a particular real-world problem. For example, the familiar formula D = r t describes the distance traveled in terms of the average rate and time; given any two of these quantities, we can determine the third. Using algebra, we can solve the equation for any one of the variables and derive two more formulas. If we divide both sides by r, we obtain the formula t = D r . Use this formula to find the time, given the distance and the rate. If we divide both sides by t, we obtain the formula r = D t . Use this formula to find the rate, given the distance traveled and the time it takes to travel that distance. Using the techniques learned up to this point, we now have three equivalent formulas relating distance, average rate, and time: When given a literal equation, it is often necessary to solve for one of the variables in terms of the others. Use the properties of equality to isolate the indicated variable.   Example 9: Solve for a:    P = 2 a + b . Solution: The goal is to isolate the variable a. Answer: a = P − b 2   Example 10: Solve for y:    z = x + y 2 . Solution: The goal is to isolate the variable y. Answer: y = 2 z − x   Try this! Solve for b:    2 a − 3 b = c . Answer: b = 2 a − c 3 Video Solution  || 