Subtraction Subtraction Subtraction is the process of determining the remainder when part of the total is removed. Suppose the sum of two whole numbers is 11, and from 11 we remove 4. Using the number line to help our visualization, we see that if we are located at 11 and move 4 units to the left, and thus remove 4 units, we will be located at 7. Thus, 7 units remain when we remove 4 units from 11 units. The Minus Symbol The minus symbol (-) is used to indicate subtraction. For example, 11 − 4 indicates that 4 is to be subtracted from 11. Minuend The number immediately in front of or the minus symbol is called the minuend, and it represents the original number of units. Subtrahend The number immediately following or below the minus symbol is called the subtrahend, and it represents the number of units to be removed. Difference The result of the subtraction is called the difference of the two numbers. For example, in 11 − 4 = 7, 11 is the minuend, 4 is the subtrahend, and 7 is the difference. Subtraction Subtraction Subtraction is the process of determining the remainder when part of the total is removed. Suppose the sum of two whole numbers is 11, and from 11 we remove 4. Using the number line to help our visualization, we see that if we are located at 11 and move 4 units to the left, and thus remove 4 units, we will be located at 7. Thus, 7 units remain when we remove 4 units from 11 units. The Minus Symbol The minus symbol (-) is used to indicate subtraction. For example, 11 − 4 indicates that 4 is to be subtracted from 11. Minuend The number immediately in front of or the minus symbol is called the minuend, and it represents the original number of units. Subtrahend The number immediately following or below the minus symbol is called the subtrahend, and it represents the number of units to be removed. Difference The result of the subtraction is called the difference of the two numbers. For example, in 11 − 4 = 7, 11 is the minuend, 4 is the subtrahend, and 7 is the difference.  || 