General Guidelines for Solving Linear Equations When solving linear equations, the goal is to determine what value, if any, will produce a true statement when substituted in the original equation. Do this by isolating the variable using the following steps: Step 1: Simplify both sides of the equation using the order of operations and combine all same-side like terms. Step 2: Use the appropriate properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms with the variable term on one side of the equation and the constant term on the other. Step 3: Divide or multiply as needed to isolate the variable. Step 4: Check to see if the answer solves the original equation.   Example 3: Solve: − 1 2 ( 10 y − 2 ) + 3 = 14 . Solution: Simplify the linear expression on the left side before solving. To check, Answer: The solution is −2.   Example 4: Solve: 5 ( 3 x + 2 ) − 2 = − 2 ( 1 − 7 x ) . Solution: First, simplify the expressions on both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is −10. The check is left as an exercise.   Try this! Solve: 6 − 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) = 4 x − 7 . Answer: x = 1 Video Solution General Guidelines for Solving Linear Equations When solving linear equations, the goal is to determine what value, if any, will produce a true statement when substituted in the original equation. Do this by isolating the variable using the following steps: Step 1: Simplify both sides of the equation using the order of operations and combine all same-side like terms. Step 2: Use the appropriate properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms with the variable term on one side of the equation and the constant term on the other. Step 3: Divide or multiply as needed to isolate the variable. Step 4: Check to see if the answer solves the original equation.   Example 3: Solve: − 1 2 ( 10 y − 2 ) + 3 = 14 . Solution: Simplify the linear expression on the left side before solving. To check, Answer: The solution is −2.   Example 4: Solve: 5 ( 3 x + 2 ) − 2 = − 2 ( 1 − 7 x ) . Solution: First, simplify the expressions on both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is −10. The check is left as an exercise.   Try this! Solve: 6 − 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) = 4 x − 7 . Answer: x = 1 Video Solution  || 