 || Variables and Constants A basic distinction between algebra and arithmetic is the use of symbols (usually letters) in algebra to represent numbers. So, algebra is a generalization of arithme­tic. Let us look at two examples of situations in which letters are substituted for numbers: Suppose that a student is taking four college classes, and each class can have at most 1 exam per week. In any 1-week period, the student may have 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 exams. In algebra, we can let the letter x represent the number of exams this student may have in a 1-week period. The letter x may assume any of the various values 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. Suppose that in writing a term paper for a biology class a student needs to specify the average lifetime, in days, of a male housefly. If she does not know this number off the top of her head, she might represent it (at least temporarily) on her paper with the letter t (which reminds her of time). Later, she could look up the average time in a reference book and find it to be 17 days. The letter t can assume only the one value, 17, and no other values. The value t is constant. Variable, Constant A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. A letter or symbol that represents one specific number, known or unknown, is called a constant. In example 1, the letter x is a variable since it can represent any of the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. The letter t example 2 is a constant since it can only have the value 17.  || Real Numbers Real Number Line The study of mathematics requires the use of several collections of numbers. The real number line allows us to visually display (graph) the numbers in which we are interested. A line is composed of infinitely many points. To each point we can associate a unique number, and with each number, we can associate a particular point. Coordinate The number associated with a point on the number line is called the coordinate of the point. Graph The point on a number line that is associated with a particular number is called the graph of that number. Constructing a Real Number Line We construct a real number line as follows: Draw a horizontal line. Origin Choose any point on the line and label it 0. This point is called the origin. Choose a convenient length. Starting at 0, mark this length off in both direc­tions, being careful to have the lengths look like they are about the same. We now define a real number. Real Number A real number is any number that is the coordinate of a point on the real number line. Positive Numbers, Negative Numbers Real numbers whose graphs are to the right of 0 are called positive real numbers, or more simply, positive numbers. Real numbers whose graphs appear to the left of 0 are called negative real numbers, or more simply, negative numbers. The number 0 is neither positive nor negative.  || Subsets of Real Numbers The set of real numbers has many subsets. Some of the subsets that are of interest in the study of algebra are listed below along with their notations and graphs. Natural Numbers, Counting Numbers The natural or counting numbers ( N ): 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . Read “and so on.” Whole Numbers The whole numbers ( W ): 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . Notice that every natural number is a whole number. Integers The integers ( Z ): . . . -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . Notice that every whole number is an integer. Rational Numbers (Fractions) The rational numbers ( Q ): Rational numbers are sometimes called fractions. They are numbers that can be written as the quotient of two integers. They have decimal representations that either terminate or do not terminate but contain a repeating block of digits. Some examples are       Some rational numbers are graphed below. Notice that every integer is a rational number. Notice that there are still a great many points on the number line that have not yet been assigned a type of number. We will not examine these other types of numbers in this text. They are examined in detail in algebra. An example of these numbers is the number π , whose decimal representation does not terminate nor contain a repeating block of digits. An approximation for π is 3.14. Sample Set A Example 10.1.  Is every whole number a natural number? No. The number 0 is a whole number but it is not a natural number. Example 10.2.  Is there an integer that is not a natural number? Yes. Some examples are 0, -1, -2, -3, and -4. Example 10.3.  Is there an integer that is a whole number? Yes. In fact, every whole number is an integer. Practice Set A Exercise 10.2.1. (Go to Solution) Is every natural number a whole number? Exercise 10.2.2. (Go to Solution) Is every whole number an integer? Exercise 10.2.3. (Go to Solution) Is every integer a real number? Exercise 10.2.4. (Go to Solution) Is there an integer that is a whole number? Exercise 10.2.5. (Go to Solution) Is there an integer that is not a natural number?  || Ordering Real Numbers Ordering Real Numbers A real number b is said to be greater than a real number a , denoted b > a , if b is to the right of a on the number line. Thus, as we would expect, 5 > 2 since 5 is to the right of 2 on the number line. Also, – 2 > – 5 since -2 is to the right of -5 on the number line. If we let a and b represent two numbers, then a and b are related in exactly one of three ways: Either Equality Symbol Inequality Symbols Sample Set B Example 10.4.  What integers can replace x so that the following statement is true? – 3 ≤ x < 2 The integers are -3, -2, -1, 0, 1. Example 10.5.  Draw a number line that extends from -3 to 5. Place points at all whole numbers between and including -1 and 3. -1 is not a whole number Practice Set B Exercise 10.2.6. (Go to Solution) What integers can replace x so that the following statement is true? – 5 ≤ x < 2 Exercise 10.2.7. (Go to Solution) Draw a number line that extends from -4 to 3. Place points at all natural numbers between, but not including, -2 to 2.  || 