Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Recall that the distance traveled is equal to the average rate times the time traveled at that rate, D = r ⋅ t . These uniform motion problems Applications relating distance, average rate, and time. usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize that data in a chart and then set up a linear system. In this section, you are encouraged to use two variables.   Example 7: An executive traveled a total of 8 hours and 1,930 miles by car and by plane. Driving to the airport by car, she averaged 60 miles per hour. In the air, the plane averaged 350 miles per hour. How long did it take her to drive to the airport? Solution: We are asked to find the time it takes her to drive to the airport; this indicates that time is the unknown quantity. Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. The distance column and the time column of the chart help us to set up the following linear system. Solve. Now back substitute to find the time it took to drive to the airport x: Answer: It took her 3 hours to drive to the airport.   It is not always the case that time is the unknown quantity. Read the problem carefully and identify what you are asked to find; this defines your variables.   Example 8: Flying with the wind, an airplane traveled 1,365 miles in 3 hours. The plane then turned against the wind and traveled another 870 miles in 2 hours. Find the speed of the airplane and the speed of the wind. Solution: There is no obvious relationship between the speed of the plane and the speed of the wind. For this reason, use two variables as follows: Use the following chart to organize the data: With the wind, the airplane’s total speed is x + w . Flying against the wind, the total speed is x − w . Use the rows of the chart along with the formula D = r ⋅ t to construct a linear system that models this problem. Take care to group the quantities that represent the rate in parentheses. If we divide both sides of the first equation by 3 and both sides of the second equation by 2, then we obtain the following equivalent system: Back substitute. Answer: The speed of the airplane is 445 miles per hour and the speed of the wind is 10 miles per hour.   Try this! A boat traveled 24 miles downstream in 2 hours. The return trip, which was against the current, took twice as long. What are the speeds of the boat and of the current? Answer: The speed of the boat is 9 miles per hour and the speed of the current is 3 miles per hour. Video Solution Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Recall that the distance traveled is equal to the average rate times the time traveled at that rate, D = r ⋅ t . These uniform motion problems Applications relating distance, average rate, and time. usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize that data in a chart and then set up a linear system. In this section, you are encouraged to use two variables.   Example 7: An executive traveled a total of 8 hours and 1,930 miles by car and by plane. Driving to the airport by car, she averaged 60 miles per hour. In the air, the plane averaged 350 miles per hour. How long did it take her to drive to the airport? Solution: We are asked to find the time it takes her to drive to the airport; this indicates that time is the unknown quantity. Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. The distance column and the time column of the chart help us to set up the following linear system. Solve. Now back substitute to find the time it took to drive to the airport x: Answer: It took her 3 hours to drive to the airport.   It is not always the case that time is the unknown quantity. Read the problem carefully and identify what you are asked to find; this defines your variables.   Example 8: Flying with the wind, an airplane traveled 1,365 miles in 3 hours. The plane then turned against the wind and traveled another 870 miles in 2 hours. Find the speed of the airplane and the speed of the wind. Solution: There is no obvious relationship between the speed of the plane and the speed of the wind. For this reason, use two variables as follows: Use the following chart to organize the data: With the wind, the airplane’s total speed is x + w . Flying against the wind, the total speed is x − w . Use the rows of the chart along with the formula D = r ⋅ t to construct a linear system that models this problem. Take care to group the quantities that represent the rate in parentheses. If we divide both sides of the first equation by 3 and both sides of the second equation by 2, then we obtain the following equivalent system: Back substitute. Answer: The speed of the airplane is 445 miles per hour and the speed of the wind is 10 miles per hour.   Try this! A boat traveled 24 miles downstream in 2 hours. The return trip, which was against the current, took twice as long. What are the speeds of the boat and of the current? Answer: The speed of the boat is 9 miles per hour and the speed of the current is 3 miles per hour. Video Solution  || 