 || More Numbers on the Number Line In Chapters Section 1.1, Section 2.1, and Section 3.1, we studied the whole numbers and methods of combining them. We noted that we could visually display the whole numbers by drawing a number line and placing closed circles at whole number locations. By observing this number line, we can see that the whole numbers do not account for every point on the line. What numbers, if any, can be associated with these points? In this section we will see that many of the points on the number line, including the points already associated with whole numbers, can be associated with numbers called fractions.  || Fractions of Whole Numbers The Nature of the Positive Fractions We can extend our collection of numbers, which now contains only the whole numbers, by including fractions of whole numbers. We can determine the nature of these fractions using the number line. If we place a pencil at some whole number and proceed to travel to the right to the next whole number, we see that our journey can be broken into different types of equal parts as shown in the following examples. 1 part. 2 equal parts. 3 equal parts. 4 equal parts. The Latin Word Fractio Notice that the number of parts, 2, 3, and 4, that we are breaking the original quantity into is always a nonzero whole number. The idea of breaking up a whole quantity gives us the word fraction. The word fraction comes from the Latin word "fractio" which means a breaking, or fracture. Suppose we break up the interval from some whole number to the next whole number into five equal parts. After starting to move from one whole number to the next, we decide to stop after covering only two parts. We have covered 2 parts of 5 equal parts. This situation is described by writing . Positive Fraction A number such as is called a positive fraction, or more simply, a fraction.  || The Parts of a Fraction A fraction has three parts. The fraction bar . Fraction Bar The fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol. It separates a quantity into individual groups. These groups have names, as noted in 2 and 3 below. The nonzero number below the fraction bar. Denominator This number is called the denominator of the fraction, and it indicates the number of parts the whole quantity has been divided into. Notice that the denominator must be a nonzero whole number since the least number of parts any quantity can have is one. The number above the fraction bar. Numerator This number is called the numerator of the fraction, and it indicates how many of the specified parts are being considered. Notice that the numerator can be any whole number (including zero) since any number of the specified parts can be considered. Sample Set A The diagrams in the following problems are illustrations of fractions. Example 4.1.  Figure 4.1.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 3 equal parts (c) 1 of the 3 equal parts The fraction is read as "one third." Example 4.2.  Figure 4.2.  (a) A whole rectangle (b) The whole rectangle divided into 5 equal parts (c) 3 of the 5 equal parts The fraction "is read as "three fifths." Example 4.3.  Figure 4.3.  (a) The number line between 0 and 1 (b) The number line between 0 and 1 divided into 7 equal parts (c) 6 of the 7 equal parts The fraction is read as "six sevenths." Example 4.4.  Figure 4.4.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 4 equal parts (c) 4 of the 4 equal parts When the numerator and denominator are equal, the fraction represents the entire quantity, and its value is 1. Practice Set A Specify the numerator and denominator of the following fractions. Exercise 4.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.5. (Go to Solution)  || Reading and Writing Fractions In order to properly translate fractions from word form to number form, or from number form to word form, it is necessary to understand the use of the hyphen. Use of the Hyphen One of the main uses of the hyphen is to tell the reader that two words not ordinarily joined are to be taken in combination as a unit. Hyphens are always used for numbers between and including 21 and 99 (except those ending in zero). Sample Set B Write each fraction using whole numbers. Example 4.5.  Fifty three-hundredths. The hyphen joins the words three and hundredths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty three-hundredths translates as Example 4.6.  Fifty-three hundredths. The hyphen joins the numbers fifty and three and tells us to con­sider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty-three hundredths translates as Example 4.7.  Four hundred seven-thousandths. The hyphen joins the words seven and thousandths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, four hundred seven-thousandths translates as Example 4.8.  Four hundred seven thousandths. The absence of hyphens indicates that the words seven and thousandths are to be considered individually. four hundred seven thousandths translates as Write each fraction using words. Example 4.9.  translates as twenty-one eighty-fifths. Example 4.10.  translates as two hundred three-thousandths. A hyphen is needed between the words three and thousandths to tell the reader that these words are to be considered as a single unit. Example 4.11.  translates as two hundred three thousandths. Practice Set B Write the following fractions using whole numbers. Exercise 4.2.6. (Go to Solution) one tenth Exercise 4.2.7. (Go to Solution) eleven fourteenths Exercise 4.2.8. (Go to Solution) sixteen thirty-fifths Exercise 4.2.9. (Go to Solution) eight hundred seven-thousandths Write the following using words. Exercise 4.2.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.13. (Go to Solution) Name the fraction that describes each shaded portion. Exercise 4.2.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.15. (Go to Solution) In the following 2 problems, state the numerator and denominator, and write each fraction in words. Exercise 4.2.16. (Go to Solution) The number is used in converting from Fahrenheit to Celsius. Exercise 4.2.17. (Go to Solution) A dime is of a dollar.  || 