To convert a fraction to a percent ·         Divide the numerator by the denominator and multiply by 100 To write a fraction as a percent you need to convert the fraction into hundredths. Sometimes this is easy to do without a calculator. For example, if you saw the fraction , you should notice that doubling the numerator and the denominator will produce an equivalent fraction that has a denominator of 100. Then the numerator will be the percent that you are seeking: With other fractions, though, it is not always so easy. It is not at all obvious how to convert a fraction like 5/7 into something over 100. In this case, the best thing to do is to convert the fraction into its decimal form, and then convert the decimal into a percent. To convert the fraction to a decimal, remember that the fraction bar indicates division: The “approximately equal to” sign () is used because the decimal parts have been rounded off. Because it is understood that approximate numbers are rounded, we will not continue to use the approximately equal sign. It is more conventional to just use the standard equal sign with approximate numbers, even though it is not entirely accurate. To convert a fraction to a percent ·         Divide the numerator by the denominator and multiply by 100 To write a fraction as a percent you need to convert the fraction into hundredths. Sometimes this is easy to do without a calculator. For example, if you saw the fraction , you should notice that doubling the numerator and the denominator will produce an equivalent fraction that has a denominator of 100. Then the numerator will be the percent that you are seeking: With other fractions, though, it is not always so easy. It is not at all obvious how to convert a fraction like 5/7 into something over 100. In this case, the best thing to do is to convert the fraction into its decimal form, and then convert the decimal into a percent. To convert the fraction to a decimal, remember that the fraction bar indicates division: The “approximately equal to” sign () is used because the decimal parts have been rounded off. Because it is understood that approximate numbers are rounded, we will not continue to use the approximately equal sign. It is more conventional to just use the standard equal sign with approximate numbers, even though it is not entirely accurate.  || 