Trinomials (Quadratic) A quadratic trinomial has the form ax2 + bx + c, where the coefficients a, b, and c, are real numbers (for simplicity we will only use integers, but in real life they could be any real number). We are interested here in factoring quadratic trinomials with integer coefficients into factors that have integer coefficients. Not all such quadratic polynomials can be factored over the real numbers, and even fewer into integers (they all can be factored of we allow for imaginary numbers and rational coefficients, but we don't). Therefore, when we say a quadratic can be factored, we mean that we can write the factors with only integer coefficients. If a quadratic can be factored, it will be the product of two first-degree binomials, except for very simple cases that just involve monomials. For example x2 by itself is a quadratic expression where the coefficient a is equal to 1, and b and c are zero. Obviously, x2 factors into (x)(x), but this is not a very interesting case. A slightly more complicated case occurs when only the coefficient c is zero. Then you get something that looks like 2x2 + 3x This can be factored very simply by factoring out (‘undistributing’) the common factor of x: 2x2 + 3x = x(2x + 3) The most general case is when all three terms are present, as in x2 + 5x + 6 We look at two cases of this type. The easiest to factor are the ones where the coefficient of x2 (which we are calling ‘a’) is equal to 1, as in the above example. If a is not 1 then things get a little bit more complicated, so we will begin by looking at a = 1 examples. Coefficient of x2 is 1 Since the trinomial comes from multiplying two first-degree binomials, let’s review what happens when we multiply binomials using the FOIL method. Remember that to do factoring we will have to think about this process in reverse (you could say we want to ‘de-FOIL’ the trinomial). Suppose we are given (x + 2)(x + 3) Using the FOIL method, we get (x + 2)(x + 3) = x2 + 3x + 2x + 6 Then, collecting like terms gives (x + 2)(x + 3) = x2 + 5x + 6 Now look at this and think about where the terms in the trinomial came from. Obviously the x2 came from x times x. The interesting part is what happens with the other parts, the ‘+ 2’ and the ‘+ 3’. The last term in the trinomial, the 6 in this case, came from multiplying the 2 and the 3. Where did the 5x in the middle come from? We got the 5x by adding the 2x and the 3x when we collected like terms. We can state this as a rule: If the coefficient of x2 is one, then to factor the quadratic you need to find two numbers that: 1. Multiply to give the constant term (which we call c) 2. Add to give the coefficient of x (which we call b) This rule works even if there are minus signs in the quadratic expression (assuming that you remember how to add and multiply positive and negative numbers). Trinomials (Quadratic) A quadratic trinomial has the form ax2 + bx + c, where the coefficients a, b, and c, are real numbers (for simplicity we will only use integers, but in real life they could be any real number). We are interested here in factoring quadratic trinomials with integer coefficients into factors that have integer coefficients. Not all such quadratic polynomials can be factored over the real numbers, and even fewer into integers (they all can be factored of we allow for imaginary numbers and rational coefficients, but we don't). Therefore, when we say a quadratic can be factored, we mean that we can write the factors with only integer coefficients. If a quadratic can be factored, it will be the product of two first-degree binomials, except for very simple cases that just involve monomials. For example x2 by itself is a quadratic expression where the coefficient a is equal to 1, and b and c are zero. Obviously, x2 factors into (x)(x), but this is not a very interesting case. A slightly more complicated case occurs when only the coefficient c is zero. Then you get something that looks like 2x2 + 3x This can be factored very simply by factoring out (‘undistributing’) the common factor of x: 2x2 + 3x = x(2x + 3) The most general case is when all three terms are present, as in x2 + 5x + 6 We look at two cases of this type. The easiest to factor are the ones where the coefficient of x2 (which we are calling ‘a’) is equal to 1, as in the above example. If a is not 1 then things get a little bit more complicated, so we will begin by looking at a = 1 examples. Coefficient of x2 is 1 Since the trinomial comes from multiplying two first-degree binomials, let’s review what happens when we multiply binomials using the FOIL method. Remember that to do factoring we will have to think about this process in reverse (you could say we want to ‘de-FOIL’ the trinomial). Suppose we are given (x + 2)(x + 3) Using the FOIL method, we get (x + 2)(x + 3) = x2 + 3x + 2x + 6 Then, collecting like terms gives (x + 2)(x + 3) = x2 + 5x + 6 Now look at this and think about where the terms in the trinomial came from. Obviously the x2 came from x times x. The interesting part is what happens with the other parts, the ‘+ 2’ and the ‘+ 3’. The last term in the trinomial, the 6 in this case, came from multiplying the 2 and the 3. Where did the 5x in the middle come from? We got the 5x by adding the 2x and the 3x when we collected like terms. We can state this as a rule: If the coefficient of x2 is one, then to factor the quadratic you need to find two numbers that: 1. Multiply to give the constant term (which we call c) 2. Add to give the coefficient of x (which we call b) This rule works even if there are minus signs in the quadratic expression (assuming that you remember how to add and multiply positive and negative numbers).  || 