Clearing Decimals and Fractions The coefficients of linear equations may be any real number, even decimals and fractions. When decimals and fractions are used, it is possible to use the multiplication property of equality to clear the coefficients in a single step. If given decimal coefficients, then multiply by an appropriate power of 10 to clear the decimals. If given fractional coefficients, then multiply both sides of the equation by the least common multiple of the denominators (LCD).   Example 7: Solve: 2.3 x + 2.8 = − 1.2 x + 9.8 . Solution: Notice that all decimal coefficients are expressed with digits in the tenths place; this suggests that we can clear the decimals by multiplying both sides by 10. Take care to distribute 10 to each term on both sides of the equation. Answer: The solution is 2.   Example 8: Solve: 1 3 x + 1 5 = 1 5 x − 1 . Solution: Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides by the least common multiple of the given denominators. In this case, the LCM ( 3, 5 ) = 15 . Answer: The solution is −9.   It is important to know that these techniques only work for equations. Do not try to clear fractions when simplifying expressions. As a reminder, Solve equations and simplify expressions. If you multiply an expression by 6, you will change the problem. However, if you multiply both sides of an equation by 6, you obtain an equivalent equation. Clearing Decimals and Fractions The coefficients of linear equations may be any real number, even decimals and fractions. When decimals and fractions are used, it is possible to use the multiplication property of equality to clear the coefficients in a single step. If given decimal coefficients, then multiply by an appropriate power of 10 to clear the decimals. If given fractional coefficients, then multiply both sides of the equation by the least common multiple of the denominators (LCD).   Example 7: Solve: 2.3 x + 2.8 = − 1.2 x + 9.8 . Solution: Notice that all decimal coefficients are expressed with digits in the tenths place; this suggests that we can clear the decimals by multiplying both sides by 10. Take care to distribute 10 to each term on both sides of the equation. Answer: The solution is 2.   Example 8: Solve: 1 3 x + 1 5 = 1 5 x − 1 . Solution: Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides by the least common multiple of the given denominators. In this case, the LCM ( 3, 5 ) = 15 . Answer: The solution is −9.   It is important to know that these techniques only work for equations. Do not try to clear fractions when simplifying expressions. As a reminder, Solve equations and simplify expressions. If you multiply an expression by 6, you will change the problem. However, if you multiply both sides of an equation by 6, you obtain an equivalent equation.  || 