 ||  || Addition of Fraction With Like Denominators Let's examine the following diagram. 2 one-fifths and 1 one fifth is shaded. It is shown in the shaded regions of the diagram that (2 one-fifths) + (1 one-fifth) = (3 one-fifths) That is, From this observation, we can suggest the following rule. Method of Adding Fractions Having Like Denominators To add two or more fractions that have the same denominators, add the numer­ators and place the resulting sum over the common denominator. Reduce, if necessary. Sample Set A Find the following sums. Example 5.1.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place that sum over 7. Example 5.2.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 8. Reduce. Example 5.3.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 9. Example 5.4.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 8. Example 5.5.  To see what happens if we mistakenly add the denominators as well as the numerators, let's add Adding the numerators and mistakenly adding the denominators produces This means that two 's is the same as one . Preposterous! We do not add denominators. Practice Set A Find the following sums. Exercise 5.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.5. (Go to Solution) Show why adding both the numerators and denominators is preposterous by adding and and examining the result.  || Subtraction of Fractions With Like Denominators We can picture the concept of subtraction of fractions in much the same way we pictured addition. From this observation, we can suggest the following rule for subtracting fractions having like denominators: Subtraction of Fractions with Like Denominators To subtract two fractions that have like denominators, subtract the numerators and place the resulting difference over the common denominator. Reduce, if possible. Sample Set B Find the following differences. Example 5.6.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 5. Example 5.7.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 6. Example 5.8.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract numerators and place the difference over 9. Example 5.9.  To see what happens if we mistakenly subtract the denominators, let's consider We get division by zero, which is undefined. We do not subtract denominators. Practice Set B Find the following differences. Exercise 5.2.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.10. (Go to Solution) Show why subtracting both the numerators and the denominators is in error by performing the subtraction .  ||  || A Basic Rule There is a basic rule that must be followed when adding or subtracting fractions. A Basic Rule Fractions can only be added or subtracted conveniently if they have like denomi­nators. To see why this rule makes sense, let's consider the problem of adding a quarter and a dime. 1 quarter + 1 dime = 35 cents Now, [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] In order to combine a quarter and a dime to produce 35¢, we convert them to quantities of the same denomination. Same denomination → same denominator  || Addition and Subtraction of Fractions Least Common Multiple (LCM) and Least Common Denominator (LCD) In Section 3.6, we examined the least common multiple (LCM) of a collection of numbers. If these numbers are used as denominators of fractions, we call the least common multiple, the least common denominator (LCD). Method of Adding or Subtracting Fractions with Unlike Denominators To add or subtract fractions having unlike denominators, convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction having as a denominator the least common denomina­tor ( LCD) of the original denominators. Sample Set A Find the following sums and differences. Example 5.10.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 6 and 4. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Write each of the original fractions as a new, equivalent fraction having the common denomina­tor 12. [ERROR: MathML not converted] To find a new numerator, we divide the original denominator into the LCD. Since the original denominator is being multiplied by this quotient, we must multiply the original numerator by this quotient. 12 ÷ 6 = 2 12 ÷ 4 = 3 [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.11.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 2 and 3. LCD = 2 ⋅ 3 = 6 Write each of the original fractions as a new, equivalent fraction having the common denominator 6. [ERROR: MathML not converted] To find a new numerator, we divide the original denominator into the LCD. Since the original denominator is being multiplied by this quotient, we must multiply the original numerator by this quotient. 6 ÷ 2 = 3 Multiply the numerator 1 by 3. 6 ÷ 2 = 3 Multiply the numerator 2 by 2. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.12.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 9 and 12. [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] 36÷9 = 4 Multiply the numerator 5 by 4. 36÷12 = 3 Multiply the numerator 5 by 3. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.13.  [ERROR: MathML not converted] The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 6, 8, and 16 [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] 48÷6 = 8 Multiply the numerator 5 by 8 48÷8 = 6 Multiply the numerator 1 by 6 48÷16 = 3 Multiply the numerator 7 by 3 [ERROR: MathML not converted] Practice Set A Find the following sums and differences. Exercise 5.3.1. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.2. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.3. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.4. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.5. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted]  ||  ||  || Order and the Inequality Symbols Our number system is called an ordered number system because the numbers in the system can be placed in order from smaller to larger. This is easily seen on the number line. On the number line, a number that appears to the right of another number is larger than that other number. For example, 5 is greater than 2 because 5 is located to the right of 2 on the number line. We may also say that 2 is less than 5. To make the inequality phrases "greater than" and "less than" more brief, mathematicians represent them with the symbols > and <, respectively. Symbols for Greater Than > and Less Than < > represents the phrase "greater than." < represents the phrase "less than." 5 > 2 represents "5 is greater than 2." 2 < 5 represents "2 is less than 5."  || Comparing Fractions Recall that the fraction indicates that we have 4 of 5 parts of some whole quantity, and the fraction indicates that we have 3 of 5 parts. Since 4 of 5 parts is more than 3 of 5 parts, is greater than ; that is, We have just observed that when two fractions have the same denominator, we can determine which is larger by comparing the numerators. Comparing Fractions If two fractions have the same denominators, the fraction with the larger nu­merator is the larger fraction. Thus, to compare the sizes of two or more fractions, we need only convert each of them to equivalent fractions that have a common denominator. We then compare the numerators. It is convenient if the common denominator is the LCD. The fraction with the larger numerator is the larger fraction. Sample Set A Example 5.16.  Compare and . Convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction with the LCD as the denominator. Find the LCD. Since 40 < 42, Thus . Example 5.17.  Write and in order from smallest to largest. Convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction with the LCD as the denominator. Find the LCD. Since 21 < 25 < 26 , < < < < Writing these numbers in order from smallest to largest, we get , , . Example 5.18.  Compare and . To compare mixed numbers that have different whole number parts, we need only compare whole number parts. Since 6 < 8, Example 5.19.  Compare To compare mixed numbers that have the same whole number parts, we need only compare fractional parts. Since 14 < 15, Hence, Practice Set A Exercise 5.5.1. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.2. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.3. (Go to Solution) Write , , and in order from smallest to largest. Exercise 5.5.4. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.5. (Go to Solution) Compare and .  ||  || Simple Fractions and Complex Fractions Simple Fraction A simple fraction is any fraction in which the numerator is any whole number and the denominator is any nonzero whole number. Some examples are the following: Complex Fraction A complex fraction is any fraction in which the numerator and/or the denomina­tor is a fraction; it is a fraction of fractions. Some examples of complex fractions are the following:  || Converting Complex Fractions to Simple Fractions The goal here is to convert a complex fraction to a simple fraction. We can do so by employing the methods of adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing fractions. Recall from Section 4.2 that a fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol separating the fractional quantity into two individual groups. We proceed in simplifying a complex fraction to a simple fraction by simplifying the numerator and the denom­inator of the complex fraction separately. We will simplify the numerator and denominator completely before removing the fraction bar by dividing. This tech­nique is illustrated in problems 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Convert each of the following complex fractions to a simple fraction. Example 5.20.  Convert this complex fraction to a simple fraction by performing the indicated division. Example 5.21.  Example 5.22.  Example 5.23.  Example 5.24.  Example 5.25.  Practice Set A Convert each of the following complex fractions to a simple fraction. Exercise 5.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.6. (Go to Solution)  ||  || The Order of Operations To determine the value of a quantity such as where we have a combination of operations (more than one operation occurs), we must use the accepted order of operations. The Order of Operations: In the order (2), (3), (4) described below, perform all operations inside group­ing symbols: ( ), [ ], ( ),. Work from the innermost set to the outermost set. Perform exponential and root operations. Perform all multiplications and divisions moving left to right. Perform all additions and subtractions moving left to right. Sample Set A Determine the value of each of the following quantities. Example 5.26.  Multiply first. Now perform this addition. Find the LCD. Thus, Example 5.27.  Operate within the parentheses first, . Now we have Perform the multiplication. Now perform the addition. The LCD=80. Thus, Example 5.28.  Work within each set of parentheses individually. Now we have Now multiply. Now subtract. Thus, Example 5.29.  Square . Now we have Perform the multiplication. Now perform the subtraction. Thus, Example 5.30.  Begin by operating inside the parentheses. Now simplify the square root. Now we have Perform the division. Now perform the addition. Thus, Practice Set A Find the value of each of the following quantities. Exercise 5.7.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.8. (Go to Solution)  || 