 || Trinomials When a quadratic has all three terms, you can still solve it with the zero-product rule if you are able to factor the trinomial. ·                     Remember, not all trinomial quadratics can be factored with integer constants If it can be factored, then it can be written as a product of two binomials. The zero-product rule can then be used to set each of these factors equal to zero, resulting in two equations that are both simple linear equations that can be solved for x. See the above example for the zero-product rule to see how this works. A more thorough discussion of factoring trinomials may be found in the chapter on polynomials, but here is a quick review:  || Tips for Factoring Trinomials 1.                  Clear fractions (by multiplying through by the common denominator) 2.                  Remove common factors if possible 3.                  If the coefficient of the x2 term is 1, then x2 + bx + c = (x + n)(x + m), where n and m                                              i.      Multiply to give c                                            ii.      Add to give b 4.                  If the coefficient of the x2 term is not 1, then use either a.       Guess-and Check                                                    i.      List the factors of the coefficient of the x2 term                                                  ii.      List the factors of the constant term                                                 iii.      Test all the possible binomials you can make from these factors b.      Factoring by Grouping                                                    i.      Find the product ac                                                  ii.      Find two factors of ac that add to give b                                                 iii.      Split the middle term into the sum of two terms, using these two factors                                                iv.      Group the terms into pairs                                                 v.      Factor out the common binomial    || 