Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms Equally important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. The higher, equivalent fraction is constructed by multiplying the original fraction by 1.Notice that and are equivalent, that is Also, This observation helps us suggest the following method for raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to higher terms by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number. For example, can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8, that is, multiplying by 1 in the form How did we know to choose 8 as the proper factor? Since we wish to convert 4 to 32 by multiplying it by some number, we know that 4 must be a factor of 32. This means that 4 divides into 32. In fact, 32รท4 = 8. We divided the original denominator into the new, specified denominator to obtain the proper factor for the multiplication. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms Equally important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. The higher, equivalent fraction is constructed by multiplying the original fraction by 1.Notice that and are equivalent, that is Also, This observation helps us suggest the following method for raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to higher terms by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number. For example, can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8, that is, multiplying by 1 in the form How did we know to choose 8 as the proper factor? Since we wish to convert 4 to 32 by multiplying it by some number, we know that 4 must be a factor of 32. This means that 4 divides into 32. In fact, 32รท4 = 8. We divided the original denominator into the new, specified denominator to obtain the proper factor for the multiplication.  || 