To convert a decimal to a percent Multiply the decimal number by 100 (or move the decimal point two places to the right). Since x% = x/100, it is also true that 100 x% = x. Another way to look at is to consider that in order to convert a number into a percent, you have to express it in hundredths. Recall that the hundredths place is the second place to the right of the decimal, so this is the digit that gives the units digit of the percent. Of course, all this means is that you move the decimal point two places to the right. WARNING: If you just remember these rules as “move the decimal two places to the left” and “move the decimal two places to the right,” you are very likely to get them confused. If you accidentally move the decimal in the wrong direction it will end up four places off from where it should be, which means that your answer will be either ten-thousand times too big or ten-thousand times too small. This is generally not an acceptable range of error. It is much better to remember these rules by simply remembering the meaning of the percent sign, namely that “ % “ means “ /100.” If you just write the problem that way, you should be able to see what you need to do in order to solve it. Converting between percents and their decimal equivalents is so simple that it is usually best to express all percents in decimal form when you are working percent problems. The decimal numbers are what you will need to put in your calculator, and you can always express the result as a percent if you need to.   Calculator  note: Some calculators have a percent key that essentially just divides by 100, but it can do other useful things that might save you a few keystrokes. For instance, if you need to add 5% to a number (perhaps to include the sales tax on a purchase), on most calculators you can enter the original number and then press “ + 5 % = “. Just make sure you understand what it does before you blindly trust it. What it is doing in this example is multiplying the original number by 0.05 and then adding the result onto the original number. You should be able to work any percent problem without using this key, but once you understand what is going on it can be a convenient short-cut. To convert a decimal to a percent Multiply the decimal number by 100 (or move the decimal point two places to the right). Since x% = x/100, it is also true that 100 x% = x. Another way to look at is to consider that in order to convert a number into a percent, you have to express it in hundredths. Recall that the hundredths place is the second place to the right of the decimal, so this is the digit that gives the units digit of the percent. Of course, all this means is that you move the decimal point two places to the right. WARNING: If you just remember these rules as “move the decimal two places to the left” and “move the decimal two places to the right,” you are very likely to get them confused. If you accidentally move the decimal in the wrong direction it will end up four places off from where it should be, which means that your answer will be either ten-thousand times too big or ten-thousand times too small. This is generally not an acceptable range of error. It is much better to remember these rules by simply remembering the meaning of the percent sign, namely that “ % “ means “ /100.” If you just write the problem that way, you should be able to see what you need to do in order to solve it. Converting between percents and their decimal equivalents is so simple that it is usually best to express all percents in decimal form when you are working percent problems. The decimal numbers are what you will need to put in your calculator, and you can always express the result as a percent if you need to.   Calculator  note: Some calculators have a percent key that essentially just divides by 100, but it can do other useful things that might save you a few keystrokes. For instance, if you need to add 5% to a number (perhaps to include the sales tax on a purchase), on most calculators you can enter the original number and then press “ + 5 % = “. Just make sure you understand what it does before you blindly trust it. What it is doing in this example is multiplying the original number by 0.05 and then adding the result onto the original number. You should be able to work any percent problem without using this key, but once you understand what is going on it can be a convenient short-cut.  || 