 ||  || Square Roots When we studied exponents in Section Section 2.5, we noted that 42 = 16 and ( − 4 ) 2 = 16. We can see that 16 is the square of both 4 and − 4 . Since 16 comes from squaring 4 or − 4 , 4 and − 4 are called the square roots of 16. Thus 16 has two square roots, 4 and − 4 . Notice that these two square roots are opposites of each other. We can say that Square Root The square root of a positive number x is a number such that when it is squared the number x results. Every positive number has two square roots, one positive square root and one negative square root. Furthermore, the two square roots of a positive number are opposites of each other. The square root of 0 is 0.  || Principal and Secondary Square Roots There is a notation for distinguishing the positive square root of a number x from the negative square root of x . Principal Square Root: If x is a positive real number, then represents the positive square root of x . The positive square root of a number is called the principal square root of the number. Secondary Square Root: represents the negative square root of x . The negative square root of a number is called the secondary square root of the number. indicates the secondary square root of x . Radical Sign, Radicand, and Radical In the expression is called a radical sign. x is called the radicand. is called a radical. The horizontal bar that appears attached to the radical sign, , is a grouping symbol that specifies the radicand. Because and are the two square root of x ,  || Meaningful Expressions Since we know that the square of any real number is a positive number or zero, we can see that expressions such as do not describe real numbers. There is no real number that can be squared that will produce −16. For to be a real number, we must have x ≥ 0. In our study of algebra, we will assume that all variables and all expressions in radicands represent nonnegative numbers (numbers greater than or equal to zero).  || Simplifying Square Roots When variables occur in the radicand, we can often simplify the expression by removing the radical sign. We can do so by keeping in mind that the radicand is the square of some other expression. We can simplify a radical by seeking an expression whose square is the radicand. The following observations will help us find the square root of a variable quantity. Example 9.9.  Since is a square root of x 6 . Also Example 9.10.  Since is a square root of x 8 . Also Example 9.11.  Since is a square root of x 12 . Also These examples suggest the following rule: If a variable has an even exponent, its square root can be found by dividing that exponent by 2. The examples of Sample Set B illustrate the use of this rule.  || Exercised for Review Exercise 9.2.93. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.4) Find the quotient. Exercise 9.2.94. (Section 8.6) Find the sum. Exercise 9.2.95. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.7) Solve the equation, if possible: Exercise 9.2.96. (Section 8.10) Perform the division: Exercise 9.2.97. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.10) Perform the division:  ||  || Perfect Squares Perfect Squares Real numbers that are squares of rational numbers are called perfect squares. The numbers 25 and are examples of perfect squares since 25 = 52 and and 5 and are rational numbers. The number 2 is not a perfect square since and is not a rational number. Although we will not make a detailed study of irrational numbers, we will make the following observation: Any indicated square root whose radicand is not a perfect square is an irrational number. The numbers and are each irrational since each radicand is not a perfect square.  || The Product Property of Square Roots Notice that     and Since both and equal 6, it must be that The Product Property This suggests that in general, if x and y are positive real numbers, The square root of the product is the product of the square roots.  || The Quotient Property of Square Roots We can suggest a similar rule for quotients. Notice that      and Since both and equal 3, it must be that The Quotient Property This suggests that in general, if x and y are positive real numbers,      y ≠ 0 The square root of the quotient is the quotient of the square roots. CAUTIONIt is extremely important to remember that For example, notice that but We shall study the process of simplifying a square root expression by distinguishing between two types of square roots: square roots not involving a fraction and square roots involving a fraction.  || Square Roots Not Involving Fractions A square root that does not involve fractions is in simplified form if there are no perfect square in the radicand. The square roots are in simplified form since none of the radicands contains a perfect square. The square roots are not in simplified form since each radicand contains a perfect square. To simplify a square root expression that does not involve a fraction, we can use the following two rules: SIMPLIFYING SQUARE ROOTS WITHOUT FRACTIONS If a factor of the radicand contains a variable with an even exponent, the square root is obtained by dividing the exponent by 2. If a factor of the radicand contains a variable with an odd exponent, the square root is obtained by first factoring the variable factor into two factors so that one has an even exponent and the other has an exponent of 1, then using the product property of square roots.  || Square Roots Involving Fractions A square root expression is in simplified form if there are no perfect squares in the radicand, no fractions in the radicand, or 3. no square root expressions in the denominator. The square root expressions and are in simplified form. The square root expressions and are not in simplified form. SIMPLIFYING SQUARE ROOTS WITH FRACTIONS To simplify the square root expression Write the expression as using the rule Multiply the fraction by 1 in the form of Simplify the remaining fraction, Rationalizing the Denominator The process involved in step 2 is called rationalizing the denominator. This process removes square root expressions from the denominator using the fact that  ||  || The Product Property of Square Roots In our work with simplifying square root expressions, we noted that Since this is an equation, we may write it as To multiply two square root expressions, we use the product property of square roots. The Product Property The product of the square roots is the square root of the product. In practice, it is usually easier to simplify the square root expressions before actually performing the multiplication. To see this, consider the following product: We can multiply these square roots in either of two ways: Example 9.27.  Simplify then multiply. Example 9.28.  Multiply then simplify. Notice that in the second method, the expanded term (the third expression, ) may be difficult to factor into a perfect square and some other number.  || Multiplication Rule for Square Root Expressions The preceding example suggests that the following rule for multiplying two square root expressions. Rule for Multiplying Square Root Expressions Simplify each square root expression, if necessary. Perform the multiplecation. Simplify, if necessary.  ||  || The Division Property of Square Roots In our work with simplifying square root expressions, we noted that Since this is an equation, we may write it as To divide two square root expressions, we use the division property of square roots. The Division Property The quotient of the square roots is the square root of the quotient.  || Rationalizing the Denominator As we can see by observing the right side of the equation governing the division of square roots, the process may produce a fraction in the radicand. This means, of course, that the square root expression is not in simplified form. It is sometimes more useful to rationalize the denominator of a square root expression before actually performing the division.  || Conjugates and Rationalizing the Denominator To perform a division that contains a binomial in the denominator, such as we multiply the numerator and denominator by a conjugate of the denominator. Conjugate A conjugate of the binomial a + b is a – b . Similarly, a conjugate of a – b is a + b . Notice that when the conjugates a + b and a – b are multiplied together, they produce a difference of two squares. ( a + b )( a – b ) = a 2 – a b + a b – b 2 = a 2 – b 2 This principle helps us eliminate square root radicals, as shown in these examples that illustrate finding the product of conjugates. Example 9.45.  Example 9.46.   ||  || The Logic Behind The Process Now we will study methods of simplifying radical expressions such as The procedure for adding and subtracting square root expressions will become apparent if we think back to the procedure we used for simplifying polynomial expressions such as The variables x and a are letters representing some unknown quantities (perhaps x represents and a represents ). Combining like terms gives us  || The Process Let’s consider the expression There are two ways to look at the simplification process: We are asking, “How many square roots of 3 do we have?” means we have 4 “square roots of 3” means we have 8 “square roots of 3”Thus, altogether we have 12 “square roots of 3.” We can also use the idea of combining like terms. If we recall, the process of combining like terms is based on the distributive propertyWe could simplify using the distributive property. Both methods will give us the same result. The first method is probably a bit quicker, but keep in mind, however, that the process works because it is based on one of the basic rules of algebra, the distributive property of real numbers.  ||  || Square Root Equations And Extraneous Solutions Square Root Equation A square root equation is an equation that contains a variable under a square root sign. The fact that suggests that we can solve a square root equation by squaring both sides of the equation. Extraneous Solutions Squaring both sides of an equation can, however, introduce extraneous solutions. Consider the equation x = − 6 The solution is − 6. Square both sides. x 2 = ( − 6 ) 2 x 2 = 36 This equation has two solutions, − 6 and + 6. The + 6 is an extraneous solution since it does not check in the original equation: + 6 ≠ − 6.  || Method For Solving Square Root Equations Solving Square Root Equations Isolate a radical. This means get a square root expression by itself on one side of the equal sign. Square both sides of the equation. Simplify the equation by combining like terms. Repeat step 1 if radicals are still present. Obtain potential solutions by solving the resulting non-square root equation. Check each potential solution by substitution into the original equation.  || 