 || Simplifying Radical Expressions An algebraic expression that contains radicals is called a radical expression An algebraic expression that contains radicals. . We use the product and quotient rules to simplify them.   Example 1: Simplify: 8 y 3 − − − √ 3 . Solution: Use the fact that a n − − √ n = a when n is odd. Answer: 2 y   Example 2: Simplify: 9 x 2 − − − √ . Solution: The square root has index 2; use the fact that a n − − √ n = | a | when n is even. Since x is a variable, it may represent a negative number. Thus we need to ensure that the result is positive by including the absolute value operator. Answer: 3 | x | Important Note Typically, at this point beginning algebra texts note that all variables are assumed to be positive. If this is the case, then x in the previous example is positive and the absolute value operator is not needed. The example can be simplified as follows: In this section, we will assume that all variables are positive. This allows us to focus on calculating nth roots without the technicalities associated with the principal nth root problem. For this reason, we will use the following property for the rest of the section: When simplifying radical expressions, look for factors with powers that match the index.   Example 3: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the square factors of 18, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 4: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the square factors of 4, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 5: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the cubic factors of 80, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 6: Simplify . Solution: The coefficient and thus does not have any perfect cube factors. It will be left as the only remaining radicand because all of the other factors are cubes, as illustrated below: Replace the variables with these equivalents, apply the product and quotient rule for radicals, and then simplify. Answer:   Example 7: Simplify: . Solution: Determine all factors that can be written as perfect powers of 4. Here it is important to see that . Hence the factor will be left inside the radical. Answer:   Example 8: Simplify: . Solution: Notice that the variable factor x cannot be written as a power of 5 and thus will be left inside the radical. In addition, for ; the factor y will be left inside the radical as well. Answer:   Try this! Simplify: . (Assume all variables are positive.) Answer: Video Solution Tip To easily simplify an nth root, we can divide the powers by the index. If the index does not divide into the power evenly, then we can use the quotient and remainder to simplify. For example, The quotient is the exponent of the factor outside of the radical, and the remainder is the exponent of the factor left inside the radical.  || Formulas Involving Radicals We next review the distance formula. Given two points and , The distance, d, between them is given by the following formula: Distance formula Given two points and calculate the distance d between them using the formula d = : Recall that this formula was derived from the Pythagorean theorem.   Example 9: Calculate the distance between (−4, 7) and (2, 1). Solution: Use the distance formula with the following points. It is a good practice to include the formula in its general form before substituting values for the variables; this improves readability and reduces the probability of making errors. Answer: units   Example 10: The period, T, of a pendulum in seconds is given by the formula where L represents the length of the pendulum in feet. If the length of a pendulum measures 6 feet, then calculate the period rounded off to the nearest tenth of a second. Solution: Substitute 6 for L and then simplify. Answer: The period is approximately 2.7 seconds.  || Square Root and Cube Root Functions We begin with the square root function The function . : We know that the square root is not a real number when the radicand x is negative. Therefore, we conclude that the domain consists of all real numbers greater than or equal to 0. Here we choose 0 and some positive values for x, calculate the corresponding y-values, and plot the resulting ordered pairs. After plotting the points, we can then sketch the graph of the square root function.   Example 11: Given the function , find , , and . Solution: Replace x with each of the given values. Answer: , , and   Next, consider the cube root function The function . : Since the cube root could be either negative or positive, we conclude that the domain consists of all real numbers. For completeness, choose some positive and negative values for x, as well as 0, and then calculate the corresponding y-values. Plot the points and sketch the graph of the cube root function.   Example 12: Given the function , find , , and . Solution: Replace x with each of the given values. Answer: , , and  || 