 || The Difference of Two Squares Recall that when we multiplied together the two binomials ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) , we obtained the product a 2 − b 2 . ( a + b ) ( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 Perfect Square Notice that the terms a 2 and b 2 in the product can be produced by squaring a and b , respectively. A term that is the square of another term is called a perfect square. Thus, both a 2 and b 2 are perfect squares. The minus sign between a 2 and b 2 means that we are taking the difference of the two squares.Since we know that ( a + b ) ( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 , we need only turn the equation around to find the factorization form. a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) The factorization form says that we can factor a 2 − b 2 , the difference of two squares, by finding the terms that produce the perfect squares and substituting these quantities into the factorization form.When using real numbers (as we are), there is no factored form for the sum of two squares. That is, using real numbers, a 2 + b 2 cannot be factored  || Fundamental Rules of Factoring There are two fundamental rules that we follow when factoring: Fundamental Rules of Factoring Factor out all common monomials first. Factor completely.  || Perfect Square Trinomials Recall the process of squaring a binomial. Table 6.1. Our Method Is We Notice Square the first term. The first term of the product should be a perfect square. Take the product of the two terms and double it. The middle term of the product should be divisible by 2 (since it’s multiplied by 2). Square the last term. The last term of the product should be a perfect square. Perfect square trinomials always factor as the square of a binomial. To recognize a perfect square trinomial, look for the following features: The first and last terms are perfect squares. The middle term is divisible by 2, and if we divide the middle term in half (the opposite of doubling it), we will get the product of the terms that when squared produce the first and last terms. In other words, factoring a perfect square trinomial amounts to finding the terms that, when squared, produce the first and last terms of the trinomial, and substituting into one of the formula  || 