Finding the Maximum and Minimum It is often useful to find the maximum and/or minimum values of functions that model real-life applications. To find these important values given a quadratic function, we use the vertex. If the leading coefficient a is positive, then the parabola opens upward and there will be a minimum y-value. If the leading coefficient a is negative, then the parabola opens downward and there will be a maximum y-value.   Example 6: Determine the maximum or minimum: y = − 4 x 2 + 24 x − 35 . Solution: Since a = −4, we know that the parabola opens downward and there will be a maximum y-value. To find it, we first find the x-value of the vertex. The x-value of the vertex is 3. Substitute this value into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (3, 1). Therefore, the maximum y-value is 1, which occurs when x = 3, as illustrated below: Note The graph is not required to answer this question. Answer: The maximum is 1.   Example 7: Determine the maximum or minimum: y = 4 x 2 − 32 x + 62 . Solution: Since a = +4, the parabola opens upward and there is a minimum y-value. Begin by finding the x-value of the vertex. Substitute x = 4 into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (4, −2). Therefore, the minimum y-value of −2 occurs when x = 4, as illustrated below: Answer: The minimum is −2.   Try this! Determine the maximum or minimum: y = ( x − 3 ) 2 − 9 . Answer: The minimum is −9. Video Solution A parabola, opening upward or downward (as opposed to sideways), defines a function and extends indefinitely to the right and left as indicated by the arrows. Therefore, the domain (the set of x-values) consists of all real numbers. However, the range (the set of y-values) is bounded by the y-value of the vertex.   Example 8: Determine the domain and range: y = x 2 − 4 x + 3 . Solution: First, note that since a = 1 is positive, the parabola opens upward. Hence there will be a minimum y-value. To find that value, find the x-value of the vertex: Then substitute into the equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (2, −1). The range consists of the set of y-values greater than or equal to the minimum y-value −1. Answer: Domain: R = (−∞, ∞); range: [−1, ∞)   Example 9: The height in feet of a projectile is given by the function h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 72 t , where t represents the time in seconds after launch. What is the maximum height reached by the projectile? Solution: Here a = − 16 , and the parabola opens downward. Therefore, the y-value of the vertex determines the maximum height. Begin by finding the x-value of the vertex: The maximum height will occur in 9/4 = 2¼ seconds. Substitute this time into the function to determine the height attained. Answer: The maximum height of the projectile is 81 feet. Finding the Maximum and Minimum It is often useful to find the maximum and/or minimum values of functions that model real-life applications. To find these important values given a quadratic function, we use the vertex. If the leading coefficient a is positive, then the parabola opens upward and there will be a minimum y-value. If the leading coefficient a is negative, then the parabola opens downward and there will be a maximum y-value.   Example 6: Determine the maximum or minimum: y = − 4 x 2 + 24 x − 35 . Solution: Since a = −4, we know that the parabola opens downward and there will be a maximum y-value. To find it, we first find the x-value of the vertex. The x-value of the vertex is 3. Substitute this value into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (3, 1). Therefore, the maximum y-value is 1, which occurs when x = 3, as illustrated below: Note The graph is not required to answer this question. Answer: The maximum is 1.   Example 7: Determine the maximum or minimum: y = 4 x 2 − 32 x + 62 . Solution: Since a = +4, the parabola opens upward and there is a minimum y-value. Begin by finding the x-value of the vertex. Substitute x = 4 into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (4, −2). Therefore, the minimum y-value of −2 occurs when x = 4, as illustrated below: Answer: The minimum is −2.   Try this! Determine the maximum or minimum: y = ( x − 3 ) 2 − 9 . Answer: The minimum is −9. Video Solution A parabola, opening upward or downward (as opposed to sideways), defines a function and extends indefinitely to the right and left as indicated by the arrows. Therefore, the domain (the set of x-values) consists of all real numbers. However, the range (the set of y-values) is bounded by the y-value of the vertex.   Example 8: Determine the domain and range: y = x 2 − 4 x + 3 . Solution: First, note that since a = 1 is positive, the parabola opens upward. Hence there will be a minimum y-value. To find that value, find the x-value of the vertex: Then substitute into the equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (2, −1). The range consists of the set of y-values greater than or equal to the minimum y-value −1. Answer: Domain: R = (−∞, ∞); range: [−1, ∞)   Example 9: The height in feet of a projectile is given by the function h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 72 t , where t represents the time in seconds after launch. What is the maximum height reached by the projectile? Solution: Here a = − 16 , and the parabola opens downward. Therefore, the y-value of the vertex determines the maximum height. Begin by finding the x-value of the vertex: The maximum height will occur in 9/4 = 2¼ seconds. Substitute this time into the function to determine the height attained. Answer: The maximum height of the projectile is 81 feet.  || 