 || Algebraic Expressions Numerical Expression In arithmetic, a numerical expression results when numbers are connected by arithmetic operation signs (+, -, ⋅ , ÷). For example, , , , and are numerical expressions. Algebraic Expression In algebra, letters are used to represent numbers, and an algebraic expression results when an arithmetic operation sign associates a letter with a number or a letter with a letter. For example, , , , , and are algebraic expressions. Expressions Numerical expressions and algebraic expressions are often referred to simply as expressions.  || Terms and Factors In algebra, it is extremely important to be able to distinguish between terms and factors. Distinction Between Terms and Factors Terms are parts of sums and are therefore connected by + signs. Factors are parts of products and are therefore separated by ⋅ signs. Note While making the distinction between sums and products, we must re­member that subtraction and division are functions of these operations. In some expressions it will appear that terms are separated by minus signs. We must keep in mind that subtraction is addition of the opposite, that is, In some expressions it will appear that factors are separated by division signs. We must keep in mind that Sample Set A State the number of terms in each expression and name them. Example 11.1.  . In this expression, x and 4 are connected by a "+" sign. Therefore, they are terms. This expression consists of two terms. Example 11.2.  . The expression can be expressed as . We can now see that this expres­sion consists of the two terms and . Rather than rewriting the expression when a subtraction occurs, we can identify terms more quickly by associating the + or - sign with the individual quantity. Example 11.3.  . Associating the sign with the individual quantities, we see that this expression consists of the four terms , 7, , . Example 11.4.  . This expression consists of the two terms, and . Notice that the term is composed of the two factors 5 and . The term is composed of the two factors and . Example 11.5.  . This expression consists of one term. Notice that can be expressed as or (indicating the connecting signs of arithmetic). Note that no operation sign is necessary for multiplication. Practice Set A Specify the terms in each expression. Exercise 11.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.5. (Go to Solution)  || Coefficients We know that multiplication is a description of repeated addition. For example, describes Suppose some quantity is represented by the letter . The multiplication de­scribes . It is now easy to see that specifies 5 of the quantities represented by . In the expression , 5 is called the numerical coefficient, or more simply, the coefficient of . Coefficient The coefficient of a quantity records how many of that quantity there are. Since constants alone do not record the number of some quantity, they are not usually considered as numerical coefficients. For example, in the expression , the coefficient of is 7. (There are 7 x's.) is 2. (There are 2 y 's.) is . (There are z 's.) The constant 12 is not considered a numerical coefficient.  When the numerical coefficient of a variable is 1, we write only the variable and not the coefficient. For example, we write rather than . It is clear just by looking at that there is only one.  || Numerical Evaluation We know that a variable represents an unknown quantity. Therefore, any expres­sion that contains a variable represents an unknown quantity. For example, if the value of is unknown, then the value of is unknown. The value of depends on the value of . Numerical Evaluation Numerical evaluation is the process of determining the numerical value of an algebraic expression by replacing the variables in the expression with specified numbers. Sample Set B Find the value of each expression. Example 11.6.  , if and Replace x with –4 and y with 2. Thus, when and , . Example 11.7.  , if and = . Replace a with 6 and b with –3. Thus, when a = 6 and b = –3, . Example 11.8.  , if and Replace with –5 and with –1. Thus, when and , . Example 11.9.  , if Replace x with 4. Thus, when , . Example 11.10.  , if Replace x with 3. Example 11.11.  , if . Replace x with 3. The exponent is connected to –3, not 3 as in the problem above. Practice Set B Find the value of each expression. Exercise 11.2.6. (Go to Solution) if and Exercise 11.2.7. (Go to Solution) , if , , Exercise 11.2.8. (Go to Solution) , if , and Exercise 11.2.9. (Go to Solution) , if and Exercise 11.2.10. (Go to Solution) , if and Exercise 11.2.11. (Go to Solution) , if Exercise 11.2.12. (Go to Solution) , if Exercise 11.2.13. (Go to Solution) , if  || 