 || Key Words, Translation, and Strategy Algebra simplifies the process of solving real-world problems. This is done by using letters to represent unknowns, restating problems in the form of equations, and offering systematic techniques for solving those equations. To solve problems using algebra, first translate the wording of the problem into mathematical statements that describe the relationships between the given information and the unknowns. Usually, this translation to mathematical statements is the difficult step in the process. The key to the translation is to carefully read the problem and identify certain key words and phrases. Key Words Translation Sum, increased by, more than, plus, added to, total + Difference, decreased by, subtracted from, less, minus − Product, multiplied by, of, times, twice * Quotient, divided by, ratio, per / Is, total, result = Here are some examples of translated key phrases. Key Phrases Translation The sum of a number and 7. x + 7 Seven more than a number. The difference of a number and 7. x − 7 Seven less than a number. Seven subtracted from a number. The product of 2 and a number. 2 x Twice a number. One-half of a number. 1 2 x The quotient of a number and 7. x / 7 When translating sentences into mathematical statements, be sure to read the sentence several times and identify the key words and phrases.   Example 1: Translate: Four less than twice some number is 16. Solution: First, choose a variable for the unknown number and identify the key words and phrases. Let x represent the unknown indicated by “some number.” Remember that subtraction is not commutative. For this reason, take care when setting up differences. In this example, 4 − 2 x = 16 is an incorrect translation. Answer: 2 x − 4 = 16   It is important to first identify the variable—let x represent…—and state in words what the unknown quantity is. This step not only makes your work more readable but also forces you to think about what you are looking for. Usually, if you know what you are asked to find, then the task of finding it is achievable.   Example 2: Translate: When 7 is subtracted from 3 times the sum of a number and 12, the result is 20. Solution: Let n represent the unknown number. Answer: 3 ( n + 12 ) − 7 = 20   To understand why parentheses are needed, study the structures of the following two sentences and their translations: “3 times the sum of a number and 12” 3 ( n + 12 ) “the sum of 3 times a number and 12” 3 n + 12 The key is to focus on the phrase “3 times the sum.” This prompts us to group the sum within parentheses and then multiply by 3. Once an application is translated into an algebraic equation, solve it using the techniques you have learned. Guidelines for Setting Up and Solving Word Problems Step 1: Read the problem several times, identify the key words and phrases, and organize the given information. Step 2: Identify the variables by assigning a letter or expression to the unknown quantities. Step 3: Translate and set up an algebraic equation that models the problem. Step 4: Solve the resulting algebraic equation. Step 5: Finally, answer the question in sentence form and make sure it makes sense (check it). For now, set up all of your equations using only one variable. Avoid two variables by looking for a relationship between the unknowns.  || Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We classify applications involving relationships between real numbers broadly as number problems. These problems can sometimes be solved using some creative arithmetic, guessing, and checking. Solving in this manner is not a good practice and should be avoided. Begin by working through the basic steps outlined in the general guidelines for solving word problems.   Example 3: A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller integer. The sum of the two integers is 18. Find the integers. Solution: Identify variables: Begin by assigning a variable to the smaller integer. Use the first sentence to identify the larger integer in terms of the variable x: “A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller.” Set up an equation: Add the expressions that represent the two integers, and set the resulting expression equal to 18 as indicated in the second sentence: “The sum of the two integers is 18.” Solve: Solve the equation to obtain the smaller integer x. Back substitute: Use the expression 3 x − 2 to find the larger integer—this is called back substituting The process of finding the answers to other unknowns after one has been found. . Answer the question: The two integers are 5 and 13. Check: 5 + 13 = 18. The answer makes sense.   Example 4: The difference between two integers is 2. The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller. Find the integers. Solution: Use the relationship between the two integers in the second sentence, “The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller,” to identify the unknowns in terms of one variable. Since the difference is positive, subtract the smaller integer from the larger. Solve. Use 2x − 6 to find the larger integer. Answer: The two integers are 8 and 10. These integers clearly solve the problem.   It is worth mentioning again that you can often find solutions to simple problems by guessing and checking. This is so because the numbers are chosen to simplify the process of solving, so that the algebraic steps are not too tedious. You learn how to set up algebraic equations with easier problems, so that you can use these ideas to solve more difficult problems later.   Example 5: The sum of two consecutive even integers is 46. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive even integers.” Add the even integers and set them equal to 46. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next even integer. Answer: The consecutive even integers are 22 and 24.   It should be clear that consecutive even integers are separated by two units. However, it may not be so clear that odd integers are as well.   Example 6: The sum of two consecutive odd integers is 36. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive odd integers.” Add the two odd integers and set the expression equal to 36. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next odd integer. Answer: The consecutive odd integers are 17 and 19.   The algebraic setup for even and odd integer problems is the same. A common mistake is to use x and x + 3 when identifying the variables for consecutive odd integers. This is incorrect because adding 3 to an odd number yields an even number: for example, 5 + 3 = 8. An incorrect setup is very likely to lead to a decimal answer, which may be an indication that the problem was set up incorrectly.   Example 7: The sum of three consecutive integers is 24. Find the integers. Solution: Consecutive integers are separated by one unit. Add the integers and set the sum equal to 24. Solve. Back substitute to find the other two integers. Answer: The three consecutive integers are 7, 8 and 9, where 7 + 8 + 9 = 24.   Try this! The sum of three consecutive odd integers is 87. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 27, 29, and 31. Video Solution  || Geometry Problems (Perimeter) Recall that the perimeter The sum of the lengths of all the outside edges of a polygon. of a polygon is the sum of the lengths of all the outside edges. In addition, it is helpful to review the following perimeter formulas ( π ≈ 3.14159 ). Perimeter of a rectangle P = 2 l + 2 w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. : P = 2 l + 2 w Perimeter of a square P = 4 s , where s represents the length of a side. : P = 4 s Perimeter of a triangle P = a + b + c , where a, b, and c each represents the length of a different side. : P = a + b + c Perimeter of a circle ( circumference The perimeter of a circle given by C = 2 π r , where r represents the radius of the circle and π ≈ 3.14159 . ): C = 2 π r Keep in mind that you are looking for a relationship between the unknowns so that you can set up algebraic equations using only one variable. When working with geometry problems, it is often helpful to draw a picture.   Example 8: A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet. The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width. Find the dimensions of the rectangle. Solution: The sentence “The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width” gives the relationship between the two variables. The sentence “A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet” suggests an algebraic setup. Substitute 64 for the perimeter and the expression for the length into the appropriate formula as follows: Once you have set up an algebraic equation with one variable, solve for the width, w. Use 3w + 4 to find the length. Answer: The rectangle measures 7 feet by 25 feet. To check, add all of the sides:   Example 9: Two sides of a triangle are 5 and 7 inches longer than the third side. If the perimeter measures 21 inches, find the length of each side. Solution: The first sentence describes the relationships between the unknowns. Substitute these expressions into the appropriate formula and use 21 for the perimeter P. You now have an equation with one variable to solve. Back substitute. Answer: The three sides of the triangle measure 3 inches, 8 inches, and 10 inches. The check is left to the reader.   Try this! The length of a rectangle is 1 foot less than twice its width. If the perimeter is 46 feet, find the dimensions. Answer: Width: 8 feet; length: 15 feet Video Solution  || Problems Involving Money and Percents Whenever setting up an equation involving a percentage, we usually need to convert the percentage to a decimal or fraction. If the question asks for a percentage, then do not forget to convert your answer to a percent at the end. Also, when money is involved, be sure to round off to two decimal places.   Example 10: If a pair of shoes costs $52.50 including a 7 1 4 % tax, what is the original cost of the item before taxes are added? Solution: Begin by converting 7 1 4 % to a decimal. The amount of tax is this rate times the original cost of the item. The original cost of the item is what you are asked to find. Use this equation to solve for c, the original cost of the item. Answer: The cost of the item before taxes is $48.95. Check this by multiplying $48.95 by 0.0725 to obtain the tax and add it to this cost.   Example 11: Given a 5 1 8 % annual interest rate, how long will it take $1,200 to yield $307.50 in simple interest? Solution: Organize the data needed to use the simple interest formula I = p r t . Given interest for the time period: I = $ 307.50 Given principal: p = $ 1200 Given rate: r = 5 1 8 % = 5.125 % = 0.05125 Next, substitute all of the known quantities into the formula and then solve for the only unknown, t. Answer: It takes 5 years for $1,200 invested at 5 1 8 % to earn $307.50 in simple interest.   Example 12: Mary invested her total savings of $3,400 in two accounts. Her mutual fund account earned 8% last year and her CD earned 5%. If her total interest for the year was $245, how much was in each account? Solution: The relationship between the two unknowns is that they total $3,400. When a total is involved, a common technique used to avoid two variables is to represent the second unknown as the difference of the total and the first unknown. The total interest is the sum of the interest earned from each account. Interest earned in the mutual fund: I = P r t = x ⋅ 0.08 ⋅ 1 = 0.08 x Interest earned in the CD: I = P r t = ( 3,400 − x ) ⋅ 0.05 ⋅ 1 = 0.05 ( 3,400 − x ) This equation models the problem with one variable. Solve for x. Back substitute. Answer: Mary invested $2,500 at 8% in a mutual fund and $900 at 5% in a CD.   Example 13: Joe has a handful of dimes and quarters that values $5.30. He has one fewer than twice as many dimes than quarters. How many of each coin does he have? Solution: Begin by identifying the variables. To determine the total value of a number of coins, multiply the number of coins by the value of each coin. For example, 5 quarters have a value $0.25 ⋅ 5 = $1.25. Solve for the number of quarters, q. Back substitute into 2q − 1 to find the number of dimes. Answer: Joe has 12 quarters and 23 dimes. Check by multiplying $0.25 ⋅ 12 = $3.00 and $0.10 ⋅ 23 = $2.30. Then add to obtain the correct amount: $3.00 + $2.30 = $5.30.   Try this! A total amount of $5,900 is invested in two accounts. One account earns 3.5% interest and another earns 4.5%. If the interest for 1 year is $229.50, then how much is invested in each account? Answer: $3,600 is invested at 3.5% and $2,300 at 4.5%. Video Solution  || Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Uniform motion refers to movement at a speed, or rate, that does not change. We can determine the distance traveled by multiplying the average rate by the time traveled at that rate with the formula D = r ⋅ t . Applications involving uniform motion usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize the data in a chart and then set up an algebraic equation that models the problem.   Example 14: Two trains leave the station at the same time traveling in opposite directions. One travels at 70 miles per hour and the other at 60 miles per hour. How long does it take for the distance between them to reach 390 miles? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in on the following chart. The time for each train is equal. To avoid introducing two more variables, use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances traveled by each train. We can now completely fill in the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the distance column. The problem asks for the time it takes for the total distance to reach 390 miles. Solve for t. Answer: It takes 3 hours for the distance between the trains to reach 390 miles.   Example 15: A train traveling nonstop to its destination is able to make the trip at an average speed of 72 miles per hour. On the return trip, the train makes several stops and is only able to average 48 miles per hour. If the return trip takes 2 hours longer than the initial trip to the destination, then what is the travel time each way? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in the following chart: Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is again defined by the distance column. In this case, the distance to the destination and back is the same, and the equation is Solve for t. The return trip takes t + 2 = 4 + 2 = 6 hours. Answer: It takes 4 hours to arrive at the destination and 6 hours to return.   Try this! Mary departs for school on a bicycle at an average rate of 6 miles per hour. Her sister Kate, running late, leaves 15 minutes later and cycles at twice that speed. How long will it take Kate to catch up to Mary? Be careful! Pay attention to the units given in the problem. Answer: It takes 15 minutes for Kate to catch up. Video Solution  || 