Interval Notation In Examples 1 and 2, we used set-builder notation to describe the set of real numbers greater than or equal to −3 and a second set of real numbers less than −1. There is another mathematical symbolism, called interval notation, that can be used to describe these sets of real numbers. Consider the first set of numbers from Example 1, {x : x ≥ −3}. 2.6. INEQUALITIES 139 −3 Sweeping our eyes “from left to right”, we use [−3,∞) to describe this set of real numbers. Some comments are in order: 1. The bracket at the left end means that −3 is included in the set. 2. As you move toward the right end of the real line, the numbers grow without bound. Hence, the ∞ symbol (positive infinity) is used to indi- cate that we are including all real numbers to the right of −3. However, ∞ is not really a number, so we use a parentheses to indicate we are “not including” this fictional point. The set of numbers from Example 2 is {x : x < −1}. −1 Sweeping our eyes “from left to right”, this set of real numbers is described with (−∞,−1). Again, comments are in order: 1. The number −1 is not included in this set. To indicate that it is not included, we use a parenthesis. 2. As you move toward the left end of the real line, the numbers decrease without bound. Hence, the −∞ symbol (negative infinity) is used to indicate that we are including all real numbers to the left of −1. Again, −∞ is not an actual number, so we use a parenthesis to indicate that we are not including this “fictional” point. Sweep your eyes from “left to right”. If you would like to insure that you correctly use interval notation, place the numbers in your interval notation in the same order as they are encountered as you sweep your eyes from “left to right” on the real line. A nice summary of set-builder and interval notation is presented in Table 2.1 at the end of the section. Interval Notation In Examples 1 and 2, we used set-builder notation to describe the set of real numbers greater than or equal to −3 and a second set of real numbers less than −1. There is another mathematical symbolism, called interval notation, that can be used to describe these sets of real numbers. Consider the first set of numbers from Example 1, {x : x ≥ −3}. 2.6. INEQUALITIES 139 −3 Sweeping our eyes “from left to right”, we use [−3,∞) to describe this set of real numbers. Some comments are in order: 1. The bracket at the left end means that −3 is included in the set. 2. As you move toward the right end of the real line, the numbers grow without bound. Hence, the ∞ symbol (positive infinity) is used to indi- cate that we are including all real numbers to the right of −3. However, ∞ is not really a number, so we use a parentheses to indicate we are “not including” this fictional point. The set of numbers from Example 2 is {x : x < −1}. −1 Sweeping our eyes “from left to right”, this set of real numbers is described with (−∞,−1). Again, comments are in order: 1. The number −1 is not included in this set. To indicate that it is not included, we use a parenthesis. 2. As you move toward the left end of the real line, the numbers decrease without bound. Hence, the −∞ symbol (negative infinity) is used to indicate that we are including all real numbers to the left of −1. Again, −∞ is not an actual number, so we use a parenthesis to indicate that we are not including this “fictional” point. Sweep your eyes from “left to right”. If you would like to insure that you correctly use interval notation, place the numbers in your interval notation in the same order as they are encountered as you sweep your eyes from “left to right” on the real line. A nice summary of set-builder and interval notation is presented in Table 2.1 at the end of the section.  || 