Guidelines and Requirements Example 3 suggests that we should use the following guidelines when sketching the graph of an equation. 160 CHAPTER 3. INTRODUCTION TO GRAPHING Guidelines for drawing the graph of an equation. When asked to draw the graph of an equation, perform each of the following steps: 1. Set up and calculate a table of points that satisfy the given equation. 2. Set up a Cartesian Coordinate System on graph paper and plot the points in your table on the system. Label each axis (usually x and y) and indicate the scale on each axis. 3. If the number of points plotted are enough to envision what the shape of the final curve will be, then draw the remaining points that satisfy the equation as imagined. Use a ruler if you believe the graph is a line. If the graph appears to be a curve, freehand the graph without the use of a ruler. 4. If the number of plotted points do not provide enough evidence to en- vision the final shape of the graph, add more points to your table, plot them, and try again to envision the final shape of the graph. If you still cannot predict the eventual shape of the graph, keep adding points to your table and plotting them until you are convinced of the final shape of the graph. Here are some additional requirements that must be followed when sketch- ing the graph of an equation. Graph paper, lines, curves, and rulers. The following are requirements for this class: 5. All graphs are to be drawn on graph paper. 6. All lines are to be drawn with a ruler. This includes the horizontal and vertical axes. 7. If the graph of an equation is a curve instead of a line, then the graph should be drawn freehand, without the aid of a ruler. Guidelines and Requirements Example 3 suggests that we should use the following guidelines when sketching the graph of an equation. 160 CHAPTER 3. INTRODUCTION TO GRAPHING Guidelines for drawing the graph of an equation. When asked to draw the graph of an equation, perform each of the following steps: 1. Set up and calculate a table of points that satisfy the given equation. 2. Set up a Cartesian Coordinate System on graph paper and plot the points in your table on the system. Label each axis (usually x and y) and indicate the scale on each axis. 3. If the number of points plotted are enough to envision what the shape of the final curve will be, then draw the remaining points that satisfy the equation as imagined. Use a ruler if you believe the graph is a line. If the graph appears to be a curve, freehand the graph without the use of a ruler. 4. If the number of plotted points do not provide enough evidence to en- vision the final shape of the graph, add more points to your table, plot them, and try again to envision the final shape of the graph. If you still cannot predict the eventual shape of the graph, keep adding points to your table and plotting them until you are convinced of the final shape of the graph. Here are some additional requirements that must be followed when sketch- ing the graph of an equation. Graph paper, lines, curves, and rulers. The following are requirements for this class: 5. All graphs are to be drawn on graph paper. 6. All lines are to be drawn with a ruler. This includes the horizontal and vertical axes. 7. If the graph of an equation is a curve instead of a line, then the graph should be drawn freehand, without the aid of a ruler.  || 