The Difference of Two Squares Recall that when we multiplied together the two binomials ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) , we obtained the product a 2 − b 2 . ( a + b ) ( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 Perfect Square Notice that the terms a 2 and b 2 in the product can be produced by squaring a and b , respectively. A term that is the square of another term is called a perfect square. Thus, both a 2 and b 2 are perfect squares. The minus sign between a 2 and b 2 means that we are taking the difference of the two squares.Since we know that ( a + b ) ( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 , we need only turn the equation around to find the factorization form. a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) The factorization form says that we can factor a 2 − b 2 , the difference of two squares, by finding the terms that produce the perfect squares and substituting these quantities into the factorization form.When using real numbers (as we are), there is no factored form for the sum of two squares. That is, using real numbers, a 2 + b 2 cannot be factored The Difference of Two Squares Recall that when we multiplied together the two binomials ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) , we obtained the product a 2 − b 2 . ( a + b ) ( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 Perfect Square Notice that the terms a 2 and b 2 in the product can be produced by squaring a and b , respectively. A term that is the square of another term is called a perfect square. Thus, both a 2 and b 2 are perfect squares. The minus sign between a 2 and b 2 means that we are taking the difference of the two squares.Since we know that ( a + b ) ( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 , we need only turn the equation around to find the factorization form. a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) The factorization form says that we can factor a 2 − b 2 , the difference of two squares, by finding the terms that produce the perfect squares and substituting these quantities into the factorization form.When using real numbers (as we are), there is no factored form for the sum of two squares. That is, using real numbers, a 2 + b 2 cannot be factored  || 