The Logic Behind The Process When working with rational expressions, it is often best to write them in the simplest possible form. For example, the rational expression can be reduced to the simpler expression for all x except x = 2,4 . From our discussion of equality of fractions in Section Section 8.2, we know that when a d = b c . This fact allows us to deduce that, if since a k b = a b k (recall the commutative property of multiplication). But this fact means that if a factor (in this case, k ) is common to both the numerator and denominator of a fraction, we may remove it without changing the value of the fraction. Cancelling The process of removing common factors is commonly called cancelling. Example 8.27.  can be reduced to .   Process:Remove the three factors of 1; Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.28.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.29.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.30.  cannot be reduced since there are no factors common to the numerator and denominator. Problems 1, 2, and 3 shown above could all be reduced. The process in each reduction included the following steps: Both the numerator and denominator were factored. Factors that were common to both the numerator and denominator were noted and removed by dividing them out. We know that we can divide both sides of an equation by the same nonzero number, but why should we be able to divide both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same nonzero number? The reason is that any nonzero number divided by itself is 1, and that if a number is multiplied by 1, it is left unchanged. Consider the fraction . Multiply this fraction by 1. This is written . But 1 can be rewritten as . The answer, , is the reduced form. Notice that in there is no factor common to both the numerator and denominator. This reasoning provides justification for the following rule. Cancelling Multiplying or dividing the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number does not change the value of a fraction. The Logic Behind The Process When working with rational expressions, it is often best to write them in the simplest possible form. For example, the rational expression can be reduced to the simpler expression for all x except x = 2,4 . From our discussion of equality of fractions in Section Section 8.2, we know that when a d = b c . This fact allows us to deduce that, if since a k b = a b k (recall the commutative property of multiplication). But this fact means that if a factor (in this case, k ) is common to both the numerator and denominator of a fraction, we may remove it without changing the value of the fraction. Cancelling The process of removing common factors is commonly called cancelling. Example 8.27.  can be reduced to .   Process:Remove the three factors of 1; Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.28.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.29.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.30.  cannot be reduced since there are no factors common to the numerator and denominator. Problems 1, 2, and 3 shown above could all be reduced. The process in each reduction included the following steps: Both the numerator and denominator were factored. Factors that were common to both the numerator and denominator were noted and removed by dividing them out. We know that we can divide both sides of an equation by the same nonzero number, but why should we be able to divide both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same nonzero number? The reason is that any nonzero number divided by itself is 1, and that if a number is multiplied by 1, it is left unchanged. Consider the fraction . Multiply this fraction by 1. This is written . But 1 can be rewritten as . The answer, , is the reduced form. Notice that in there is no factor common to both the numerator and denominator. This reasoning provides justification for the following rule. Cancelling Multiplying or dividing the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number does not change the value of a fraction.  || 