 || Extracting Square Roots Recall that a quadratic equation is in standard form Any quadratic equation in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . if it is equal to 0: where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . A solution to such an equation is called a root A solution to a quadratic equation in standard form. . Quadratic equations can have two real solutions, one real solution, or no real solution. If the quadratic expression on the left factors, then we can solve it by factoring. A review of the steps used to solve by factoring follow: Step 1: Express the quadratic equation in standard form. Step 2: Factor the quadratic expression. Step 3: Apply the zero-product property and set each variable factor equal to 0. Step 4: Solve the resulting linear equations. For example, we can solve x 2 − 4 = 0 by factoring as follows: The two solutions are −2 and 2. The goal in this section is to develop an alternative method that can be used to easily solve equations where b = 0, giving the form The equation x 2 − 4 = 0 is in this form and can be solved by first isolating x 2 . If we take the square root of both sides of this equation, we obtain the following: Here we see that x = − 2 and x = 2 are solutions to the resulting equation. In general, this describes the square root property For any real number k, if x 2 = k , then x = ± k √ . ; for any real number k, The notation “±” is read “plus or minus” and is used as compact notation that indicates two solutions. Hence the statement x = ± k √ indicates that x = − k √ or x = k √ . Applying the square root property as a means of solving a quadratic equation is called extracting the roots Applying the square root property as a means of solving a quadratic equation. .   Example 1: Solve: x 2 − 25 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square. Next, apply the square root property. Answer: The solutions are −5 and 5. The check is left to the reader.   Certainly, the previous example could have been solved just as easily by factoring. However, it demonstrates a technique that can be used to solve equations in this form that do not factor.   Example 2: Solve: x 2 − 5 = 0 . Solution: Notice that the quadratic expression on the left does not factor. We can extract the roots if we first isolate the leading term, x 2 . Apply the square root property. For completeness, check that these two real solutions solve the original quadratic equation. Generally, the check is optional. Answer: The solutions are − 5 √ and 5 √ .   Example 3: Solve: 4 x 2 − 45 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating x 2 . Apply the square root property and then simplify. Answer: The solutions are − 3 5 √ 2 and 3 5 √ 2 .   Sometimes quadratic equations have no real solution.   Example 4: Solve: x 2 + 9 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating x 2 . After applying the square root property, we are left with the square root of a negative number. Therefore, there is no real solution to this equation. Answer: No real solution   Reverse this process to find equations with given solutions of the form ±k.   Example 5: Find an equation with solutions − 2 3 √ and 2 3 √ . Solution: Begin by squaring both sides of the following equation: Lastly, subtract 12 from both sides and present the equation in standard form. Answer: x 2 − 12 = 0   Try this! Solve: 9 x 2 − 8 = 0 . Answer: x = − 2 2 √ 3 or x = 2 2 √ 3 Video Solution Consider solving the following equation: To solve this equation by factoring, first square x + 2 and then put it in standard form, equal to zero, by subtracting 25 from both sides. Factor and then apply the zero-product property. The two solutions are −7 and 3. When an equation is in this form, we can obtain the solutions in fewer steps by extracting the roots.   Example 6: Solve: ( x + 2 ) 2 = 25 . Solution: Solve by extracting the roots. At this point, separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and simplify each individually. Answer: The solutions are −7 and 3.   In addition to fewer steps, this method allows us to solve equations that do not factor.   Example 7: Solve: ( 3 x + 3 ) 2 − 27 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square. Next, extract the roots and simplify. Solve for x. Answer: The solutions are − 1 − 3 √ and − 1 + 3 √ .   Example 8: Solve: 9 ( 2 x − 1 ) 2 − 8 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square factor. Apply the square root property and solve. Answer: The solutions are 3 − 2 2 √ 6 and 3 + 2 2 √ 6 .   Try this! Solve: 3 ( x − 5 ) 2 − 2 = 0 . Answer: 15 ± 6 √ 3 Video Solution   Example 9: The length of a rectangle is twice its width. If the diagonal measures 2 feet, then find the dimensions of the rectangle. Solution: The diagonal of any rectangle forms two right triangles. Thus the Pythagorean theorem applies. The sum of the squares of the legs of a right triangle is equal to the square of the hypotenuse: Solve. Here we obtain two solutions, w = − 2 5 √ and w = 2 5 √ . Since the problem asked for a length of a rectangle, we disregard the negative answer. Furthermore, we will rationalize the denominator and present our solutions without any radicals in the denominator. Back substitute to find the length. Answer: The length of the rectangle is 4 5 √ 5 feet and the width is 2 5 √ 5 feet.  || 