Plotting Ordered Pairs Before we can plot any points or draw any graphs, we first need to set up a Cartesian Coordinate System on a sheet of graph paper? How do we do this? What is required? Draw and label each axis. If we are going to plot points (x, y), then, on aWe don’t always label the horizontal axis as the x-axis and the vertical axis as the y-axis. For example, if we want to plot the velocity of an object as a function of time, then we would be plotting points (t, v). In that case, we would label the horizontal axis as the t-axis and the vertical axis as the v-axis. sheet of graph paper, perform each of the following initial tasks. 1. Use a ruler to draw the horizontal and vertical axes. 2. Label the horizontal axis as the x-axis and the vertical axis as the y-axis. The result of this first step is shown in Figure 3.3. Indicate the scale on each axis. 3. Label at least one vertical gridline with its numerical value. 4. Label at least one horizontal gridline with its numerical value. An example is shown in Figure 3.4. Note that the scale indicated on the x-axisThe scales on the horizontal and vertical axes may differ. However, on each axis, the scale must remain consistent. That is, as you count to the right from the origin on the x-axis, if each gridline represents one unit, then as you count to the left from the origin on the x-axis, each gridline must also represent one unit. Similar comments are in order for the y-axis, where the scale must also be consistent, whether you are counting up or down. indicates that each gridline counts as 1-unit as we count from left-to-right. The scale on the y-axis indicates that each gridlines counts as 2-units as we count from bottom-to-top. x y Figure 3.3: Draw and label each axis. −5 5 −10 10 x y Figure 3.4: Indicate the scale on each axis. 3.1. GRAPHING EQUATIONS BY HAND 155 Now that we know how to set up a Cartesian Coordinate System on a sheet of graph paper, here are two examples of how we plot points on our coordinate system. To plot the ordered pair (4, 3), start at the origin and move 4 units to the right along the horizontal axis, then 3 units upward in the direction of the vertical axis. −5 5 −5 5 x y 4 3 (4, 3) To plot the ordered pair (−2,−3), start at the origin and move 2 units to the left along the horizontal axis, then 3 units downward in the direc- tion of the vertical axis. −5 5 −5 5 x y −2 −3 (−2,−3) Continuing in this manner, each ordered pair (x, y) of real numbers is asso- ciated with a unique point in the Cartesian plane. Vice-versa, each point in the Cartesian point is associated with a unique ordered pair of real numbers. Because of this association, we begin to use the words “point” and “ordered pair” as equivalent expressions, sometimes referring to the “point” (x, y) and other times to the “ordered pair” (x, y). You Try It! EXAMPLE 1. Identify the coordinates of the point P in Figure 3.5. Identify the coordinates of the point P in the graph below. −5 5 −5 5 x y P Solution: In Figure 3.6, start at the origin, move 3 units to the left and 4 units up to reach the point P . This indicates that the coordinates of the point P are (−3, 4). 156 CHAPTER 3. INTRODUCTION TO GRAPHING −5 5 −5 5 x y P Figure 3.5: Identify the coordinates of the point P . −5 5 −5 5 x y P (−3, 4) −3 −4 Figure 3.6: Start at the origin, move 3 units left and 4 units up. Answer: (3,−2) ! Plotting Ordered Pairs Before we can plot any points or draw any graphs, we first need to set up a Cartesian Coordinate System on a sheet of graph paper? How do we do this? What is required? Draw and label each axis. If we are going to plot points (x, y), then, on aWe don’t always label the horizontal axis as the x-axis and the vertical axis as the y-axis. For example, if we want to plot the velocity of an object as a function of time, then we would be plotting points (t, v). In that case, we would label the horizontal axis as the t-axis and the vertical axis as the v-axis. sheet of graph paper, perform each of the following initial tasks. 1. Use a ruler to draw the horizontal and vertical axes. 2. Label the horizontal axis as the x-axis and the vertical axis as the y-axis. The result of this first step is shown in Figure 3.3. Indicate the scale on each axis. 3. Label at least one vertical gridline with its numerical value. 4. Label at least one horizontal gridline with its numerical value. An example is shown in Figure 3.4. Note that the scale indicated on the x-axisThe scales on the horizontal and vertical axes may differ. However, on each axis, the scale must remain consistent. That is, as you count to the right from the origin on the x-axis, if each gridline represents one unit, then as you count to the left from the origin on the x-axis, each gridline must also represent one unit. Similar comments are in order for the y-axis, where the scale must also be consistent, whether you are counting up or down. indicates that each gridline counts as 1-unit as we count from left-to-right. The scale on the y-axis indicates that each gridlines counts as 2-units as we count from bottom-to-top. x y Figure 3.3: Draw and label each axis. −5 5 −10 10 x y Figure 3.4: Indicate the scale on each axis. 3.1. GRAPHING EQUATIONS BY HAND 155 Now that we know how to set up a Cartesian Coordinate System on a sheet of graph paper, here are two examples of how we plot points on our coordinate system. To plot the ordered pair (4, 3), start at the origin and move 4 units to the right along the horizontal axis, then 3 units upward in the direction of the vertical axis. −5 5 −5 5 x y 4 3 (4, 3) To plot the ordered pair (−2,−3), start at the origin and move 2 units to the left along the horizontal axis, then 3 units downward in the direc- tion of the vertical axis. −5 5 −5 5 x y −2 −3 (−2,−3) Continuing in this manner, each ordered pair (x, y) of real numbers is asso- ciated with a unique point in the Cartesian plane. Vice-versa, each point in the Cartesian point is associated with a unique ordered pair of real numbers. Because of this association, we begin to use the words “point” and “ordered pair” as equivalent expressions, sometimes referring to the “point” (x, y) and other times to the “ordered pair” (x, y). You Try It! EXAMPLE 1. Identify the coordinates of the point P in Figure 3.5. Identify the coordinates of the point P in the graph below. −5 5 −5 5 x y P Solution: In Figure 3.6, start at the origin, move 3 units to the left and 4 units up to reach the point P . This indicates that the coordinates of the point P are (−3, 4). 156 CHAPTER 3. INTRODUCTION TO GRAPHING −5 5 −5 5 x y P Figure 3.5: Identify the coordinates of the point P . −5 5 −5 5 x y P (−3, 4) −3 −4 Figure 3.6: Start at the origin, move 3 units left and 4 units up. Answer: (3,−2) !  || 