Conditional Equations, Identities, and Contradictions There are three different types of equations. Up to this point, we have been solving conditional equations Equations that are true for particular values. . These are equations that are true for particular values. An identity An equation that is true for all possible values. is an equation that is true for all possible values of the variable. For example, has a solution set consisting of all real numbers, R. A contradiction An equation that is never true and has no solution. is an equation that is never true and thus has no solutions. For example, has no solution. We use the empty set, ∅ , to indicate that there are no solutions. If the end result of solving an equation is a true statement, like 0 = 0, then the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution. If solving results in a false statement, like 0 = 1, then the equation is a contradiction and there is no solution.   Example 5: Solve: 4 ( x + 5 ) + 6 = 2 ( 2 x + 3 ) . Solution: Answer: ∅ . Solving leads to a false statement; therefore, the equation is a contradiction and there is no solution.   Example 6: Solve: 3 ( 3 y + 5 ) + 5 = 10 ( y + 2 ) − y . Solution: Answer: R. Solving leads to a true statement; therefore, the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution.   If it is hard to believe that any real number is a solution to the equation in the previous example, then choose your favorite real number, and substitute it in the equation to see that it leads to a true statement. Choose x = 7 and check:   Try this! Solve: − 2 ( 3 x + 1 ) − ( x − 3 ) = − 7 x + 1 . Answer: R Video Solution Conditional Equations, Identities, and Contradictions There are three different types of equations. Up to this point, we have been solving conditional equations Equations that are true for particular values. . These are equations that are true for particular values. An identity An equation that is true for all possible values. is an equation that is true for all possible values of the variable. For example, has a solution set consisting of all real numbers, R. A contradiction An equation that is never true and has no solution. is an equation that is never true and thus has no solutions. For example, has no solution. We use the empty set, ∅ , to indicate that there are no solutions. If the end result of solving an equation is a true statement, like 0 = 0, then the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution. If solving results in a false statement, like 0 = 1, then the equation is a contradiction and there is no solution.   Example 5: Solve: 4 ( x + 5 ) + 6 = 2 ( 2 x + 3 ) . Solution: Answer: ∅ . Solving leads to a false statement; therefore, the equation is a contradiction and there is no solution.   Example 6: Solve: 3 ( 3 y + 5 ) + 5 = 10 ( y + 2 ) − y . Solution: Answer: R. Solving leads to a true statement; therefore, the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution.   If it is hard to believe that any real number is a solution to the equation in the previous example, then choose your favorite real number, and substitute it in the equation to see that it leads to a true statement. Choose x = 7 and check:   Try this! Solve: − 2 ( 3 x + 1 ) − ( x − 3 ) = − 7 x + 1 . Answer: R Video Solution  || 