 || Number Problems Recall that the reciprocal The reciprocal of a nonzero number n is 1/n. of a nonzero number n is 1/n. For example, the reciprocal of 5 is 1/5 and 5 ⋅ 1/5 = 1. In this section, the applications will often involve the key word “reciprocal.” When this is the case, we will see that the algebraic setup results in a rational equation.   Example 1: A positive integer is 4 less than another. The sum of the reciprocals of the two positive integers is 10/21. Find the two integers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the unknowns. Next, use the reciprocals 1 n and 1 n − 4 to translate the sentences into an algebraic equation. We can solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD). In this case, the LCD is 21 n ( n − 4 ) . Solve the resulting quadratic equation. The question calls for integers and the only integer solution is n = 7 . Hence disregard 6/5. Use the expression n − 4 to find the smaller integer. Answer: The two positive integers are 3 and 7. The check is left to the reader.   Example 2: A positive integer is 4 less than another. If the reciprocal of the smaller integer is subtracted from twice the reciprocal of the larger, then the result is 1/30. Find the two integers. Solution: Set up an algebraic equation. Solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides by the LCD. The LCD is 30 n ( n − 4 ) . Here we have two viable possibilities for the larger integer. For this reason, we will we have two solutions to this problem. As a check, perform the operations indicated in the problem. Answer: Two sets of positive integers solve this problem: {6, 10} and {20, 24}.   Try this! The difference between the reciprocals of two consecutive positive odd integers is 2/15. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 3 and 5. Video Solution  || Uniform Motion Problems Uniform motion Described by the formula D = r t , where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. problems, also referred to as distance problems, involve the formula where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. If we divide both sides by the average rate, r, then we obtain the formula For this reason, when the unknown quantity is time, the algebraic setup for distance problems often results in a rational equation. Similarly, when the unknown quantity is the rate, the setup also may result in a rational equation. We begin any uniform motion problem by first organizing our data with a chart. Use this information to set up an algebraic equation that models the application.   Example 5: Mary spent the first 120 miles of her road trip in traffic. When the traffic cleared, she was able to drive twice as fast for the remaining 300 miles. If the total trip took 9 hours, then how fast was she moving in traffic? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. To avoid introducing two more variables for the time column, use the formula t = D r . Here the time for each leg of the trip is calculated as follows: Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 9 hours: We begin solving this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, 2x. Answer: Mary averaged 30 miles per hour in traffic.   Example 6: A passenger train can travel, on average, 20 miles per hour faster than a freight train. If the passenger train covers 390 miles in the same time it takes the freight train to cover 270 miles, then how fast is each train? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantities and organize the data. Next, organize the given data in a chart. Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each train. Because the trains travel the same amount of time, finish the algebraic setup by equating the expressions that represent the times: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, x ( x + 20 ) . Use x + 20 to find the speed of the passenger train. Answer: The speed of the passenger train is 65 miles per hour and the speed of the freight train is 45 miles per hour.   Example 7: Brett lives on the river 8 miles upstream from town. When the current is 2 miles per hour, he can row his boat downstream to town for supplies and back in 3 hours. What is his average rowing speed in still water? Solution: Rowing downstream, the current increases his speed, and his rate is x + 2 miles per hour. Rowing upstream, the current decreases his speed, and his rate is x − 2 miles per hour. Begin by organizing the data in the following chart: Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each leg of the trip. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 3 hours: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 ) . Next, solve the resulting quadratic equation. Use only the positive solution, x = 6 miles per hour. Answer: His rowing speed is 6 miles per hour.   Try this! Dwayne drove 18 miles to the airport to pick up his father and then returned home. On the return trip he was able to drive an average of 15 miles per hour faster than he did on the trip there. If the total driving time was 1 hour, then what was his average speed driving to the airport? Answer: His average speed driving to the airport was 30 miles per hour. Video Solution  || Work-Rate Problems The rate at which a task can be performed is called a work rate The rate at which a task can be performed. . For example, if a painter can paint a room in 8 hours, then the task is to paint the room, and we can write In other words, the painter can complete 1 8 of the task per hour. If he works for less than 8 hours, then he will perform a fraction of the task. For example, Obtain the amount of the task completed by multiplying the work rate by the amount of time the painter works. Typically, work-rate problems involve people working together to complete tasks. When this is the case, we can organize the data in a chart, just as we have done with distance problems. Suppose an apprentice painter can paint the same room by himself in 10 hours. Then we say that he can complete 1 10 of the task per hour. Let t represent the time it takes both of the painters, working together, to paint the room. To complete the chart, multiply the work rate by the time for each person. The portion of the room each can paint adds to a total of 1 task completed. This is represented by the equation obtained from the first column of the chart: This setup results in a rational equation that can be solved for t by multiplying both sides by the LCD, 40. Therefore, the two painters, working together, complete the task in 4 4 9 hours. In general, we have the following work-rate formula 1 t 1 ⋅ t + 1 t 2 ⋅ t = 1 , where 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete the task working together. : Here 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete one task working together. If we factor out the time, t, and then divide both sides by t, we obtain an equivalent work-rate formula: In summary, we have the following equivalent work-rate formulas:   Example 3: Working alone, Billy’s dad can complete the yard work in 3 hours. If Billy helps his dad, then the yard work takes 2 hours. How long would it take Billy working alone to complete the yard work? Solution: The given information tells us that Billy’s dad has an individual work rate of 1 3 task per hour. If we let x represent the time it takes Billy working alone to complete the yard work, then Billy’s individual work rate is 1 x , and we can write Working together, they can complete the task in 2 hours. Multiply the individual work rates by 2 hours to fill in the chart. The amount of the task each completes will total 1 completed task. To solve for x, we first multiply both sides by the LCD, 3x. Answer: It takes Billy 6 hours to complete the yard work alone.   Of course, the unit of time for the work rate need not always be in hours.   Example 4: Working together, two construction crews can build a shed in 5 days. Working separately, the less experienced crew takes twice as long to build a shed than the more experienced crew. Working separately, how long does it take each crew to build a shed? Solution: Working together, the job is completed in 5 days. This gives the following setup: The first column in the chart gives us an algebraic equation that models the problem: Solve the equation by multiplying both sides by 2x. To determine the time it takes the less experienced crew, we use 2x: Answer: Working separately, the experienced crew takes 7½ days to build a shed, and the less experienced crew takes 15 days to build a shed.   Try this! Joe’s garden hose fills the pool in 12 hours. His neighbor has a thinner hose that fills the pool in 15 hours. How long will it take to fill the pool using both hoses? Answer: It will take both hoses 6 2 3 hours to fill the pool. Video Solution  || 