Numbers and Numerals We begin our study of introductory mathematics by examining its most basic building block, the number. Number A number is a concept. It exists only in the mind. The earliest concept of a number was a thought that allowed people to mentally picture the size of some collection of objects. To write down the number being conceptualized, a numeral is used. Numeral A numeral is a symbol that represents a number. In common usage today we do not distinguish between a number and a numeral. In our study of introductory mathematics, we will follow this common usage. Sample Set A The following are numerals. In each case, the first represents the number four, the second repre­sents the number one hundred twenty-three, and the third, the number one thousand five. These numbers are represented in different ways. Hindu-Arabic numerals 4, 123, 1005 Roman numerals IV, CXXIII, MV Egyptian numerals Practice Set A Exercise 1.2.1. (Go to Solution) Do the phrases "four," "one hundred twenty-three," and "one thousand five" qualify as numerals? Yes or no? Numbers and Numerals We begin our study of introductory mathematics by examining its most basic building block, the number. Number A number is a concept. It exists only in the mind. The earliest concept of a number was a thought that allowed people to mentally picture the size of some collection of objects. To write down the number being conceptualized, a numeral is used. Numeral A numeral is a symbol that represents a number. In common usage today we do not distinguish between a number and a numeral. In our study of introductory mathematics, we will follow this common usage. Sample Set A The following are numerals. In each case, the first represents the number four, the second repre­sents the number one hundred twenty-three, and the third, the number one thousand five. These numbers are represented in different ways. Hindu-Arabic numerals 4, 123, 1005 Roman numerals IV, CXXIII, MV Egyptian numerals Practice Set A Exercise 1.2.1. (Go to Solution) Do the phrases "four," "one hundred twenty-three," and "one thousand five" qualify as numerals? Yes or no?  || 