Definitions A ratio Relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. is a relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. Ratios are typically expressed using the following notation: All of the above are equivalent forms used to express a ratio. However, the most familiar way to express a ratio is in the form of a fraction. When writing ratios, it is important to pay attention to the units. If the units are the same, then the ratio can be written without them.   Example 1: Express the ratio 12 feet to 48 feet in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 1 to 4   If the units are different, then we must be sure to include them because the ratio represents a rate A ratio where the units for the numerator and the denominator are different. .   Example 2: Express the ratio 220 miles to 4 hours in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 55 miles to 1 hour (or 55 miles per hour)   Rates are useful when determining unit cost The price of each unit. , or the price of each unit. We use the unit cost to compare values when the quantities are not the same. To determine the unit cost, divide the cost by the number of units.   Example 3: A local supermarket offers a pack of 12 sodas for $3.48 on sale, and the local discount warehouse offers the soda in a 36-can case for $11.52. Which is the better value? Solution: Divide the cost by the number of cans to obtain the unit price. Supermarket Discount warehouse $ 3.48 12     cans = $ 0.29 / can $ 11.52 36     cans = $ 0.32 / can Answer: The supermarket sale price of $3.48 for a 12-pack is a better value at $0.29 per can.   A proportion A statement of the equality of two ratios. is a statement of equality of two ratios. This proportion is often read “a is to b as c is to d.” Here is an example of a simple proportion, If we clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the proportion by the product of the denominators, 8, then we obtain the following true statement: Given any nonzero real numbers a, b, c, and d that satisfy a proportion, multiply both sides by the product of the denominators to obtain the following: This shows that cross products are equal, and is commonly referred to as cross multiplication If a b = c d , then a d = b c . . Definitions A ratio Relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. is a relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. Ratios are typically expressed using the following notation: All of the above are equivalent forms used to express a ratio. However, the most familiar way to express a ratio is in the form of a fraction. When writing ratios, it is important to pay attention to the units. If the units are the same, then the ratio can be written without them.   Example 1: Express the ratio 12 feet to 48 feet in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 1 to 4   If the units are different, then we must be sure to include them because the ratio represents a rate A ratio where the units for the numerator and the denominator are different. .   Example 2: Express the ratio 220 miles to 4 hours in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 55 miles to 1 hour (or 55 miles per hour)   Rates are useful when determining unit cost The price of each unit. , or the price of each unit. We use the unit cost to compare values when the quantities are not the same. To determine the unit cost, divide the cost by the number of units.   Example 3: A local supermarket offers a pack of 12 sodas for $3.48 on sale, and the local discount warehouse offers the soda in a 36-can case for $11.52. Which is the better value? Solution: Divide the cost by the number of cans to obtain the unit price. Supermarket Discount warehouse $ 3.48 12     cans = $ 0.29 / can $ 11.52 36     cans = $ 0.32 / can Answer: The supermarket sale price of $3.48 for a 12-pack is a better value at $0.29 per can.   A proportion A statement of the equality of two ratios. is a statement of equality of two ratios. This proportion is often read “a is to b as c is to d.” Here is an example of a simple proportion, If we clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the proportion by the product of the denominators, 8, then we obtain the following true statement: Given any nonzero real numbers a, b, c, and d that satisfy a proportion, multiply both sides by the product of the denominators to obtain the following: This shows that cross products are equal, and is commonly referred to as cross multiplication If a b = c d , then a d = b c . .  || 