The Five Step Method We are now in a position to solve some applied problems using algebraic methods. The problems we shall solve are intended as logic developers. Although they may not seem to reflect real situations, they do serve as a basis for solving more complex, real situation, applied problems. To solve problems algebraically, we will use the five-step method. Strategy for Reading Word Problems When solving mathematical word problems, you may wish to apply the following "reading strategy." Read the problem quickly to get a feel for the situation. Do not pay close attention to details. At the first reading, too much attention to details may be overwhelming and lead to confusion and discouragement. After the first, brief reading, read the problem carefully in phrases. Reading phrases introduces information more slowly and allows us to absorb and put together important information. We can look for the unknown quantity by reading one phrase at a time. Five-Step Method for Solving Word Problems Let (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Draw a picture if possible. Solve the equation. Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement, not equation, of the problem. Write a conclusion. If it has been your experience that word problems are difficult, then follow the five-step method carefully. Most people have trouble with word problems for two reasons: They are not able to translate the words to mathematical symbols. (See Section 11.5.) They neglect step 1. After working through the problem phrase by phrase, to become familiar with the situation, INTRODUCE A VARIABLE The Five Step Method We are now in a position to solve some applied problems using algebraic methods. The problems we shall solve are intended as logic developers. Although they may not seem to reflect real situations, they do serve as a basis for solving more complex, real situation, applied problems. To solve problems algebraically, we will use the five-step method. Strategy for Reading Word Problems When solving mathematical word problems, you may wish to apply the following "reading strategy." Read the problem quickly to get a feel for the situation. Do not pay close attention to details. At the first reading, too much attention to details may be overwhelming and lead to confusion and discouragement. After the first, brief reading, read the problem carefully in phrases. Reading phrases introduces information more slowly and allows us to absorb and put together important information. We can look for the unknown quantity by reading one phrase at a time. Five-Step Method for Solving Word Problems Let (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Draw a picture if possible. Solve the equation. Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement, not equation, of the problem. Write a conclusion. If it has been your experience that word problems are difficult, then follow the five-step method carefully. Most people have trouble with word problems for two reasons: They are not able to translate the words to mathematical symbols. (See Section 11.5.) They neglect step 1. After working through the problem phrase by phrase, to become familiar with the situation, INTRODUCE A VARIABLE  || 