Factoring Method In the last two types of problems (Sections Section 6.2 and Section 6.3), we knew one of the factors and were able to determine the other factor through division. Suppose, now, we’re given the product without any factors. Our problem is to find the factors, if possible. This procedure and the previous two procedures are based on the distributive property. We will use the distributive property in reverse. We notice that in the product, a is common to both terms. (In fact, a is a common factor of both terms.) Since a is common to both terms, we will factor it out and write a(               ) Now we need to determine what to place inside the parentheses. This is the procedure of the previous section. Divide each term of the product by the known factor a. Thus, b and c are the required terms of the other factor. Hence, a b + a c = a(b + c) When factoring a monomial from a polynomial, we seek out factors that are not only common to each term of the polynomial, but factors that have these properties: The numerical coefficients are the largest common numerical coefficients. The variables possess the largest exponents common to all the variables. Factoring Method In the last two types of problems (Sections Section 6.2 and Section 6.3), we knew one of the factors and were able to determine the other factor through division. Suppose, now, we’re given the product without any factors. Our problem is to find the factors, if possible. This procedure and the previous two procedures are based on the distributive property. We will use the distributive property in reverse. We notice that in the product, a is common to both terms. (In fact, a is a common factor of both terms.) Since a is common to both terms, we will factor it out and write a(               ) Now we need to determine what to place inside the parentheses. This is the procedure of the previous section. Divide each term of the product by the known factor a. Thus, b and c are the required terms of the other factor. Hence, a b + a c = a(b + c) When factoring a monomial from a polynomial, we seek out factors that are not only common to each term of the polynomial, but factors that have these properties: The numerical coefficients are the largest common numerical coefficients. The variables possess the largest exponents common to all the variables.  || 