The Process We have cleared the equation of fractions by multiplying both sides by the LCD. This development generates the following rule. Clearing an Equation of Fractions To clear an equation of fractions, multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD. When multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD, we use the distributive property to distribute the LCD to each term. This means we can simplify the above rule. Clearing an Equation of Fractions To clear an equation of fractions, multiply every term on both sides of the equation by the LCD. The complete method for solving a rational equation is 1. Determine all the values that must be excluded from consideration by finding the values that will produce zero in the denominator (and thus, division by zero). These excluded values are not in the domain of the equation and are called nondomain values. 2. Clear the equation of fractions by multiplying every term by the LCD. 3. Solve this nonfractional equation for the variable. Check to see if any of these potential solutions are excluded values. 4. Check the solution by substitution. The Process We have cleared the equation of fractions by multiplying both sides by the LCD. This development generates the following rule. Clearing an Equation of Fractions To clear an equation of fractions, multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD. When multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD, we use the distributive property to distribute the LCD to each term. This means we can simplify the above rule. Clearing an Equation of Fractions To clear an equation of fractions, multiply every term on both sides of the equation by the LCD. The complete method for solving a rational equation is 1. Determine all the values that must be excluded from consideration by finding the values that will produce zero in the denominator (and thus, division by zero). These excluded values are not in the domain of the equation and are called nondomain values. 2. Clear the equation of fractions by multiplying every term by the LCD. 3. Solve this nonfractional equation for the variable. Check to see if any of these potential solutions are excluded values. 4. Check the solution by substitution.  || 