Definition of a Linear System Real-world applications are often modeled using more than one variable and more than one equation. A system of equations A set of two or more equations with the same variables. consists of a set of two or more equations with the same variables. In this section, we will study linear systems In this section, we restrict our study to systems of two linear equations with two variables. consisting of two linear equations each with two variables. For example, A solution to a linear system An ordered pair that satisfies both equations and corresponds to a point of intersection. , or simultaneous solution Used when referring to a solution of a system of equations. , to a linear system is an ordered pair (x, y) that solves both of the equations. In this case, (3, 2) is the only solution. To check that an ordered pair is a solution, substitute the corresponding x- and y-values into each equation and then simplify to see if you obtain a true statement for both equations.   Example 1: Determine whether (1, 0) is a solution to the system { x − y = 1 − 2 x + 3 y = 5 . Solution: Substitute the appropriate values into both equations. Answer: Since (1, 0) does not satisfy both equations, it is not a solution.   Try this! Is (−2, 4) a solution to the system {   x − y = − 6 − 2 x + 3 y = 16 ? Answer: Yes Video Solution Definition of a Linear System Real-world applications are often modeled using more than one variable and more than one equation. A system of equations A set of two or more equations with the same variables. consists of a set of two or more equations with the same variables. In this section, we will study linear systems In this section, we restrict our study to systems of two linear equations with two variables. consisting of two linear equations each with two variables. For example, A solution to a linear system An ordered pair that satisfies both equations and corresponds to a point of intersection. , or simultaneous solution Used when referring to a solution of a system of equations. , to a linear system is an ordered pair (x, y) that solves both of the equations. In this case, (3, 2) is the only solution. To check that an ordered pair is a solution, substitute the corresponding x- and y-values into each equation and then simplify to see if you obtain a true statement for both equations.   Example 1: Determine whether (1, 0) is a solution to the system { x − y = 1 − 2 x + 3 y = 5 . Solution: Substitute the appropriate values into both equations. Answer: Since (1, 0) does not satisfy both equations, it is not a solution.   Try this! Is (−2, 4) a solution to the system {   x − y = − 6 − 2 x + 3 y = 16 ? Answer: Yes Video Solution  || 