Relating Positive Improper Fractions and Positive Mixed Numbers A relationship between improper fractions and mixed numbers is suggested by two facts. The first is that improper fractions and mixed numbers are located in the same interval on the number line. The second fact, that mixed numbers are the sum of a natural number and a fraction, can be seen by making the following observa­tions. Divide a whole quantity into 3 equal parts. Now, consider the following examples by observing the respective shaded areas. In the shaded region, there are 2 one thirds, or . There are 3 one thirds, or , or 1. Thus, Improper fraction = whole number. There are 4 one thirds, or , or 1 and . or The terms 1 and can be represented as or Thus, . Improper fraction = mixed number. There are 5 one thirds, or , or 1 and . The terms 1 and can be represented as or . Thus, . Improper fraction = mixed number. There are 6 one thirds, or , or 2. Thus, Improper fraction = whole number. The following important fact is illustrated in the preceding examples. Mixed Number = Natural Number + Proper Fraction Mixed numbers are the sum of a natural number and a proper fraction. Mixed number = (natural number) + (proper fraction) For example can be expressed as The fraction can be expressed as . It is important to note that a number such as does not indicate multiplication. To indicate multiplication, we would need to use a multiplication symbol (such as ⋅) Note means and not , which means 5 times or 5 multiplied by . Thus, mixed numbers may be represented by improper fractions, and improper fractions may be represented by mixed numbers. Relating Positive Improper Fractions and Positive Mixed Numbers A relationship between improper fractions and mixed numbers is suggested by two facts. The first is that improper fractions and mixed numbers are located in the same interval on the number line. The second fact, that mixed numbers are the sum of a natural number and a fraction, can be seen by making the following observa­tions. Divide a whole quantity into 3 equal parts. Now, consider the following examples by observing the respective shaded areas. In the shaded region, there are 2 one thirds, or . There are 3 one thirds, or , or 1. Thus, Improper fraction = whole number. There are 4 one thirds, or , or 1 and . or The terms 1 and can be represented as or Thus, . Improper fraction = mixed number. There are 5 one thirds, or , or 1 and . The terms 1 and can be represented as or . Thus, . Improper fraction = mixed number. There are 6 one thirds, or , or 2. Thus, Improper fraction = whole number. The following important fact is illustrated in the preceding examples. Mixed Number = Natural Number + Proper Fraction Mixed numbers are the sum of a natural number and a proper fraction. Mixed number = (natural number) + (proper fraction) For example can be expressed as The fraction can be expressed as . It is important to note that a number such as does not indicate multiplication. To indicate multiplication, we would need to use a multiplication symbol (such as ⋅) Note means and not , which means 5 times or 5 multiplied by . Thus, mixed numbers may be represented by improper fractions, and improper fractions may be represented by mixed numbers.  || 