Unbounded Intervals An algebraic inequality Expressions related with the symbols ≤ , <, ≥ , and >. , such as x ≥ 2 , is read “x is greater than or equal to 2.” This inequality has infinitely many solutions for x. Some of the solutions are 2, 3, 3.5, 5, 20, and 20.001. Since it is impossible to list all of the solutions, a system is needed that allows a clear communication of this infinite set. Two common ways of expressing solutions to an inequality are by graphing them on a number line Solutions to an algebraic inequality expressed by shading the solution on a number line. and using interval notation A textual system of expressing solutions to an algebraic inequality. . To express the solution graphically, draw a number line and shade in all the values that are solutions to the inequality. Interval notation is textual and uses specific notation as follows: Determine the interval notation after graphing the solution set on a number line. The numbers in interval notation should be written in the same order as they appear on the number line, with smaller numbers in the set appearing first. In this example, there is an inclusive inequality An inequality that includes the boundary point indicated by the “or equal” part of the symbols ≤ and ≥ and a closed dot on the number line. , which means that the lower-bound 2 is included in the solution. Denote this with a closed dot on the number line and a square bracket in interval notation. The symbol (∞) is read as infinity The symbol (∞) indicates the interval is unbounded to the right. and indicates that the set is unbounded to the right on a number line. Interval notation requires a parenthesis to enclose infinity. The square bracket indicates the boundary is included in the solution. The parentheses indicate the boundary is not included. Infinity is an upper bound to the real numbers, but is not itself a real number: it cannot be included in the solution set. Now compare the interval notation in the previous example to that of the strict, or noninclusive, inequality that follows: Strict inequalities Express ordering relationships using the symbol < for “less than” and > for “greater than.” imply that solutions may get very close to the boundary point, in this case 2, but not actually include it. Denote this idea with an open dot on the number line and a round parenthesis in interval notation.   Example 1: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3 . Solution: Use an open dot at 3 and shade all real numbers strictly less than 3. Use negative infinity The symbol (−∞) indicates the interval is unbounded to the left. (−∞) to indicate that the solution set is unbounded to the left on a number line. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   Example 2: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x ≤ 5 . Solution: Use a closed dot and shade all numbers less than and including 5. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   5 ]   It is important to see that 5 ≥ x is the same as x ≤ 5 . Both require values of x to be smaller than or equal to 5. To avoid confusion, it is good practice to rewrite all inequalities with the variable on the left. Also, when using text, use “inf” as a shortened form of infinity. For example, ( − ∞ ,   5 ] can be expressed textually as (−inf, 5]. A compound inequality Two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” is actually two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” Compound inequalities with the logical “or” require that either condition must be satisfied. Therefore, the solution set of this type of compound inequality consists of all the elements of the solution sets of each inequality. When we join these individual solution sets it is called the union The set formed by joining the individual solution sets indicated by the logical use of the word “or” and denoted with the symbol ∪ . , denoted ∪ . For example, the solutions to the compound inequality x < 3   o r   x ≥ 6 can be graphed as follows: Sometimes we encounter compound inequalities where the separate solution sets overlap. In the case where the compound inequality contains the word “or,” we combine all the elements of both sets to create one set containing all the elements of each.   Example 3: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x ≤ − 1   or   x < 3 . Solution: Combine all solutions of both inequalities. The solutions to each inequality are sketched above the number line as a means to determine the union, which is graphed on the number line below. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   Any real number less than 3 in the shaded region on the number line will satisfy at least one of the two given inequalities.   Example 4: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3   or   x ≥ − 1 . Solution: Both solution sets are graphed above the union, which is graphed below. Answer: Interval notation: R = (−∞, ∞)   When you combine both solution sets and form the union, you can see that all real numbers satisfy the original compound inequality. In summary, and Unbounded Intervals An algebraic inequality Expressions related with the symbols ≤ , <, ≥ , and >. , such as x ≥ 2 , is read “x is greater than or equal to 2.” This inequality has infinitely many solutions for x. Some of the solutions are 2, 3, 3.5, 5, 20, and 20.001. Since it is impossible to list all of the solutions, a system is needed that allows a clear communication of this infinite set. Two common ways of expressing solutions to an inequality are by graphing them on a number line Solutions to an algebraic inequality expressed by shading the solution on a number line. and using interval notation A textual system of expressing solutions to an algebraic inequality. . To express the solution graphically, draw a number line and shade in all the values that are solutions to the inequality. Interval notation is textual and uses specific notation as follows: Determine the interval notation after graphing the solution set on a number line. The numbers in interval notation should be written in the same order as they appear on the number line, with smaller numbers in the set appearing first. In this example, there is an inclusive inequality An inequality that includes the boundary point indicated by the “or equal” part of the symbols ≤ and ≥ and a closed dot on the number line. , which means that the lower-bound 2 is included in the solution. Denote this with a closed dot on the number line and a square bracket in interval notation. The symbol (∞) is read as infinity The symbol (∞) indicates the interval is unbounded to the right. and indicates that the set is unbounded to the right on a number line. Interval notation requires a parenthesis to enclose infinity. The square bracket indicates the boundary is included in the solution. The parentheses indicate the boundary is not included. Infinity is an upper bound to the real numbers, but is not itself a real number: it cannot be included in the solution set. Now compare the interval notation in the previous example to that of the strict, or noninclusive, inequality that follows: Strict inequalities Express ordering relationships using the symbol < for “less than” and > for “greater than.” imply that solutions may get very close to the boundary point, in this case 2, but not actually include it. Denote this idea with an open dot on the number line and a round parenthesis in interval notation.   Example 1: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3 . Solution: Use an open dot at 3 and shade all real numbers strictly less than 3. Use negative infinity The symbol (−∞) indicates the interval is unbounded to the left. (−∞) to indicate that the solution set is unbounded to the left on a number line. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   Example 2: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x ≤ 5 . Solution: Use a closed dot and shade all numbers less than and including 5. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   5 ]   It is important to see that 5 ≥ x is the same as x ≤ 5 . Both require values of x to be smaller than or equal to 5. To avoid confusion, it is good practice to rewrite all inequalities with the variable on the left. Also, when using text, use “inf” as a shortened form of infinity. For example, ( − ∞ ,   5 ] can be expressed textually as (−inf, 5]. A compound inequality Two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” is actually two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” Compound inequalities with the logical “or” require that either condition must be satisfied. Therefore, the solution set of this type of compound inequality consists of all the elements of the solution sets of each inequality. When we join these individual solution sets it is called the union The set formed by joining the individual solution sets indicated by the logical use of the word “or” and denoted with the symbol ∪ . , denoted ∪ . For example, the solutions to the compound inequality x < 3   o r   x ≥ 6 can be graphed as follows: Sometimes we encounter compound inequalities where the separate solution sets overlap. In the case where the compound inequality contains the word “or,” we combine all the elements of both sets to create one set containing all the elements of each.   Example 3: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x ≤ − 1   or   x < 3 . Solution: Combine all solutions of both inequalities. The solutions to each inequality are sketched above the number line as a means to determine the union, which is graphed on the number line below. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   Any real number less than 3 in the shaded region on the number line will satisfy at least one of the two given inequalities.   Example 4: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3   or   x ≥ − 1 . Solution: Both solution sets are graphed above the union, which is graphed below. Answer: Interval notation: R = (−∞, ∞)   When you combine both solution sets and form the union, you can see that all real numbers satisfy the original compound inequality. In summary, and  || 