Evaluating Algebraic Expressions Think of an algebraic expression as a generalization of particular arithmetic operations. Performing these operations after substituting given values for variables is called evaluating The process of performing the operations of an algebraic expression for given values of the variables. . In algebra, a variable represents an unknown value. However, if the problem specifically assigns a value to a variable, then you can replace that letter with the given number and evaluate using the order of operations.   Example 3: Evaluate: a. 2 x + 3 , where x = − 4 b. 2 3 y , where y = 9 Solution: To avoid common errors, it is a best practice to first replace all variables with parentheses and then replace, or substitute The act of replacing a variable with an equivalent quantity. , the given value. a. b. Answers: a. −5; b. 6   If parentheses are not used in part (a) of the previous example, the result is quite different: 2 x + 3 = 2 − 4 + 4 . Without parentheses, the first operation is subtraction, which leads to an incorrect result.   Example 4: Evaluate: − 2 x − y , where x = − 5 and y = − 3 . Solution: After substituting the given values for the variables, simplify using the order of operations. Answer: 13   Example 5: Evaluate: 9 a 2 − b 2 , where a = 2 and b = − 5 . Solution: Answer: 11   Example 6: Evaluate: − x 2 − 4 x + 1 , where x = − 1 2 . Solution: Answer: 11/4   The answer to the previous example is 11 4 , which can be written as a mixed number 2 3 4 . In algebra, improper fractions are generally preferred. Unless the original problem has mixed numbers in it, or it is an answer to a real-world application, solutions will be expressed as reduced improper fractions.   Example 7: Evaluate: ( 3 x − 2 ) ( x − 7 ) , where x = 2 3 . Solution: The order of operations requires us to perform the operations within the parentheses first. Answer: 0   Example 8: Evaluate: b 2 − 4 a c , where a = − 1 , b = − 3 , and c = 2 . Solution: The expression b 2 − 4 a c is called the discriminant The algebraic expression b 2 − 4 a c . ; it is an essential quantity seen later in our study of algebra. Answer: 17   Try this! Evaluate a 3 − b 3 , where a = 2 and b = − 3 . Answer: 35 Video Solution Evaluating Algebraic Expressions Think of an algebraic expression as a generalization of particular arithmetic operations. Performing these operations after substituting given values for variables is called evaluating The process of performing the operations of an algebraic expression for given values of the variables. . In algebra, a variable represents an unknown value. However, if the problem specifically assigns a value to a variable, then you can replace that letter with the given number and evaluate using the order of operations.   Example 3: Evaluate: a. 2 x + 3 , where x = − 4 b. 2 3 y , where y = 9 Solution: To avoid common errors, it is a best practice to first replace all variables with parentheses and then replace, or substitute The act of replacing a variable with an equivalent quantity. , the given value. a. b. Answers: a. −5; b. 6   If parentheses are not used in part (a) of the previous example, the result is quite different: 2 x + 3 = 2 − 4 + 4 . Without parentheses, the first operation is subtraction, which leads to an incorrect result.   Example 4: Evaluate: − 2 x − y , where x = − 5 and y = − 3 . Solution: After substituting the given values for the variables, simplify using the order of operations. Answer: 13   Example 5: Evaluate: 9 a 2 − b 2 , where a = 2 and b = − 5 . Solution: Answer: 11   Example 6: Evaluate: − x 2 − 4 x + 1 , where x = − 1 2 . Solution: Answer: 11/4   The answer to the previous example is 11 4 , which can be written as a mixed number 2 3 4 . In algebra, improper fractions are generally preferred. Unless the original problem has mixed numbers in it, or it is an answer to a real-world application, solutions will be expressed as reduced improper fractions.   Example 7: Evaluate: ( 3 x − 2 ) ( x − 7 ) , where x = 2 3 . Solution: The order of operations requires us to perform the operations within the parentheses first. Answer: 0   Example 8: Evaluate: b 2 − 4 a c , where a = − 1 , b = − 3 , and c = 2 . Solution: The expression b 2 − 4 a c is called the discriminant The algebraic expression b 2 − 4 a c . ; it is an essential quantity seen later in our study of algebra. Answer: 17   Try this! Evaluate a 3 − b 3 , where a = 2 and b = − 3 . Answer: 35 Video Solution  || 