Real Numbers Real Number Line The study of mathematics requires the use of several collections of numbers. The real number line allows us to visually display (graph) the numbers in which we are interested. A line is composed of infinitely many points. To each point we can associate a unique number, and with each number, we can associate a particular point. Coordinate The number associated with a point on the number line is called the coordinate of the point. Graph The point on a number line that is associated with a particular number is called the graph of that number. Constructing a Real Number Line We construct a real number line as follows: Draw a horizontal line. Origin Choose any point on the line and label it 0. This point is called the origin. Choose a convenient length. Starting at 0, mark this length off in both direc­tions, being careful to have the lengths look like they are about the same. We now define a real number. Real Number A real number is any number that is the coordinate of a point on the real number line. Positive Numbers, Negative Numbers Real numbers whose graphs are to the right of 0 are called positive real numbers, or more simply, positive numbers. Real numbers whose graphs appear to the left of 0 are called negative real numbers, or more simply, negative numbers. The number 0 is neither positive nor negative. Real Numbers Real Number Line The study of mathematics requires the use of several collections of numbers. The real number line allows us to visually display (graph) the numbers in which we are interested. A line is composed of infinitely many points. To each point we can associate a unique number, and with each number, we can associate a particular point. Coordinate The number associated with a point on the number line is called the coordinate of the point. Graph The point on a number line that is associated with a particular number is called the graph of that number. Constructing a Real Number Line We construct a real number line as follows: Draw a horizontal line. Origin Choose any point on the line and label it 0. This point is called the origin. Choose a convenient length. Starting at 0, mark this length off in both direc­tions, being careful to have the lengths look like they are about the same. We now define a real number. Real Number A real number is any number that is the coordinate of a point on the real number line. Positive Numbers, Negative Numbers Real numbers whose graphs are to the right of 0 are called positive real numbers, or more simply, positive numbers. Real numbers whose graphs appear to the left of 0 are called negative real numbers, or more simply, negative numbers. The number 0 is neither positive nor negative.  || 