Interest and Money Problems In this section, the interest and money problems Applications involving simple interest and money. should seem familiar. The difference is that we will be making use of two variables when setting up the algebraic equations.   Example 3: A roll of 32 bills contains only $5 bills and $10 bills. If the value of the roll is $220, then how many of each bill are in the roll? Solution: Begin by identifying the variables. When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first equation is created from the fact that there are 32 bills. The second equation sums the value of each bill: the total value is $220. Present both equations as a system; this is our algebraic setup. Here we choose to solve by elimination, although substitution would work just as well. Eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by −5. Now add the equations together: Once we have y, the number of $10 bills, back substitute to find x. Answer: There are twenty $5 bills and twelve $10 bills. The check is left to the reader.   Example 4: A total of $6,300 was invested in two accounts. Part was invested in a CD at a 4 1 2 % annual interest rate and part was invested in a money market fund at a 3 3 4 % annual interest rate. If the total simple interest for one year was $267.75, then how much was invested in each account? Solution: The total amount in both accounts can be expressed as To set up a second equation, use the fact that the total interest was $267.75. Recall that the interest for one year is the interest rate times the principal ( I = p r t = p r ⋅ 1 = p r ). Use this to add the interest in both accounts. Be sure to use the decimal equivalents for the interest rates given as percentages. These two equations together form the following linear system: Eliminate y by multiplying the first equation by −0.0375. Next, add the equations together to eliminate the variable y. Back substitute. Answer: $4,200 was invested at 4 1 2 % and $2,100 was invested at 3 3 4 % .   At this point, we should be able to solve these types of problems in two ways: with one variable and now with two variables. Setting up word problems with two variables often simplifies the entire process, particularly when the relationships between the variables are not so clear.   Try this! On the first day of a two-day meeting, 10 coffees and 10 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $20.00. Since nobody drank the coffee and all the doughnuts were eaten, the next day only 2 coffees and 14 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $13.00. How much did each coffee and each doughnut cost? Answer: Coffee: $1.25; doughnut: $0.75 Video Solution Interest and Money Problems In this section, the interest and money problems Applications involving simple interest and money. should seem familiar. The difference is that we will be making use of two variables when setting up the algebraic equations.   Example 3: A roll of 32 bills contains only $5 bills and $10 bills. If the value of the roll is $220, then how many of each bill are in the roll? Solution: Begin by identifying the variables. When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first equation is created from the fact that there are 32 bills. The second equation sums the value of each bill: the total value is $220. Present both equations as a system; this is our algebraic setup. Here we choose to solve by elimination, although substitution would work just as well. Eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by −5. Now add the equations together: Once we have y, the number of $10 bills, back substitute to find x. Answer: There are twenty $5 bills and twelve $10 bills. The check is left to the reader.   Example 4: A total of $6,300 was invested in two accounts. Part was invested in a CD at a 4 1 2 % annual interest rate and part was invested in a money market fund at a 3 3 4 % annual interest rate. If the total simple interest for one year was $267.75, then how much was invested in each account? Solution: The total amount in both accounts can be expressed as To set up a second equation, use the fact that the total interest was $267.75. Recall that the interest for one year is the interest rate times the principal ( I = p r t = p r ⋅ 1 = p r ). Use this to add the interest in both accounts. Be sure to use the decimal equivalents for the interest rates given as percentages. These two equations together form the following linear system: Eliminate y by multiplying the first equation by −0.0375. Next, add the equations together to eliminate the variable y. Back substitute. Answer: $4,200 was invested at 4 1 2 % and $2,100 was invested at 3 3 4 % .   At this point, we should be able to solve these types of problems in two ways: with one variable and now with two variables. Setting up word problems with two variables often simplifies the entire process, particularly when the relationships between the variables are not so clear.   Try this! On the first day of a two-day meeting, 10 coffees and 10 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $20.00. Since nobody drank the coffee and all the doughnuts were eaten, the next day only 2 coffees and 14 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $13.00. How much did each coffee and each doughnut cost? Answer: Coffee: $1.25; doughnut: $0.75 Video Solution  || 