The Elimination Method In this section, the goal is to develop another completely algebraic method for solving a system of linear equations. We begin by defining what it means to add equations together. In the following example, notice that if we add the expressions on both sides of the equal sign, we obtain another true statement. This is true in general: if A, B, C, and D are algebraic expressions, then we have the following addition property of equations If A, B, C, and D are algebraic expressions, where A = B and C = D, then A + C = B + D. : For the system we add the two equations together: The sum of y and −y is zero and that term is eliminated. This leaves us with a linear equation with one variable that can be easily solved: At this point, we have the x coordinate of the simultaneous solution, so all that is left to do is back substitute to find the corresponding y-value. Hence the solution to the system is (3, 2). This process describes the elimination (or addition) method A means of solving a system by adding equivalent equations in such a way as to eliminate a variable. for solving linear systems. Of course, the variable is not always so easily eliminated. Typically, we have to find an equivalent system by applying the multiplication property of equality to one or both of the equations as a means to line up one of the variables to eliminate. The goal is to arrange that either the x terms or the y terms are opposites, so that when the equations are added, the terms eliminate. The steps for the elimination method are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Solve by elimination: { 2 x + y = 7 3 x − 2 y = − 7 . Solution: Step 1: Multiply one, or both, of the equations to set up the elimination of one of the variables. In this example, we will eliminate the variable y by multiplying both sides of the first equation by 2. Take care to distribute. This leaves us with an equivalent system where the variable y is lined up to eliminate. Step 2: Add the equations together to eliminate one of the variables. Step 3: Solve for the remaining variable. Step 3: Back substitute into either equation or its equivalent equation. Step 4: Check. Remember that the solution must solve both of the original equations. Answer: (1, 5)   Occasionally, we will have to multiply both equations to line up one of the variables to eliminate. We want the resulting equivalent equations to have terms with opposite coefficients.   Example 2: Solve by elimination: { 5 x − 3 y = − 1 3 x + 2 y = 7 . Solution: We choose to eliminate the terms with variable y because the coefficients have different signs. To do this, we first determine the least common multiple of the coefficients; in this case, the LCM(3, 2) is 6. Therefore, multiply both sides of both equations by the appropriate values to obtain coefficients of −6 and 6. This results in the following equivalent system: The y terms are now lined up to eliminate. Back substitute. Answer: (1, 2)   Sometimes linear systems are not given in standard form. When this is the case, it is best to first rearrange the equations before beginning the steps to solve by elimination.   Example 3: Solve by elimination: { 5 x + 12 y = 11 3 y = 4 x + 1 . Solution: First, rewrite the second equation in standard form. This results in the following equivalent system where like terms are aligned in columns: We can eliminate the term with variable y if we multiply the second equation by −4. Next, we add the equations together, Back substitute. Answer: (1/3, 7/9)   Try this! Solve by elimination: { 2 x + y = − 3 − 3 x − 2 y = 4 . Answer: (−2, 1) Video Solution At this point, we explore what happens when solving dependent and inconsistent systems using the elimination method.   Example 4: Solve by elimination: { 3 x − y = 7 6 x − 2 y = 14 . Solution: To eliminate the variable x, we could multiply the first equation by −2. Now adding the equations we have A true statement indicates that this is a dependent system. The lines coincide, and we need y in terms of x to present the solution set in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Choose one of the original equations and solve for y. Since the equations are equivalent, it does not matter which one we choose. Answer: ( x ,   3 x − 7 )   Example 5: Solve by elimination: { − x + 3 y = 9   2 x − 6 y = 12 . Solution: We can eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by 2. Now adding the equations we have A false statement indicates that the system is inconsistent. The lines are parallel and do not intersect. Answer: No solution, ∅   Try this! Solve by elimination: { 3 x + 15 y = − 15 2 x + 10 y = 30 . Answer: No solution, ∅ Video Solution The Elimination Method In this section, the goal is to develop another completely algebraic method for solving a system of linear equations. We begin by defining what it means to add equations together. In the following example, notice that if we add the expressions on both sides of the equal sign, we obtain another true statement. This is true in general: if A, B, C, and D are algebraic expressions, then we have the following addition property of equations If A, B, C, and D are algebraic expressions, where A = B and C = D, then A + C = B + D. : For the system we add the two equations together: The sum of y and −y is zero and that term is eliminated. This leaves us with a linear equation with one variable that can be easily solved: At this point, we have the x coordinate of the simultaneous solution, so all that is left to do is back substitute to find the corresponding y-value. Hence the solution to the system is (3, 2). This process describes the elimination (or addition) method A means of solving a system by adding equivalent equations in such a way as to eliminate a variable. for solving linear systems. Of course, the variable is not always so easily eliminated. Typically, we have to find an equivalent system by applying the multiplication property of equality to one or both of the equations as a means to line up one of the variables to eliminate. The goal is to arrange that either the x terms or the y terms are opposites, so that when the equations are added, the terms eliminate. The steps for the elimination method are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Solve by elimination: { 2 x + y = 7 3 x − 2 y = − 7 . Solution: Step 1: Multiply one, or both, of the equations to set up the elimination of one of the variables. In this example, we will eliminate the variable y by multiplying both sides of the first equation by 2. Take care to distribute. This leaves us with an equivalent system where the variable y is lined up to eliminate. Step 2: Add the equations together to eliminate one of the variables. Step 3: Solve for the remaining variable. Step 3: Back substitute into either equation or its equivalent equation. Step 4: Check. Remember that the solution must solve both of the original equations. Answer: (1, 5)   Occasionally, we will have to multiply both equations to line up one of the variables to eliminate. We want the resulting equivalent equations to have terms with opposite coefficients.   Example 2: Solve by elimination: { 5 x − 3 y = − 1 3 x + 2 y = 7 . Solution: We choose to eliminate the terms with variable y because the coefficients have different signs. To do this, we first determine the least common multiple of the coefficients; in this case, the LCM(3, 2) is 6. Therefore, multiply both sides of both equations by the appropriate values to obtain coefficients of −6 and 6. This results in the following equivalent system: The y terms are now lined up to eliminate. Back substitute. Answer: (1, 2)   Sometimes linear systems are not given in standard form. When this is the case, it is best to first rearrange the equations before beginning the steps to solve by elimination.   Example 3: Solve by elimination: { 5 x + 12 y = 11 3 y = 4 x + 1 . Solution: First, rewrite the second equation in standard form. This results in the following equivalent system where like terms are aligned in columns: We can eliminate the term with variable y if we multiply the second equation by −4. Next, we add the equations together, Back substitute. Answer: (1/3, 7/9)   Try this! Solve by elimination: { 2 x + y = − 3 − 3 x − 2 y = 4 . Answer: (−2, 1) Video Solution At this point, we explore what happens when solving dependent and inconsistent systems using the elimination method.   Example 4: Solve by elimination: { 3 x − y = 7 6 x − 2 y = 14 . Solution: To eliminate the variable x, we could multiply the first equation by −2. Now adding the equations we have A true statement indicates that this is a dependent system. The lines coincide, and we need y in terms of x to present the solution set in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Choose one of the original equations and solve for y. Since the equations are equivalent, it does not matter which one we choose. Answer: ( x ,   3 x − 7 )   Example 5: Solve by elimination: { − x + 3 y = 9   2 x − 6 y = 12 . Solution: We can eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by 2. Now adding the equations we have A false statement indicates that the system is inconsistent. The lines are parallel and do not intersect. Answer: No solution, ∅   Try this! Solve by elimination: { 3 x + 15 y = − 15 2 x + 10 y = 30 . Answer: No solution, ∅ Video Solution  || 