Subsets of Real Numbers The set of real numbers has many subsets. Some of the subsets that are of interest in the study of algebra are listed below along with their notations and graphs. Natural Numbers, Counting Numbers The natural or counting numbers ( N ): 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . Read “and so on.” Whole Numbers The whole numbers ( W ): 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . Notice that every natural number is a whole number. Integers The integers ( Z ): . . . -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . Notice that every whole number is an integer. Rational Numbers (Fractions) The rational numbers ( Q ): Rational numbers are sometimes called fractions. They are numbers that can be written as the quotient of two integers. They have decimal representations that either terminate or do not terminate but contain a repeating block of digits. Some examples are       Some rational numbers are graphed below. Notice that every integer is a rational number. Notice that there are still a great many points on the number line that have not yet been assigned a type of number. We will not examine these other types of numbers in this text. They are examined in detail in algebra. An example of these numbers is the number π , whose decimal representation does not terminate nor contain a repeating block of digits. An approximation for π is 3.14. Sample Set A Example 10.1.  Is every whole number a natural number? No. The number 0 is a whole number but it is not a natural number. Example 10.2.  Is there an integer that is not a natural number? Yes. Some examples are 0, -1, -2, -3, and -4. Example 10.3.  Is there an integer that is a whole number? Yes. In fact, every whole number is an integer. Practice Set A Exercise 10.2.1. (Go to Solution) Is every natural number a whole number? Exercise 10.2.2. (Go to Solution) Is every whole number an integer? Exercise 10.2.3. (Go to Solution) Is every integer a real number? Exercise 10.2.4. (Go to Solution) Is there an integer that is a whole number? Exercise 10.2.5. (Go to Solution) Is there an integer that is not a natural number? Subsets of Real Numbers The set of real numbers has many subsets. Some of the subsets that are of interest in the study of algebra are listed below along with their notations and graphs. Natural Numbers, Counting Numbers The natural or counting numbers ( N ): 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . Read “and so on.” Whole Numbers The whole numbers ( W ): 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . Notice that every natural number is a whole number. Integers The integers ( Z ): . . . -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . Notice that every whole number is an integer. Rational Numbers (Fractions) The rational numbers ( Q ): Rational numbers are sometimes called fractions. They are numbers that can be written as the quotient of two integers. They have decimal representations that either terminate or do not terminate but contain a repeating block of digits. Some examples are       Some rational numbers are graphed below. Notice that every integer is a rational number. Notice that there are still a great many points on the number line that have not yet been assigned a type of number. We will not examine these other types of numbers in this text. They are examined in detail in algebra. An example of these numbers is the number π , whose decimal representation does not terminate nor contain a repeating block of digits. An approximation for π is 3.14. Sample Set A Example 10.1.  Is every whole number a natural number? No. The number 0 is a whole number but it is not a natural number. Example 10.2.  Is there an integer that is not a natural number? Yes. Some examples are 0, -1, -2, -3, and -4. Example 10.3.  Is there an integer that is a whole number? Yes. In fact, every whole number is an integer. Practice Set A Exercise 10.2.1. (Go to Solution) Is every natural number a whole number? Exercise 10.2.2. (Go to Solution) Is every whole number an integer? Exercise 10.2.3. (Go to Solution) Is every integer a real number? Exercise 10.2.4. (Go to Solution) Is there an integer that is a whole number? Exercise 10.2.5. (Go to Solution) Is there an integer that is not a natural number?  || 