Dependent and Inconsistent Systems Systems with at least one solution are called consistent systems A system with at least one solution. . Up to this point, all of the examples have been of consistent systems with exactly one ordered pair solution. It turns out that this is not always the case. Sometimes systems consist of two linear equations that are equivalent. If this is the case, the two lines are the same and when graphed will coincide. Hence the solution set consists of all the points on the line. This is a dependent system A system that consists of equivalent equations with infinitely many ordered pair solutions, denoted by (x, mx + b). . Given a consistent linear system with two variables, there are two possible results: The solutions to independent systems A system of equations with one ordered pair solution (x, y). are ordered pairs (x, y). We need some way to express the solution sets to dependent systems, since these systems have infinitely many solutions, or points of intersection. Recall that any line can be written in slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . Here, y depends on x. So we may express all the ordered pair solutions ( x ,   y ) in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) , where x is any real number.   Example 5: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 3 y = − 9   4 x − 6 y = 18 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation in the system. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and same y-intercept. They are, in fact, the same line. And the system is dependent. Answer: ( x ,   2 3 x − 3 )   In this example, it is important to notice that the two lines have the same slope and same y-intercept. This tells us that the two equations are equivalent and that the simultaneous solutions are all the points on the line y = 2 3 x − 3 . This is a dependent system, and the infinitely many solutions are expressed using the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Other resources may express this set using set notation, {(x, y) | y = 2 3 x − 3 }, which reads “the set of all ordered pairs (x, y) such that y equals two-thirds x minus 3.” Sometimes the lines do not cross and there is no point of intersection. Such systems have no solution, Ø, and are called inconsistent systems A system with no simultaneous solution. .   Example 6: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 5 y = − 15 − 4 x + 10 y = 10 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and different y-intercepts. Therefore, they are parallel and will never intersect. Answer: There is no simultaneous solution, Ø.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { x + y = − 1 − 2 x − 2 y = 2 . Answer: ( x ,   − x − 1 ) Video Solution Dependent and Inconsistent Systems Systems with at least one solution are called consistent systems A system with at least one solution. . Up to this point, all of the examples have been of consistent systems with exactly one ordered pair solution. It turns out that this is not always the case. Sometimes systems consist of two linear equations that are equivalent. If this is the case, the two lines are the same and when graphed will coincide. Hence the solution set consists of all the points on the line. This is a dependent system A system that consists of equivalent equations with infinitely many ordered pair solutions, denoted by (x, mx + b). . Given a consistent linear system with two variables, there are two possible results: The solutions to independent systems A system of equations with one ordered pair solution (x, y). are ordered pairs (x, y). We need some way to express the solution sets to dependent systems, since these systems have infinitely many solutions, or points of intersection. Recall that any line can be written in slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . Here, y depends on x. So we may express all the ordered pair solutions ( x ,   y ) in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) , where x is any real number.   Example 5: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 3 y = − 9   4 x − 6 y = 18 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation in the system. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and same y-intercept. They are, in fact, the same line. And the system is dependent. Answer: ( x ,   2 3 x − 3 )   In this example, it is important to notice that the two lines have the same slope and same y-intercept. This tells us that the two equations are equivalent and that the simultaneous solutions are all the points on the line y = 2 3 x − 3 . This is a dependent system, and the infinitely many solutions are expressed using the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Other resources may express this set using set notation, {(x, y) | y = 2 3 x − 3 }, which reads “the set of all ordered pairs (x, y) such that y equals two-thirds x minus 3.” Sometimes the lines do not cross and there is no point of intersection. Such systems have no solution, Ø, and are called inconsistent systems A system with no simultaneous solution. .   Example 6: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 5 y = − 15 − 4 x + 10 y = 10 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and different y-intercepts. Therefore, they are parallel and will never intersect. Answer: There is no simultaneous solution, Ø.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { x + y = − 1 − 2 x − 2 y = 2 . Answer: ( x ,   − x − 1 ) Video Solution  || 