Finding Equations with Given Solutions The zero-product property states, And, in fact, the converse is true as well: When this is the case, we can write the following: We use this property to find equations, given the solutions. To do this, the steps for solving by factoring are performed in reverse.   Example 11: Find a quadratic equation with solutions −7 and 2. Solution: Given the solutions, we can determine two linear factors. The product of these linear factors is equal to zero when x = − 7 or x = 2 : Multiply the binomials and present the equation in standard form. Answer: x 2 + 5 x − 14 = 0 . We may check our equation by substituting the given answers to see if we obtain a true statement. Also, the equation found above is not unique and so the check becomes essential when our equation looks different from someone else’s. This is left as an exercise.   Example 12: Find a quadratic equation with integer coefficients, given solutions 1/2 and −3/4. Solution: To avoid fractional coefficients, we first clear the fractions by multiplying both sides by the denominator. Apply the zero-product property and multiply. Answer: 8 x 2 + 2 x − 3 = 0   Try this! Find a quadratic equation with integer coefficients, given solutions −1 and 2/3. Answer: 3 x 2 + x − 2 = 0 Video Solution Finding Equations with Given Solutions The zero-product property states, And, in fact, the converse is true as well: When this is the case, we can write the following: We use this property to find equations, given the solutions. To do this, the steps for solving by factoring are performed in reverse.   Example 11: Find a quadratic equation with solutions −7 and 2. Solution: Given the solutions, we can determine two linear factors. The product of these linear factors is equal to zero when x = − 7 or x = 2 : Multiply the binomials and present the equation in standard form. Answer: x 2 + 5 x − 14 = 0 . We may check our equation by substituting the given answers to see if we obtain a true statement. Also, the equation found above is not unique and so the check becomes essential when our equation looks different from someone else’s. This is left as an exercise.   Example 12: Find a quadratic equation with integer coefficients, given solutions 1/2 and −3/4. Solution: To avoid fractional coefficients, we first clear the fractions by multiplying both sides by the denominator. Apply the zero-product property and multiply. Answer: 8 x 2 + 2 x − 3 = 0   Try this! Find a quadratic equation with integer coefficients, given solutions −1 and 2/3. Answer: 3 x 2 + x − 2 = 0 Video Solution  || 