Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Uniform motion refers to movement at a speed, or rate, that does not change. We can determine the distance traveled by multiplying the average rate by the time traveled at that rate with the formula D = r ⋅ t . Applications involving uniform motion usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize the data in a chart and then set up an algebraic equation that models the problem.   Example 14: Two trains leave the station at the same time traveling in opposite directions. One travels at 70 miles per hour and the other at 60 miles per hour. How long does it take for the distance between them to reach 390 miles? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in on the following chart. The time for each train is equal. To avoid introducing two more variables, use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances traveled by each train. We can now completely fill in the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the distance column. The problem asks for the time it takes for the total distance to reach 390 miles. Solve for t. Answer: It takes 3 hours for the distance between the trains to reach 390 miles.   Example 15: A train traveling nonstop to its destination is able to make the trip at an average speed of 72 miles per hour. On the return trip, the train makes several stops and is only able to average 48 miles per hour. If the return trip takes 2 hours longer than the initial trip to the destination, then what is the travel time each way? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in the following chart: Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is again defined by the distance column. In this case, the distance to the destination and back is the same, and the equation is Solve for t. The return trip takes t + 2 = 4 + 2 = 6 hours. Answer: It takes 4 hours to arrive at the destination and 6 hours to return.   Try this! Mary departs for school on a bicycle at an average rate of 6 miles per hour. Her sister Kate, running late, leaves 15 minutes later and cycles at twice that speed. How long will it take Kate to catch up to Mary? Be careful! Pay attention to the units given in the problem. Answer: It takes 15 minutes for Kate to catch up. Video Solution Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Uniform motion refers to movement at a speed, or rate, that does not change. We can determine the distance traveled by multiplying the average rate by the time traveled at that rate with the formula D = r ⋅ t . Applications involving uniform motion usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize the data in a chart and then set up an algebraic equation that models the problem.   Example 14: Two trains leave the station at the same time traveling in opposite directions. One travels at 70 miles per hour and the other at 60 miles per hour. How long does it take for the distance between them to reach 390 miles? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in on the following chart. The time for each train is equal. To avoid introducing two more variables, use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances traveled by each train. We can now completely fill in the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the distance column. The problem asks for the time it takes for the total distance to reach 390 miles. Solve for t. Answer: It takes 3 hours for the distance between the trains to reach 390 miles.   Example 15: A train traveling nonstop to its destination is able to make the trip at an average speed of 72 miles per hour. On the return trip, the train makes several stops and is only able to average 48 miles per hour. If the return trip takes 2 hours longer than the initial trip to the destination, then what is the travel time each way? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in the following chart: Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is again defined by the distance column. In this case, the distance to the destination and back is the same, and the equation is Solve for t. The return trip takes t + 2 = 4 + 2 = 6 hours. Answer: It takes 4 hours to arrive at the destination and 6 hours to return.   Try this! Mary departs for school on a bicycle at an average rate of 6 miles per hour. Her sister Kate, running late, leaves 15 minutes later and cycles at twice that speed. How long will it take Kate to catch up to Mary? Be careful! Pay attention to the units given in the problem. Answer: It takes 15 minutes for Kate to catch up. Video Solution  || 