Product, Quotient, and Power Rule for Exponents If a factor is repeated multiple times, then the product can be written in exponential form An equivalent expression written using a rational exponent. x n . The positive integer exponent n indicates the number of times the base x is repeated as a factor. For example, Here the base is 5 and the exponent is 4. Exponents are sometimes indicated with the caret (^) symbol found on the keyboard: 5^4 = 5*5*5*5. Next consider the product of 2 3 and 2 5 , Expanding the expression using the definition produces multiple factors of the base, which is quite cumbersome, particularly when n is large. For this reason, we will develop some useful rules to help us simplify expressions with exponents. In this example, notice that we could obtain the same result by adding the exponents. In general, this describes the product rule for exponents x m ⋅ x n = x m + n ; the product of two expressions with the same base can be simplified by adding the exponents. . If m and n are positive integers, then In other words, when multiplying two expressions with the same base, add the exponents.   Example 1: Simplify: 10 5 ⋅ 10 18 . Solution: Answer: 10 23   In the previous example, notice that we did not multiply the base 10 times itself. When applying the product rule, add the exponents and leave the base unchanged.   Example 2: Simplify: x 6 ⋅ x 12 ⋅ x . Solution: Recall that the variable x is assumed to have an exponent of 1: x = x 1 . Answer: x 19   The base could be any algebraic expression.   Example 3: Simplify: ( x + y ) 9   ( x + y ) 13 . Solution: Treat the expression ( x + y ) as the base. Answer: ( x + y ) 22   The commutative property of multiplication allows us to use the product rule for exponents to simplify factors of an algebraic expression.   Example 4: Simplify: 2 x 8 y ⋅ 3 x 4 y 7 . Solution: Multiply the coefficients and add the exponents of variable factors with the same base. Answer: 6 x 12 y 8   Next, we will develop a rule for division by first looking at the quotient of 2 7 and 2 3 . Here we can cancel factors after applying the definition of exponents. Notice that the same result can be obtained by subtracting the exponents. This describes the quotient rule for exponents x m x n = x m − n ; the quotient of two expressions with the same base can be simplified by subtracting the exponents. . If m and n are positive integers and x ≠ 0 , then In other words, when you divide two expressions with the same base, subtract the exponents.   Example 5: Simplify: 12 y 15 4 y 7 . Solution: Divide the coefficients and subtract the exponents of the variable y. Answer: 3 y 8   Example 6: Simplify: 20 x 10 ( x + 5 ) 6 10 x 9 ( x + 5 ) 2 . Solution: Answer: 2 x ( x + 5 ) 4   Now raise 2 3 to the fourth power as follows: After writing the base 2 3 as a factor four times, expand to obtain 12 factors of 2. We can obtain the same result by multiplying the exponents. In general, this describes the power rule for exponents ( x m ) n = x m n ; a power raised to a power can be simplified by multiplying the exponents. . Given positive integers m and n, then In other words, when raising a power to a power, multiply the exponents.   Example 7: Simplify: ( y 6 ) 7 . Solution: Answer: y 42   To summarize, we have developed three very useful rules of exponents that are used extensively in algebra. If given positive integers m and n, then Product rule: x m ⋅ x n = x m + n Quotient rule: x m x n = x m − n   ,   x ≠ 0 Power rule: ( x m ) n = x m ⋅ n   Try this! Simplify: y 5 ⋅ ( y 4 ) 6 . Answer: y 29 Video Solution Product, Quotient, and Power Rule for Exponents If a factor is repeated multiple times, then the product can be written in exponential form An equivalent expression written using a rational exponent. x n . The positive integer exponent n indicates the number of times the base x is repeated as a factor. For example, Here the base is 5 and the exponent is 4. Exponents are sometimes indicated with the caret (^) symbol found on the keyboard: 5^4 = 5*5*5*5. Next consider the product of 2 3 and 2 5 , Expanding the expression using the definition produces multiple factors of the base, which is quite cumbersome, particularly when n is large. For this reason, we will develop some useful rules to help us simplify expressions with exponents. In this example, notice that we could obtain the same result by adding the exponents. In general, this describes the product rule for exponents x m ⋅ x n = x m + n ; the product of two expressions with the same base can be simplified by adding the exponents. . If m and n are positive integers, then In other words, when multiplying two expressions with the same base, add the exponents.   Example 1: Simplify: 10 5 ⋅ 10 18 . Solution: Answer: 10 23   In the previous example, notice that we did not multiply the base 10 times itself. When applying the product rule, add the exponents and leave the base unchanged.   Example 2: Simplify: x 6 ⋅ x 12 ⋅ x . Solution: Recall that the variable x is assumed to have an exponent of 1: x = x 1 . Answer: x 19   The base could be any algebraic expression.   Example 3: Simplify: ( x + y ) 9   ( x + y ) 13 . Solution: Treat the expression ( x + y ) as the base. Answer: ( x + y ) 22   The commutative property of multiplication allows us to use the product rule for exponents to simplify factors of an algebraic expression.   Example 4: Simplify: 2 x 8 y ⋅ 3 x 4 y 7 . Solution: Multiply the coefficients and add the exponents of variable factors with the same base. Answer: 6 x 12 y 8   Next, we will develop a rule for division by first looking at the quotient of 2 7 and 2 3 . Here we can cancel factors after applying the definition of exponents. Notice that the same result can be obtained by subtracting the exponents. This describes the quotient rule for exponents x m x n = x m − n ; the quotient of two expressions with the same base can be simplified by subtracting the exponents. . If m and n are positive integers and x ≠ 0 , then In other words, when you divide two expressions with the same base, subtract the exponents.   Example 5: Simplify: 12 y 15 4 y 7 . Solution: Divide the coefficients and subtract the exponents of the variable y. Answer: 3 y 8   Example 6: Simplify: 20 x 10 ( x + 5 ) 6 10 x 9 ( x + 5 ) 2 . Solution: Answer: 2 x ( x + 5 ) 4   Now raise 2 3 to the fourth power as follows: After writing the base 2 3 as a factor four times, expand to obtain 12 factors of 2. We can obtain the same result by multiplying the exponents. In general, this describes the power rule for exponents ( x m ) n = x m n ; a power raised to a power can be simplified by multiplying the exponents. . Given positive integers m and n, then In other words, when raising a power to a power, multiply the exponents.   Example 7: Simplify: ( y 6 ) 7 . Solution: Answer: y 42   To summarize, we have developed three very useful rules of exponents that are used extensively in algebra. If given positive integers m and n, then Product rule: x m ⋅ x n = x m + n Quotient rule: x m x n = x m − n   ,   x ≠ 0 Power rule: ( x m ) n = x m ⋅ n   Try this! Simplify: y 5 ⋅ ( y 4 ) 6 . Answer: y 29 Video Solution  || 