The Relationship Between Fractions, Decimals, and Percents – Making Conversions Since a percent is a ratio, and a ratio can be written as a fraction, and a fraction can be written as a decimal, any of these forms can be converted to any other. Before we proceed to the problems in the section called “Sample Set B” and the section called “Practice Set B”, let's summarize the conversion techniques. Table 7.1. Conversion Techniques – Fractions, Decimals, Percents To Convert a Fraction To Convert a Decimal To Convert a Percent To a decimal: Divide the numerator by the denominator To a fraction: Read the decimal and reduce the resulting fraction To a decimal: Move the decimal point 2 places to the left and drop the % symbol To a percent: Convert the fraction first to a decimal, then move the decimal point 2 places to the right and affix the % symbol. To a percent: Move the decimal point 2 places to the right and affix the % symbol To a fraction: Drop the % sign and write the number “over” 100. Reduce, if possible. Sample Set B Example 7.27.  Convert 12% to a decimal. Note that The % symbol is dropped, and the decimal point moves 2 places to the left. Example 7.28.  Convert 0.75 to a percent. Note that The % symbol is affixed, and the decimal point moves 2 units to the right. Example 7.29.  Convert to a percent. We see in Example 7.28 that we can convert a decimal to a percent. We also know that we can convert a fraction to a decimal. Thus, we can see that if we first convert the fraction to a decimal, we can then convert the decimal to a percent. or Example 7.30.  Convert 42% to a fraction. or Practice Set B Exercise 7.5.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 21% to a decimal. Exercise 7.5.6. (Go to Solution) Convert 461% to a decimal. Exercise 7.5.7. (Go to Solution) Convert 0.55 to a percent. Exercise 7.5.8. (Go to Solution) Convert 5.64 to a percent. Exercise 7.5.9. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent. Exercise 7.5.10. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent Exercise 7.5.11. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent. The Relationship Between Fractions, Decimals, and Percents – Making Conversions Since a percent is a ratio, and a ratio can be written as a fraction, and a fraction can be written as a decimal, any of these forms can be converted to any other. Before we proceed to the problems in the section called “Sample Set B” and the section called “Practice Set B”, let's summarize the conversion techniques. Table 7.1. Conversion Techniques – Fractions, Decimals, Percents To Convert a Fraction To Convert a Decimal To Convert a Percent To a decimal: Divide the numerator by the denominator To a fraction: Read the decimal and reduce the resulting fraction To a decimal: Move the decimal point 2 places to the left and drop the % symbol To a percent: Convert the fraction first to a decimal, then move the decimal point 2 places to the right and affix the % symbol. To a percent: Move the decimal point 2 places to the right and affix the % symbol To a fraction: Drop the % sign and write the number “over” 100. Reduce, if possible. Sample Set B Example 7.27.  Convert 12% to a decimal. Note that The % symbol is dropped, and the decimal point moves 2 places to the left. Example 7.28.  Convert 0.75 to a percent. Note that The % symbol is affixed, and the decimal point moves 2 units to the right. Example 7.29.  Convert to a percent. We see in Example 7.28 that we can convert a decimal to a percent. We also know that we can convert a fraction to a decimal. Thus, we can see that if we first convert the fraction to a decimal, we can then convert the decimal to a percent. or Example 7.30.  Convert 42% to a fraction. or Practice Set B Exercise 7.5.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 21% to a decimal. Exercise 7.5.6. (Go to Solution) Convert 461% to a decimal. Exercise 7.5.7. (Go to Solution) Convert 0.55 to a percent. Exercise 7.5.8. (Go to Solution) Convert 5.64 to a percent. Exercise 7.5.9. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent. Exercise 7.5.10. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent Exercise 7.5.11. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent.  || 