Equations The equation of a line gives the mathematical relationship between the x and y coordinates of any point on the line. Let’s return to the example we used in graphing functions. The equation y = 2x – 1 produces the following graph: This line evidently has a slope of 2 and a y intercept equal to –1. The numbers 2 and –1 also appear in the equation—the coefficient of x is 2, and the additive constant is –1. This is not a coincidence, but is due to the standard form in which the equation was written. Standard Form (Slope-Intercept Form) If a linear equation in two unknowns is written in the form y = mx + b   where m and b are any two real numbers, then the graph will be a straight line with a slope of m and a y intercept equal to b. Point-Slope Form As mentioned earlier, a line is fully described by giving its slope and one distinct point that the line passes through. While this point is customarily the y intercept, it does not need to be. If you want to describe a line with a given slope m that passes through a given point (x1, y1), the formula is   To help remember this formula, think of solving it for m:   Since the point (x, y) is an arbitrary point on the line and the point (x1, y1) is another point on the line, this is nothing more than the definition of slope for that line. Two-Point Form Another way to completely specify a line is to give two different points that the line passes through. If you are given that the line passes through the points (x1, y1) and (x2, y2), the formula is   This formula is also easy to remember if you notice that it is just the same as the point-slope form with the slope m replaced by the definition of slope,   Equations The equation of a line gives the mathematical relationship between the x and y coordinates of any point on the line. Let’s return to the example we used in graphing functions. The equation y = 2x – 1 produces the following graph: This line evidently has a slope of 2 and a y intercept equal to –1. The numbers 2 and –1 also appear in the equation—the coefficient of x is 2, and the additive constant is –1. This is not a coincidence, but is due to the standard form in which the equation was written. Standard Form (Slope-Intercept Form) If a linear equation in two unknowns is written in the form y = mx + b   where m and b are any two real numbers, then the graph will be a straight line with a slope of m and a y intercept equal to b. Point-Slope Form As mentioned earlier, a line is fully described by giving its slope and one distinct point that the line passes through. While this point is customarily the y intercept, it does not need to be. If you want to describe a line with a given slope m that passes through a given point (x1, y1), the formula is   To help remember this formula, think of solving it for m:   Since the point (x, y) is an arbitrary point on the line and the point (x1, y1) is another point on the line, this is nothing more than the definition of slope for that line. Two-Point Form Another way to completely specify a line is to give two different points that the line passes through. If you are given that the line passes through the points (x1, y1) and (x2, y2), the formula is   This formula is also easy to remember if you notice that it is just the same as the point-slope form with the slope m replaced by the definition of slope,    || 