Preliminary Definitions In algebra, letters are used to represent numbers. The letters used to represent these numbers are called variables Letters or symbols used in algebra to represent numbers. . Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations form algebraic expressions Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations used to generalize specific arithmetic operations. , or just expressions. The following are some examples of expressions with one variable, x: Terms Components of an algebraic expression separated by addition operators. in an algebraic expression are separated by addition operators, and factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. are separated by multiplication operators. The numerical factor of a term is called the coefficient The numerical factor of a term. . For example, the algebraic expression 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 can be thought of as 3 x 2 + 2 x + ( − 1 ) and has three terms. The first term, 3 x 2 , represents the quantity 3 ⋅ x ⋅ x , where 3 is the coefficient and x is the variable. All of the variable factors, with their exponents, form the variable part of a term All the variable factors with their exponents. . If a term is written without a variable factor, then it is called a constant term A term written without a variable factor. . Consider the components of 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 , Terms Coefficient Variable Part 3 x 2 3 x 2 2 x 2 x −1 −1 The third term in this expression, −1, is a constant term because it is written without a variable factor. While a variable represents an unknown quantity and may change, the constant term does not change.   Example 1: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: 5 x 2 − 4 x y − y 2 . Solution: Think of the third term in this example, − y 2 , as − 1 y 2 . Terms Coefficient Variable Part 5 x 2 5 x 2 − 4 x y −4 x y − y 2 −1 y 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 4 ,   − 1 ,   5 } ; variable parts: { x 2 ,   x y ,   y 2 }   Some terms, such as y 2 and − y 2 , appear not to have a coefficient. The multiplicative identity property states that 1 times anything is itself and occurs so often that it is customary to omit this factor and write Therefore, the coefficient of y 2 is actually 1 and the coefficient of − y 2 is −1. In addition, you will encounter terms that have variable parts composed of algebraic expressions as factors.   Example 2: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: − 3 ( x + y ) 3 + ( x + y ) 2 . Solution: This is an expression with two terms: Terms Coefficient Variable Part − 3 ( x + y ) 3 −3 ( x + y ) 3 ( x + y ) 2 1 ( x + y ) 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 3 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { ( x + y ) 3 ,   ( x + y ) 2 }   In our study of algebra, we will encounter a wide variety of algebraic expressions. Typically, expressions use the two most common variables, x and y. However, expressions may use any letter (or symbol) for a variable, even Greek letters, such as alpha ( α ) and beta ( β ). Some letters and symbols are reserved for constants, such as π ≈ 3.14159 and e ≈ 2.71828 . Since there is only a limited number of letters, you will also use subscripts, x 1 ,   x 2 ,   x 3 ,   x 4 , … , to indicate different variables.   Try this! List all coefficients and variable parts of the expression: − 5 a 2 + a b − 2 b 2 − 3 . Answer: Coefficients: { − 5 ,   − 3 ,   − 2 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { a 2 ,   a b ,   b 2 } Video Solution Preliminary Definitions In algebra, letters are used to represent numbers. The letters used to represent these numbers are called variables Letters or symbols used in algebra to represent numbers. . Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations form algebraic expressions Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations used to generalize specific arithmetic operations. , or just expressions. The following are some examples of expressions with one variable, x: Terms Components of an algebraic expression separated by addition operators. in an algebraic expression are separated by addition operators, and factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. are separated by multiplication operators. The numerical factor of a term is called the coefficient The numerical factor of a term. . For example, the algebraic expression 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 can be thought of as 3 x 2 + 2 x + ( − 1 ) and has three terms. The first term, 3 x 2 , represents the quantity 3 ⋅ x ⋅ x , where 3 is the coefficient and x is the variable. All of the variable factors, with their exponents, form the variable part of a term All the variable factors with their exponents. . If a term is written without a variable factor, then it is called a constant term A term written without a variable factor. . Consider the components of 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 , Terms Coefficient Variable Part 3 x 2 3 x 2 2 x 2 x −1 −1 The third term in this expression, −1, is a constant term because it is written without a variable factor. While a variable represents an unknown quantity and may change, the constant term does not change.   Example 1: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: 5 x 2 − 4 x y − y 2 . Solution: Think of the third term in this example, − y 2 , as − 1 y 2 . Terms Coefficient Variable Part 5 x 2 5 x 2 − 4 x y −4 x y − y 2 −1 y 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 4 ,   − 1 ,   5 } ; variable parts: { x 2 ,   x y ,   y 2 }   Some terms, such as y 2 and − y 2 , appear not to have a coefficient. The multiplicative identity property states that 1 times anything is itself and occurs so often that it is customary to omit this factor and write Therefore, the coefficient of y 2 is actually 1 and the coefficient of − y 2 is −1. In addition, you will encounter terms that have variable parts composed of algebraic expressions as factors.   Example 2: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: − 3 ( x + y ) 3 + ( x + y ) 2 . Solution: This is an expression with two terms: Terms Coefficient Variable Part − 3 ( x + y ) 3 −3 ( x + y ) 3 ( x + y ) 2 1 ( x + y ) 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 3 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { ( x + y ) 3 ,   ( x + y ) 2 }   In our study of algebra, we will encounter a wide variety of algebraic expressions. Typically, expressions use the two most common variables, x and y. However, expressions may use any letter (or symbol) for a variable, even Greek letters, such as alpha ( α ) and beta ( β ). Some letters and symbols are reserved for constants, such as π ≈ 3.14159 and e ≈ 2.71828 . Since there is only a limited number of letters, you will also use subscripts, x 1 ,   x 2 ,   x 3 ,   x 4 , … , to indicate different variables.   Try this! List all coefficients and variable parts of the expression: − 5 a 2 + a b − 2 b 2 − 3 . Answer: Coefficients: { − 5 ,   − 3 ,   − 2 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { a 2 ,   a b ,   b 2 } Video Solution  || 