Reduced Form Numerator and Denominator Have No Common Factors Procedure: 1.      Write out prime factorization of Numerator and Denominator 2.      Cancel all common factors This procedure is just the opposite of building up a fraction by multiplying it by a fraction equivalent to 1.   Prime Factors A number is prime if it has no whole number factors other than 1 times itself, that is, the number cannot be written as a product of two whole numbers (except 1 times itself). Example:  6 is not prime because it can be written as 2 × 3 Example:  7 is prime because the only way to write it as a product of whole numbers is 1 × 7 The first few prime numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, . . . There are an infinite number of prime numbers (the list goes on forever).  Any non-prime number can be decomposed into a product of prime numbers Example:  4 = 2 × 2 Example:  12 = 2 × 2 × 3 The Branching Method This method works well for larger numbers that might have many factors. All you need to do is think of any two numbers that multiply to give your original number, and write them below it. Continue this process for each number until each branch ends in a prime number. The factors of the original number are the prime numbers on the ends of all the branches. Example:  Factor the number 60     60 = 2 × 2 × 3 × 5 Notes Notice how I started with the smallest numbers: first 2’s, then 3’s, and so on. This is not required but it keeps the result nicely in order. If a number is even, then it is divisible by 2. If a number ends in 0 or 5, then it is divisible by 5. If the digits of a number add up to a number divisible by 3, then the number is divisible by 3. In this example 15 gives 1 + 5 = 6, which is divisible by 3, and therefore 15 is divisible by 3. Large numbers with large prime factors are notoriously hard to factor—it is mainly just a matter of trial and error. The public-key encryption system for sending secure computer data uses very large numbers that need to be factored in order to break the code. The code is essentially unbreakable because it would take an enormous amount of computer time to try every possible prime factor.     Reduced Form Numerator and Denominator Have No Common Factors Procedure: 1.      Write out prime factorization of Numerator and Denominator 2.      Cancel all common factors This procedure is just the opposite of building up a fraction by multiplying it by a fraction equivalent to 1.   Prime Factors A number is prime if it has no whole number factors other than 1 times itself, that is, the number cannot be written as a product of two whole numbers (except 1 times itself). Example:  6 is not prime because it can be written as 2 × 3 Example:  7 is prime because the only way to write it as a product of whole numbers is 1 × 7 The first few prime numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, . . . There are an infinite number of prime numbers (the list goes on forever).  Any non-prime number can be decomposed into a product of prime numbers Example:  4 = 2 × 2 Example:  12 = 2 × 2 × 3 The Branching Method This method works well for larger numbers that might have many factors. All you need to do is think of any two numbers that multiply to give your original number, and write them below it. Continue this process for each number until each branch ends in a prime number. The factors of the original number are the prime numbers on the ends of all the branches. Example:  Factor the number 60     60 = 2 × 2 × 3 × 5 Notes Notice how I started with the smallest numbers: first 2’s, then 3’s, and so on. This is not required but it keeps the result nicely in order. If a number is even, then it is divisible by 2. If a number ends in 0 or 5, then it is divisible by 5. If the digits of a number add up to a number divisible by 3, then the number is divisible by 3. In this example 15 gives 1 + 5 = 6, which is divisible by 3, and therefore 15 is divisible by 3. Large numbers with large prime factors are notoriously hard to factor—it is mainly just a matter of trial and error. The public-key encryption system for sending secure computer data uses very large numbers that need to be factored in order to break the code. The code is essentially unbreakable because it would take an enormous amount of computer time to try every possible prime factor.      || 