Solutions to Systems of Linear Inequalities A system of linear inequalities A set of two or more linear inequalities that define the conditions to be considered simultaneously. consists of a set of two or more linear inequalities with the same variables. The inequalities define the conditions that are to be considered simultaneously. For example, We know that each inequality in the set contains infinitely many ordered pair solutions defined by a region in a rectangular coordinate plane. When considering two of these inequalities together, the intersection of these sets defines the set of simultaneous ordered pair solutions. When we graph each of the above inequalities separately, we have When graphed on the same set of axes, the intersection can be determined. The intersection is shaded darker and the final graph of the solution set is presented as follows: The graph suggests that (3, 2) is a solution because it is in the intersection. To verify this, show that it solves both of the original inequalities: Points on the solid boundary are included in the set of simultaneous solutions and points on the dashed boundary are not. Consider the point (−1, 0) on the solid boundary defined by y = 2 x + 2 and verify that it solves the original system: Notice that this point satisfies both inequalities and thus is included in the solution set. Now consider the point (2, 0) on the dashed boundary defined by y = x − 2 and verify that it does not solve the original system: This point does not satisfy both inequalities and thus is not included in the solution set. Solutions to Systems of Linear Inequalities A system of linear inequalities A set of two or more linear inequalities that define the conditions to be considered simultaneously. consists of a set of two or more linear inequalities with the same variables. The inequalities define the conditions that are to be considered simultaneously. For example, We know that each inequality in the set contains infinitely many ordered pair solutions defined by a region in a rectangular coordinate plane. When considering two of these inequalities together, the intersection of these sets defines the set of simultaneous ordered pair solutions. When we graph each of the above inequalities separately, we have When graphed on the same set of axes, the intersection can be determined. The intersection is shaded darker and the final graph of the solution set is presented as follows: The graph suggests that (3, 2) is a solution because it is in the intersection. To verify this, show that it solves both of the original inequalities: Points on the solid boundary are included in the set of simultaneous solutions and points on the dashed boundary are not. Consider the point (−1, 0) on the solid boundary defined by y = 2 x + 2 and verify that it solves the original system: Notice that this point satisfies both inequalities and thus is included in the solution set. Now consider the point (2, 0) on the dashed boundary defined by y = x − 2 and verify that it does not solve the original system: This point does not satisfy both inequalities and thus is not included in the solution set.  || 