Discriminant If given a quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then the solutions can be calculated using the quadratic formula: The solutions are rational, irrational, or not real. We can determine the type and number of solutions by studying the discriminant The expression inside the radical of the quadratic formula, b 2 − 4 a c . , the expression inside the radical, b 2 − 4 a c . If the value of this expression is negative, then the equation has no real solutions. If the discriminant is positive, then we have two real solutions. And if the discriminant is 0, then we have one real solution.   Example 1: Determine the type and number of solutions: x 2 − 10 x + 30 = 0 . Solution: We begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is negative, we conclude that there are no real solutions. Answer: No real solution   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a negative radicand stops the process of simplification and shows that there is no real solution. Note We will study quadratic equations with no real solutions as we progress in our study of algebra.   Example 2: Determine the type and number of solutions: 7 x 2 − 10 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here Substitute these values into the discriminant: Since the discriminant is positive, we can conclude that there are two real solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a positive radicand in the quadratic formula leads to two real solutions. The two real solutions are 5 − 3 2 √ 7 and 5 + 3 2 √ 7 . Note that these solutions are irrational; we can approximate the values on a calculator.   Example 3: Determine the type and number of solutions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 = 0 . Solution: In this example, Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is positive, we conclude that there are two real solutions. Furthermore, since the discriminant is a perfect square, we obtain two rational solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   We could solve the previous quadratic equation using the quadratic formula as follows: Note that if the discriminant is a perfect square, then we could have factored the original equation. Given the special condition where the discriminant is 0, we obtain only one solution, a double root.   Example 4: Determine the type and number of solutions: 9 x 2 − 6 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here a = 9 , b = − 6 , and c = 1 , and we have Since the discriminant is 0, we conclude that there is only one real solution, a double root. Answer: One real solution   Since 0 is a perfect square, we can solve the equation above by factoring. Here 1/3 is a solution that occurs twice; it is a double root. In summary, if given any quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then we have the following: Positive discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c > 0 Two real solutions Zero discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c = 0 One real solution Negative discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c < 0 No real solution As we will see, knowing the number and type of solutions ahead of time helps us determine which method is best for solving a quadratic equation.   Try this! Determine the number and type of solutions: 3 x 2 − 5 x + 4 = 0 . Answer: No real solution Video Solution Discriminant If given a quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then the solutions can be calculated using the quadratic formula: The solutions are rational, irrational, or not real. We can determine the type and number of solutions by studying the discriminant The expression inside the radical of the quadratic formula, b 2 − 4 a c . , the expression inside the radical, b 2 − 4 a c . If the value of this expression is negative, then the equation has no real solutions. If the discriminant is positive, then we have two real solutions. And if the discriminant is 0, then we have one real solution.   Example 1: Determine the type and number of solutions: x 2 − 10 x + 30 = 0 . Solution: We begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is negative, we conclude that there are no real solutions. Answer: No real solution   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a negative radicand stops the process of simplification and shows that there is no real solution. Note We will study quadratic equations with no real solutions as we progress in our study of algebra.   Example 2: Determine the type and number of solutions: 7 x 2 − 10 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here Substitute these values into the discriminant: Since the discriminant is positive, we can conclude that there are two real solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a positive radicand in the quadratic formula leads to two real solutions. The two real solutions are 5 − 3 2 √ 7 and 5 + 3 2 √ 7 . Note that these solutions are irrational; we can approximate the values on a calculator.   Example 3: Determine the type and number of solutions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 = 0 . Solution: In this example, Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is positive, we conclude that there are two real solutions. Furthermore, since the discriminant is a perfect square, we obtain two rational solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   We could solve the previous quadratic equation using the quadratic formula as follows: Note that if the discriminant is a perfect square, then we could have factored the original equation. Given the special condition where the discriminant is 0, we obtain only one solution, a double root.   Example 4: Determine the type and number of solutions: 9 x 2 − 6 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here a = 9 , b = − 6 , and c = 1 , and we have Since the discriminant is 0, we conclude that there is only one real solution, a double root. Answer: One real solution   Since 0 is a perfect square, we can solve the equation above by factoring. Here 1/3 is a solution that occurs twice; it is a double root. In summary, if given any quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then we have the following: Positive discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c > 0 Two real solutions Zero discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c = 0 One real solution Negative discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c < 0 No real solution As we will see, knowing the number and type of solutions ahead of time helps us determine which method is best for solving a quadratic equation.   Try this! Determine the number and type of solutions: 3 x 2 − 5 x + 4 = 0 . Answer: No real solution Video Solution  || 