Solving Basic Linear Equations We begin by defining equivalent equations Equations with the same solution set. as equations with the same solution set. Consider the following two linear equations and check to see if the solution is x = 7 . Here we can see that the two linear equations 3 x − 5 = 16 and 3 x = 21 are equivalent because they share the same solution set, namely, {7}. The goal is to develop a systematic process to find equivalent equations until the variable is isolated: To do this, use the properties of equality Properties that allow us to obtain equivalent equations by adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing both sides of an equation by nonzero real numbers. . Given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a real number, we have the following: Note Multiplying or dividing both sides of an equation by 0 is carefully avoided. Dividing by 0 is undefined and multiplying both sides by 0 results in the equation 0 = 0. To summarize, equality is retained and you obtain an equivalent equation if you add, subtract, multiply, or divide both sides of an equation by any nonzero real number. The technique for solving linear equations involves applying these properties in order to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. If the linear equation has a constant term, then we add to or subtract it from both sides of the equation to obtain an equivalent equation where the variable term is isolated.   Example 4: Solve: x + 3 = − 5 . Solution: To isolate the variable x on the left side, subtract 3 from both sides. Answer: The solution is x = − 8 . To check that this is true, substitute −8 into the original equation and simplify to see that it is satisfied: x + 3 = − 8 + 3 = − 5 ✓.   In the previous example, after subtracting 3 from both sides, you get x + 0 = − 8 . By the additive identity property of real numbers, this is equivalent to x = − 8 . This step is often left out in the presentation of the solution. If the variable term of the equation (including the coefficient) is isolated, then apply the multiplication or division property of equality to obtain an equivalent equation with the variable isolated. In other words, our goal is to obtain an equivalent equation with x or 1x isolated on one side of the equal sign.   Example 5: Solve: − 5 x = − 35 . Solution: The coefficient of x is –5, so divide both sides by −5. Answer: The solution is x = 7 . Perform the check mentally by substituting 7 for x in the original equation.   In the previous example, after dividing both sides by −5, x is left with a coefficient of 1, because − 5 − 5 = 1 . In fact, when we say “isolate the variable,” we mean to change the coefficient of the variable to 1, because 1 x = 7 is equivalent to x = 7 . This step is often left out of the instructional examples even though its omission is sometimes a source of confusion. Another important property is the symmetric property Allows you to solve for the variable on either side of the equal sign, because 5 = x is equivalent to x = 5 . : for any algebraic expressions A and B, The equation 2 = x is equivalent to x = 2 . It does not matter on which side we choose to isolate the variable.   Example 6: Solve: 2 = 5 + x . Solution: Isolate the variable x by subtracting 5 from both sides of the equation. Answer: The solution is −3, and checking the solution shows that 2 = 5 − 3.   Try this! Solve: 6 = x − 4 . Answer: x = 10 Video Solution Solving Basic Linear Equations We begin by defining equivalent equations Equations with the same solution set. as equations with the same solution set. Consider the following two linear equations and check to see if the solution is x = 7 . Here we can see that the two linear equations 3 x − 5 = 16 and 3 x = 21 are equivalent because they share the same solution set, namely, {7}. The goal is to develop a systematic process to find equivalent equations until the variable is isolated: To do this, use the properties of equality Properties that allow us to obtain equivalent equations by adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing both sides of an equation by nonzero real numbers. . Given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a real number, we have the following: Note Multiplying or dividing both sides of an equation by 0 is carefully avoided. Dividing by 0 is undefined and multiplying both sides by 0 results in the equation 0 = 0. To summarize, equality is retained and you obtain an equivalent equation if you add, subtract, multiply, or divide both sides of an equation by any nonzero real number. The technique for solving linear equations involves applying these properties in order to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. If the linear equation has a constant term, then we add to or subtract it from both sides of the equation to obtain an equivalent equation where the variable term is isolated.   Example 4: Solve: x + 3 = − 5 . Solution: To isolate the variable x on the left side, subtract 3 from both sides. Answer: The solution is x = − 8 . To check that this is true, substitute −8 into the original equation and simplify to see that it is satisfied: x + 3 = − 8 + 3 = − 5 ✓.   In the previous example, after subtracting 3 from both sides, you get x + 0 = − 8 . By the additive identity property of real numbers, this is equivalent to x = − 8 . This step is often left out in the presentation of the solution. If the variable term of the equation (including the coefficient) is isolated, then apply the multiplication or division property of equality to obtain an equivalent equation with the variable isolated. In other words, our goal is to obtain an equivalent equation with x or 1x isolated on one side of the equal sign.   Example 5: Solve: − 5 x = − 35 . Solution: The coefficient of x is –5, so divide both sides by −5. Answer: The solution is x = 7 . Perform the check mentally by substituting 7 for x in the original equation.   In the previous example, after dividing both sides by −5, x is left with a coefficient of 1, because − 5 − 5 = 1 . In fact, when we say “isolate the variable,” we mean to change the coefficient of the variable to 1, because 1 x = 7 is equivalent to x = 7 . This step is often left out of the instructional examples even though its omission is sometimes a source of confusion. Another important property is the symmetric property Allows you to solve for the variable on either side of the equal sign, because 5 = x is equivalent to x = 5 . : for any algebraic expressions A and B, The equation 2 = x is equivalent to x = 2 . It does not matter on which side we choose to isolate the variable.   Example 6: Solve: 2 = 5 + x . Solution: Isolate the variable x by subtracting 5 from both sides of the equation. Answer: The solution is −3, and checking the solution shows that 2 = 5 − 3.   Try this! Solve: 6 = x − 4 . Answer: x = 10 Video Solution  || 