 || Definitions A ratio Relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. is a relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. Ratios are typically expressed using the following notation: All of the above are equivalent forms used to express a ratio. However, the most familiar way to express a ratio is in the form of a fraction. When writing ratios, it is important to pay attention to the units. If the units are the same, then the ratio can be written without them.   Example 1: Express the ratio 12 feet to 48 feet in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 1 to 4   If the units are different, then we must be sure to include them because the ratio represents a rate A ratio where the units for the numerator and the denominator are different. .   Example 2: Express the ratio 220 miles to 4 hours in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 55 miles to 1 hour (or 55 miles per hour)   Rates are useful when determining unit cost The price of each unit. , or the price of each unit. We use the unit cost to compare values when the quantities are not the same. To determine the unit cost, divide the cost by the number of units.   Example 3: A local supermarket offers a pack of 12 sodas for $3.48 on sale, and the local discount warehouse offers the soda in a 36-can case for $11.52. Which is the better value? Solution: Divide the cost by the number of cans to obtain the unit price. Supermarket Discount warehouse $ 3.48 12     cans = $ 0.29 / can $ 11.52 36     cans = $ 0.32 / can Answer: The supermarket sale price of $3.48 for a 12-pack is a better value at $0.29 per can.   A proportion A statement of the equality of two ratios. is a statement of equality of two ratios. This proportion is often read “a is to b as c is to d.” Here is an example of a simple proportion, If we clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the proportion by the product of the denominators, 8, then we obtain the following true statement: Given any nonzero real numbers a, b, c, and d that satisfy a proportion, multiply both sides by the product of the denominators to obtain the following: This shows that cross products are equal, and is commonly referred to as cross multiplication If a b = c d , then a d = b c . .  || Solving Proportions Cross multiply to solve proportions where terms are unknown.   Example 4: Solve: 5 8 = n 4 . Solution: Cross multiply and then solve for n. Answer: n = 5 2   Example 5: Solve: 15 x = 5 6 . Solution: Cross multiply then solve for x. Answer: x = 18   Example 6: Solve: n + 3 5 = 7 2 . Solution: When cross multiplying, be sure to group n + 3 . Apply the distributive property in the next step. Answer: n = 29 2   Try this! Solve: 5 3 = 3 n − 1 2 . Answer: n = 13 9 Video Solution  || Applications When setting up proportions, consistency with the units of each ratio is critical. Units for the numerators should be the same and units for the denominators should also be the same.   Example 7: It is claimed that 2 out of 3 dentists prefer a certain brand of toothpaste. If 600 dentists are surveyed, then how many will say they prefer that brand? Solution: First, identify the unknown and assign it a variable. Since you are looking for the number of dentists who prefer the brand name out of a total of 600 surveyed, construct the ratios with the number of dentists who prefer the brand in the numerator and the total number surveyed in the denominator. Cross multiply and solve for n, Answer: The claim suggests that 400 out of 600 dentists surveyed prefer the brand name.   Example 8: In Tulare County, 3 out of every 7 voters said yes to Proposition 40. If 42,000 people voted, how many said no to Proposition 40? Solution: The problem gives the ratio of voters who said yes, but it asks for the number who said no. If 3 out of 7 said yes, then we can assume 4 out of 7 said no. Set up the ratios with the number of voters who said no in the numerator and the total number of voters in the denominator. Cross multiply and solve for n. Answer: 24,000 voters out of 42,000 said no.   Example 9: The sum of two integers in the ratio of 4 to 5 is 27. Find the integers. Solution: The sum of two integers is 27; use this relationship to avoid two variables. The integers are given to be in the ratio of 4 to 5. Set up the following proportion: Use 27 − n to determine the other integer. Answer: The integers are 12 and 15.   Try this! A recipe calls for 5 tablespoons of sugar for every 8 cups of flour. How many tablespoons of sugar are required for 32 cups of flour? Answer: 20 tablespoons of sugar Video Solution  || Similar Triangles We will often encounter proportion problems in geometry and trigonometry. One application involves similar triangles Triangles with the same shape but not necessarily the same size. The measures of corresponding angles are equal and the corresponding sides are proportional. , which have the same shape, but not necessarily the same size. The measures of the corresponding angles of similar triangles are equal, and the measures of the corresponding sides are proportional. Given similar triangles ABC and RST, We may write A B C   ~   R S T and conclude that all of the corresponding angles are equal. The notation indicates that angle A corresponds to angle R and that the measures of these angles are equal: A = R. In addition, the measures of other pairs of corresponding angles are equal: B = S and C = T. Use uppercase letters for angles and a lowercase letter to denote the side opposite of the given angle. Denote the proportionality of the sides as follows:   Example 10: If triangle ABC is similar to RST, where a = 3 , b = 4 , c = 5 , and r = 9 , then find the remaining two sides. Solution: Draw a picture and identify the variables pictorially. Represent the remaining unknown sides by s and t. Set up proportions and solve for the missing sides. Answer: The two remaining sides measure 12 units and 15 units.   The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles is called the scale factor The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles. . In the previous example, the ratio of the two given sides a and r is Therefore, triangle ABC is similar to triangle RST with a scale factor of 1/3. This means that each leg of triangle ABC is 1/3 of the measure of the corresponding legs of triangle RST. Also, another interesting fact is that the perimeters of similar triangles are in the same proportion as their sides and share the same scale factor.   Example 11: If a triangle ABC has a perimeter of 12 units and is similar to RST with a scale factor of 1/3, then find the perimeter of triangle RST. Solution: Scale factor 1/3 implies that the perimeters are in proportion to this ratio. Set up a proportion as follows: Cross multiply and solve for x. Answer: The perimeter of triangle RST is 36 units.  || 