Projectile Problems The height of an object launched upward, ignoring the effects of air resistance, can be modeled with the following formula: Using function notation, which is more appropriate, we have With this formula, the height can be calculated at any given time t after the object is launched. The coefficients represent the following: − 1 2 g The letter g represents the acceleration due to gravity. v 0 “v-naught” represents the initial velocity of the object. s 0 “s-naught” represents the initial height from which the object is launched. We consider only problems where the acceleration due to gravity can be expressed as g = 32  ft / sec 2 . Therefore, in this section time will be measured in seconds and the height in feet. Certainly though, the formula is valid using units other than these.   Example 8: The height of a projectile launched upward at a speed of 32 feet/second from a height of 128 feet is given by the function h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 32 t + 128 . How long does it take to hit the ground? Solution: An inefficient method for finding the time to hit the ground is to simply start guessing at times and evaluating. To do this, construct a chart. Use the table to sketch the height of the projectile over time. We see that at 4 seconds, the projectile hits the ground. Note that when this occurs, the height is equal to 0. Now we need to solve this problem algebraically. To find the solution algebraically, use the fact that the height is 0 when the object hits the ground. We need to find the time, t, when h ( t ) = 0 . Solve the equation by factoring. Now set each variable factor to zero. As expected, the projectile hits the ground at t = 4 seconds. Disregard −2 as a solution because negative time is not defined. Answer: The projectile hits the ground 4 seconds after it is launched.   Example 9: The height of a certain book dropped from the top of a 144-foot building is given by h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 144 . How long does it take to hit the ground? Solution: Find the time t when the height h ( t ) = 0 . Answer: The book takes 3 seconds to hit the ground when dropped from the top of a 144-foot building.   Try this! The height of a projectile, shot straight up into the air from the ground, is given by h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 80 t . How long does it take to come back down to the ground? Answer: It will take 5 seconds to come back down to the ground. Video Solution Projectile Problems The height of an object launched upward, ignoring the effects of air resistance, can be modeled with the following formula: Using function notation, which is more appropriate, we have With this formula, the height can be calculated at any given time t after the object is launched. The coefficients represent the following: − 1 2 g The letter g represents the acceleration due to gravity. v 0 “v-naught” represents the initial velocity of the object. s 0 “s-naught” represents the initial height from which the object is launched. We consider only problems where the acceleration due to gravity can be expressed as g = 32  ft / sec 2 . Therefore, in this section time will be measured in seconds and the height in feet. Certainly though, the formula is valid using units other than these.   Example 8: The height of a projectile launched upward at a speed of 32 feet/second from a height of 128 feet is given by the function h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 32 t + 128 . How long does it take to hit the ground? Solution: An inefficient method for finding the time to hit the ground is to simply start guessing at times and evaluating. To do this, construct a chart. Use the table to sketch the height of the projectile over time. We see that at 4 seconds, the projectile hits the ground. Note that when this occurs, the height is equal to 0. Now we need to solve this problem algebraically. To find the solution algebraically, use the fact that the height is 0 when the object hits the ground. We need to find the time, t, when h ( t ) = 0 . Solve the equation by factoring. Now set each variable factor to zero. As expected, the projectile hits the ground at t = 4 seconds. Disregard −2 as a solution because negative time is not defined. Answer: The projectile hits the ground 4 seconds after it is launched.   Example 9: The height of a certain book dropped from the top of a 144-foot building is given by h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 144 . How long does it take to hit the ground? Solution: Find the time t when the height h ( t ) = 0 . Answer: The book takes 3 seconds to hit the ground when dropped from the top of a 144-foot building.   Try this! The height of a projectile, shot straight up into the air from the ground, is given by h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 80 t . How long does it take to come back down to the ground? Answer: It will take 5 seconds to come back down to the ground. Video Solution  || 