Multiplication/ Division Property of Equality Recall that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. From this, we can suggest the multiplication/division property of equality. Multiplication/Division Property of Equality Given any equation, We can obtain an equivalent equation by multiplying both sides of the equa­tion by the same nonzero number, that is, if , then is equivalent to We can obtain an equivalent equation by dividing both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if , then is equivalent to The multiplication/division property of equality can be used to undo an association with a number that multiplies or divides the variable. Sample Set A Use the multiplication / division property of equality to solve each equation. Example 11.26.  6 is associated with y by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6 Check: When becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.27.  . -2 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by -2. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is Example 11.28.  . We will examine two methods for solving equations such as this one. Method 1: Use of dividing out common factors. 7 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by 7. Divide out the 7’s. 3 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dviding both sides by 3. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Method 2: Use of reciprocals Recall that if the product of two numbers is 1, the numbers are reciprocals. Thus and are reciprocals. Multiply both sides of the equation by , the reciprocal of . Notice that we get the same solution using either method. Example 11.29.  -8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by -8. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. Example 11.30.  Since is actually and , we can isolate by multiplying both sides of the equation by . Check: When , becomes The solution to is . Practice Set A Use the multiplication/division property of equality to solve each equation. Be sure to check each solution. Exercise 11.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.6. (Go to Solution) Multiplication/ Division Property of Equality Recall that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. From this, we can suggest the multiplication/division property of equality. Multiplication/Division Property of Equality Given any equation, We can obtain an equivalent equation by multiplying both sides of the equa­tion by the same nonzero number, that is, if , then is equivalent to We can obtain an equivalent equation by dividing both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if , then is equivalent to The multiplication/division property of equality can be used to undo an association with a number that multiplies or divides the variable. Sample Set A Use the multiplication / division property of equality to solve each equation. Example 11.26.  6 is associated with y by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6 Check: When becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.27.  . -2 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by -2. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is Example 11.28.  . We will examine two methods for solving equations such as this one. Method 1: Use of dividing out common factors. 7 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by 7. Divide out the 7’s. 3 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dviding both sides by 3. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Method 2: Use of reciprocals Recall that if the product of two numbers is 1, the numbers are reciprocals. Thus and are reciprocals. Multiply both sides of the equation by , the reciprocal of . Notice that we get the same solution using either method. Example 11.29.  -8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by -8. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. Example 11.30.  Since is actually and , we can isolate by multiplying both sides of the equation by . Check: When , becomes The solution to is . Practice Set A Use the multiplication/division property of equality to solve each equation. Be sure to check each solution. Exercise 11.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.6. (Go to Solution)  || 