 || Equivalent Fractions Let's examine the following two diagrams. Notice that both and represent the same part of the whole, that is, they represent the same number. Equivalent Fractions Fractions that have the same value are called equivalent fractions. Equiva­lent fractions may look different, but they are still the same point on the number line. There is an interesting property that equivalent fractions satisfy. A Test for Equivalent Fractions Using the Cross Product These pairs of products are called cross products. If the cross products are equal, the fractions are equivalent. If the cross products are not equal, the fractions are not equivalent. Thus, and are equivalent, that is, . Sample Set A Determine if the following pairs of fractions are equivalent. Example 4.18.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are equals. The fractions and are equivalent, so . Example 4.19.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are not equal. The fractions and are not equivalent. Practice Set A Determine if the pairs of fractions are equivalent. Exercise 4.4.1. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.2. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.3. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.4. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.5. (Go to Solution) ,  || Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms It is often very useful to convert one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. We can suggest a method for doing so by considering the equivalent fractions and . First, divide both the numerator and denominator of by 3. The fractions and are equivalent. (Can you prove this?) So, . We wish to convert to . Now divide the numerator and denominator of by 3, and see what happens. The fraction is converted to . A natural question is "Why did we choose to divide by 3?" Notice that We can see that the factor 3 is common to both the numerator and denominator. Reducing a Fraction From these observations we can suggest the following method for converting one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. The method is called reducing a fraction. A fraction can be reduced by dividing both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero whole number. Consider the collection of equivalent fractions , , , , Reduced to Lowest Terms Notice that each of the first four fractions can be reduced to the last fraction, , by dividing both the numerator and denominator by, respectively, 5, 4, 3, and 2. When a fraction is converted to the fraction that has the smallest numerator and denomi­nator in its collection of equivalent fractions, it is said to be reduced to lowest terms. The fractions , , , and are all reduced to lowest terms. Observe a very important property of a fraction that has been reduced to lowest terms. The only whole number that divides both the numerator and denominator without a remainder is the number 1. When 1 is the only whole number that divides two whole numbers, the two whole numbers are said to be relatively prime. Relatively Prime A fraction is reduced to lowest terms if its numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Methods of Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms Method 1: Dividing Out Common Primes Write the numerator and denominator as a product of primes. Divide the numerator and denominator by each of the common prime factors. We often indicate this division by drawing a slanted line through each divided out factor. This process is also called cancelling common factors. The product of the remaining factors in the numerator and the product of remaining factors of the denominator are relatively prime, and this fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Sample Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.20.  1 and 3 are relatively prime. Example 4.21.  4 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.22.  7 and 13 are relatively prime (and also truly prime) Example 4.23.  15 and 16 are relatively prime. Example 4.24.  No common prime factors, so 8 and 15 are relatively prime. The fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Practice Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.11. (Go to Solution) Method 2: Dividing Out Common Factors Mentally divide the numerator and the denominator by a factor that is com­mon to each. Write the quotient above the original number. Continue this process until the numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Sample Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.25.  . 5 divides into both 25 and 30. 5 and 6 are relatively prime. Example 4.26.  . Both numbers are even so we can divide by 2. Now, both 9 and 12 are divisible by 3. 3 and 4 are relatively prime. Example 4.27.  . 7 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.28.  . 3 and 8 are relatively prime. Practice Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.17. (Go to Solution)  || Methods of Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms Method 1: Dividing Out Common Primes Write the numerator and denominator as a product of primes. Divide the numerator and denominator by each of the common prime factors. We often indicate this division by drawing a slanted line through each divided out factor. This process is also called cancelling common factors. The product of the remaining factors in the numerator and the product of remaining factors of the denominator are relatively prime, and this fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Sample Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.20.  1 and 3 are relatively prime. Example 4.21.  4 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.22.  7 and 13 are relatively prime (and also truly prime) Example 4.23.  15 and 16 are relatively prime. Example 4.24.  No common prime factors, so 8 and 15 are relatively prime. The fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Practice Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.11. (Go to Solution) Method 2: Dividing Out Common Factors Mentally divide the numerator and the denominator by a factor that is com­mon to each. Write the quotient above the original number. Continue this process until the numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Sample Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.25.  . 5 divides into both 25 and 30. 5 and 6 are relatively prime. Example 4.26.  . Both numbers are even so we can divide by 2. Now, both 9 and 12 are divisible by 3. 3 and 4 are relatively prime. Example 4.27.  . 7 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.28.  . 3 and 8 are relatively prime. Practice Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.17. (Go to Solution)  || Raising Fractions to Higher Terms Equally as important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator than the original fraction. The fractions and are equivalent, that is, . Notice also, Notice that and that . We are not changing the value of . From these observations we can suggest the following method for converting one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. This method is called raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to an equivalent fraction that has higher terms in the numerator and denominator by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero whole number. The fraction can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8. Most often, we will want to convert a given fraction to an equivalent fraction with a higher specified denominator. For example, we may wish to convert to an equivalent fraction that has denominator 32, that is, This is possible to do because we know the process. We must multiply both the numerator and denominator of by the same nonzero whole number in order to 8 obtain an equivalent fraction. We have some information. The denominator 8 was raised to 32 by multiplying it by some nonzero whole number. Division will give us the proper factor. Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 32 ÷ 8 = 4 Now, multiply the numerator 5 by 4. 5 ⋅ 4 = 20 Thus, So, Sample Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Example 4.29.  . Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 35 ÷ 7 = 5 The quotient is 5. Multiply the original numerator by 5. The missing numerator is 15. Example 4.30.  . Divide the original numerator into the new numerator. 45 ÷ 5 = 9 The quotient is 9. Multiply the original denominator by 9. The missing denominator is 45. Practice Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Exercise 4.4.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.20. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.22. (Go to Solution)  || 