Definitions A complex fraction A fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. is a fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. For example, Simplifying such a fraction requires us to find an equivalent fraction with integer numerator and denominator. One way to do this is to divide. Recall that dividing fractions involves multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. An alternative method for simplifying this complex fraction involves multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the LCD of all the given fractions. In this case, the LCD = 4. A complex rational expression A rational expression where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more rational expressions. is defined as a rational expression that contains one or more rational expressions in the numerator or denominator or both. For example, We simplify a complex rational expression by finding an equivalent fraction where the numerator and denominator are polynomials. As illustrated above, there are two methods for simplifying complex rational expressions, and we will outline the steps for both methods. For the sake of clarity, assume that variable expressions used as denominators are nonzero. Definitions A complex fraction A fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. is a fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. For example, Simplifying such a fraction requires us to find an equivalent fraction with integer numerator and denominator. One way to do this is to divide. Recall that dividing fractions involves multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. An alternative method for simplifying this complex fraction involves multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the LCD of all the given fractions. In this case, the LCD = 4. A complex rational expression A rational expression where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more rational expressions. is defined as a rational expression that contains one or more rational expressions in the numerator or denominator or both. For example, We simplify a complex rational expression by finding an equivalent fraction where the numerator and denominator are polynomials. As illustrated above, there are two methods for simplifying complex rational expressions, and we will outline the steps for both methods. For the sake of clarity, assume that variable expressions used as denominators are nonzero.  || 