 || Direct Variation Consider a freight train moving at a constant speed of 30 miles per hour. The equation that expresses the distance traveled at that speed in terms of time is given by After 1 hour the train has traveled 30 miles, after 2 hours the train has traveled 60 miles, and so on. We can construct a chart and graph this relation. In this example, we can see that the distance varies over time as the product of the constant rate, 30 miles per hour, and the variable, t. This relationship is described as direct variation Describes two quantities x and y that are constant multiples of each other: y = k x . and 30 is called the variation constant. In addition, if we divide both sides of D = 30 t by t we have In this form, it is reasonable to say that D is proportional to t, where 30 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies directly as x” y = k x “y is directly proportional Used when referring to direct variation. to x” “y is proportional to x” Here k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation The nonzero multiple k, when quantities vary directly or inversely. or the constant of proportionality Used when referring to the constant of variation. .   Example 1: The circumference of a circle is directly proportional to its diameter, and the constant of proportionality is π . If the circumference is measured to be 20 inches, then what is the radius of the circle? Solution: Use the fact that “the circumference is directly proportional to the diameter” to write an equation that relates the two variables. We are given that “the constant of proportionality is π ,” or k = π . Therefore, we write Now use this formula to find d when the circumference is 20 inches. The radius of the circle, r, is one-half of its diameter. Answer: The radius is 10 π inches, or approximately 3.18 inches.   Typically, we will not be given the constant of variation. Instead, we will be given information from which it can be determined.   Example 2: An object’s weight on earth varies directly to its weight on the moon. If a man weighs 180 pounds on earth, then he will weigh 30 pounds on the moon. Set up an algebraic equation that expresses the weight on earth in terms of the weight on the moon and use it to determine the weight of a woman on the moon if she weighs 120 pounds on earth. Solution: We are given that the “weight on earth varies directly to the weight on the moon.” To find the constant of variation k, use the given information. A 180-pound man on earth weighs 30 pounds on the moon, or y = 180 when x = 30 . Solve for k. Next, set up a formula that models the given information. This implies that a person’s weight on earth is 6 times her weight on the moon. To answer the question, use the woman’s weight on earth, y = 120   pounds , and solve for x. Answer: The woman weighs 20 pounds on the moon.  || Inverse Variation Next, consider the relationship between time and rate, If we wish to travel a fixed distance, then we can determine the average speed required to travel that distance in a given amount of time. For example, if we wish to drive 240 miles in 4 hours, we can determine the required average speed as follows: The average speed required to drive 240 miles in 4 hours is 60 miles per hour. If we wish to drive the 240 miles in 5 hours, then determine the required speed using a similar equation: In this case, we would only have to average 48 miles per hour. We can make a chart and view this relationship on a graph. This is an example of an inverse relationship. We say that r is inversely proportional to the time t, where 240 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies inversely Describes two quantities x and y, where one variable is directly proportional to the reciprocal of the other: y = k x . as x” y = k x “y is inversely proportional Used when referring to inverse variation. to x” Again, k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation or the constant of proportionality.   Example 3: If y varies inversely as x and y = 5 when x = 2 , then find the constant of proportionality and an equation that relates the two variables. Solution: If we let k represent the constant of proportionality, then the statement “y varies inversely as x” can be written as follows: Use the given information, y = 5 when x = 2 , to find k. Solve for k. Therefore, the formula that models the problem is Answer: The constant of proportionality is 10, and the equation is y = 10 x .   Example 4: The weight of an object varies inversely as the square of its distance from the center of earth. If an object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth (approximately 4,000 miles from the center), then how much will it weigh at 1,000 miles above earth’s surface? Solution: Since “w varies inversely as the square of d,” we can write Use the given information to find k. An object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth, approximately 4,000 miles from the center. In other words, w = 100 when d = 4,000: Solve for k. Therefore, we can model the problem with the following formula: To use the formula to find the weight, we need the distance from the center of earth. Since the object is 1,000 miles above the surface, find the distance from the center of earth by adding 4,000 miles: To answer the question, use the formula with d = 5,000. Answer: The object will weigh 64 pounds at a distance 1,000 miles above the surface of earth.  || Joint Variation Lastly, we define relationships between multiple variables. In general, we have Vocabulary Translation “y varies jointly Describes a quantity y that varies directly as the product of two other quantities x and z: y = k x z . as x and z” y = k x z “y is jointly proportional Used when referring to joint variation. to x and z” Here k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation or the constant of proportionality.   Example 5: The area of an ellipse varies jointly as a, half of the ellipse’s major axis, and b, half of the ellipse’s minor axis. If the area of an ellipse is 300 π   cm 2 , where a = 10   cm and b = 30   cm , then what is the constant of proportionality? Give a formula for the area of an ellipse. Solution: If we let A represent the area of an ellipse, then we can use the statement “area varies jointly as a and b” to write To find the constant of variation, k, use the fact that the area is 300 π when a = 10 and b = 30 . Therefore, the formula for the area of an ellipse is Answer: The constant of proportionality is π , and the formula for the area is A = a b π .   Try this! Given that y varies directly as the square of x and inversely to z, where y = 2 when x = 3 and z = 27, find y when x = 2 and z = 16. Answer: 3/2 Video Solution  || 