Location of Solutions In our study of linear equations in two variables, we observed that all the solutions to the equation, and only the solutions to the equation, were located on the graph of the equation. We now wish to determine the location of the solutions to linear inequalities in two variables. Linear inequalities in two variables are inequalities of the forms: Half-Planes A straight line drawn through the plane divides the plane into two half-planes. Boundary Line The straight line is called the boundary line. Solution to an Inequality in Two Variables Recall that when working with linear equations in two variables, we observed that ordered pairs that produced true statements when substituted into an equation were called solutions to that equation. We can make a similar statement for inequalities in two variables. We say that an inequality in two variables has a solution when a pair of values has been found such that when these values are substituted into the inequality a true statement results. The Location of Solutions in the Plane As with equations, solutions to linear inequalities have particular locations in the plane. All solutions to a linear inequality in two variables are located in one and only in one entire half-plane. For example, consider the inequality 2x + 3y ≤ 6 All the solutions to the inequality 2x + 3y ≤ 6 lie in the shaded half-plane. Example 7.51.  Point A(1,  − 1) is a solution since Example 7.52.  Point B(2, 5) is not a solution since Location of Solutions In our study of linear equations in two variables, we observed that all the solutions to the equation, and only the solutions to the equation, were located on the graph of the equation. We now wish to determine the location of the solutions to linear inequalities in two variables. Linear inequalities in two variables are inequalities of the forms: Half-Planes A straight line drawn through the plane divides the plane into two half-planes. Boundary Line The straight line is called the boundary line. Solution to an Inequality in Two Variables Recall that when working with linear equations in two variables, we observed that ordered pairs that produced true statements when substituted into an equation were called solutions to that equation. We can make a similar statement for inequalities in two variables. We say that an inequality in two variables has a solution when a pair of values has been found such that when these values are substituted into the inequality a true statement results. The Location of Solutions in the Plane As with equations, solutions to linear inequalities have particular locations in the plane. All solutions to a linear inequality in two variables are located in one and only in one entire half-plane. For example, consider the inequality 2x + 3y ≤ 6 All the solutions to the inequality 2x + 3y ≤ 6 lie in the shaded half-plane. Example 7.51.  Point A(1,  − 1) is a solution since Example 7.52.  Point B(2, 5) is not a solution since  || 