Wrap and Unwrap, Do and Undo Suppose that you are wrapping a gift for your cousin. You perform the following steps in order. 1. Put the gift paper on. 2. Put the tape on. 3. Put the decorative bow on. When we give the wrapped gift to our cousin, he politely unwraps the present, “undoing” each of our three steps in inverse order. 1. Take off the decorative bow. 2. Take off the tape. 3. Take off the gift paper. 76 CHAPTER 2. SOLVING LINEAR EQUATIONS AND INEQUALITIES This seemingly frivolous wrapping and unwrapping of a gift contains some deeply powerful mathematical ideas. Consider the mathematical expression x + 4. To evaluate this expression at a particular value of x, we would start with the given value of x, then add 4. • Let’s set x equal to the number 7. If we add 4, we arrive at the following result: 11 Now, how would we “unwrap” this result to return to our original number? We would start with our result, namely 11, then subtract 4. • Take our result from above, 11. If we subtract 4, we return to our original value of x: 7 The above discussion leads us to two extremely important observations. The inverse of addition is subtraction. If we start with a number x and add a number a, then subtracting a from the result will return us to the original number x. In symbols, x+ a− a = x. That is, subtracting a “undoes” the effect of adding a and returns us to the original number x. The inverse of subtraction is addition. If we start with a number x and subtract a number a, then adding a to the result will return us to the original number x. In symbols, x− a+ a = x. That is, adding a “undoes” the effect of subtracting a and returns us to the original number x. Wrap and Unwrap, Do and Undo Suppose that you are wrapping a gift for your cousin. You perform the following steps in order. 1. Put the gift paper on. 2. Put the tape on. 3. Put the decorative bow on. When we give the wrapped gift to our cousin, he politely unwraps the present, “undoing” each of our three steps in inverse order. 1. Take off the decorative bow. 2. Take off the tape. 3. Take off the gift paper. 76 CHAPTER 2. SOLVING LINEAR EQUATIONS AND INEQUALITIES This seemingly frivolous wrapping and unwrapping of a gift contains some deeply powerful mathematical ideas. Consider the mathematical expression x + 4. To evaluate this expression at a particular value of x, we would start with the given value of x, then add 4. • Let’s set x equal to the number 7. If we add 4, we arrive at the following result: 11 Now, how would we “unwrap” this result to return to our original number? We would start with our result, namely 11, then subtract 4. • Take our result from above, 11. If we subtract 4, we return to our original value of x: 7 The above discussion leads us to two extremely important observations. The inverse of addition is subtraction. If we start with a number x and add a number a, then subtracting a from the result will return us to the original number x. In symbols, x+ a− a = x. That is, subtracting a “undoes” the effect of adding a and returns us to the original number x. The inverse of subtraction is addition. If we start with a number x and subtract a number a, then adding a to the result will return us to the original number x. In symbols, x− a+ a = x. That is, adding a “undoes” the effect of subtracting a and returns us to the original number x.  || 