The Slope-Intercept and Point-Slope Forms In the pervious sections we have been given an equation and have constructed the line to which it corresponds. Now, however, suppose we're given some geometric information about the line and we wish to construct the corresponding equation. We wish to find the equation of a line. We know that the formula for the slope of a line is We can find the equation of a line using the slope formula in either of two ways: Example 7.40.  If we’re given the slope, m , and any point (x, y 1 ) on the line, we can substitute this information into the formula for slope.Let (x, y 1 ) be the known point on the line and let (x,y) be any other point on the line. Then Since this equation was derived using a point and the slope of a line, it is called the point-slope form of a line. Example 7.41.  If we are given the slope, m , y-intercept, (0,b) , we can substitute this information into the formula for slope.Let (0,b) be the y-intercept and (x,y) be any other point on the line. Then, Since this equation was derived using the slope and the intercept, it was called the slope-intercept form of a line. We summarize these two derivations as follows. Forms of the Equation of a Line We can find the equation of a line if we’re given either of the following sets of information: The slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0,b), by substituting these values into This is the slope-intercept form. The slope, m, and any point, (x 1 ,y 1 ), by substituting these values into This is the point-slope form. Notice that both forms rely on knowing the slope. If we are given two points on the line we may still find the equation of the line passing through them by first finding the slope of the line, then using the point-slope form. It is customary to use either the slope-intercept form or the general form for the final form of the line. We will use the slope-intercept form as the final form. The Slope-Intercept and Point-Slope Forms In the pervious sections we have been given an equation and have constructed the line to which it corresponds. Now, however, suppose we're given some geometric information about the line and we wish to construct the corresponding equation. We wish to find the equation of a line. We know that the formula for the slope of a line is We can find the equation of a line using the slope formula in either of two ways: Example 7.40.  If we’re given the slope, m , and any point (x, y 1 ) on the line, we can substitute this information into the formula for slope.Let (x, y 1 ) be the known point on the line and let (x,y) be any other point on the line. Then Since this equation was derived using a point and the slope of a line, it is called the point-slope form of a line. Example 7.41.  If we are given the slope, m , y-intercept, (0,b) , we can substitute this information into the formula for slope.Let (0,b) be the y-intercept and (x,y) be any other point on the line. Then, Since this equation was derived using the slope and the intercept, it was called the slope-intercept form of a line. We summarize these two derivations as follows. Forms of the Equation of a Line We can find the equation of a line if we’re given either of the following sets of information: The slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0,b), by substituting these values into This is the slope-intercept form. The slope, m, and any point, (x 1 ,y 1 ), by substituting these values into This is the point-slope form. Notice that both forms rely on knowing the slope. If we are given two points on the line we may still find the equation of the line passing through them by first finding the slope of the line, then using the point-slope form. It is customary to use either the slope-intercept form or the general form for the final form of the line. We will use the slope-intercept form as the final form.  || 