The Parts of a Fraction A fraction has three parts. The fraction bar . Fraction Bar The fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol. It separates a quantity into individual groups. These groups have names, as noted in 2 and 3 below. The nonzero number below the fraction bar. Denominator This number is called the denominator of the fraction, and it indicates the number of parts the whole quantity has been divided into. Notice that the denominator must be a nonzero whole number since the least number of parts any quantity can have is one. The number above the fraction bar. Numerator This number is called the numerator of the fraction, and it indicates how many of the specified parts are being considered. Notice that the numerator can be any whole number (including zero) since any number of the specified parts can be considered. Sample Set A The diagrams in the following problems are illustrations of fractions. Example 4.1.  Figure 4.1.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 3 equal parts (c) 1 of the 3 equal parts The fraction is read as "one third." Example 4.2.  Figure 4.2.  (a) A whole rectangle (b) The whole rectangle divided into 5 equal parts (c) 3 of the 5 equal parts The fraction "is read as "three fifths." Example 4.3.  Figure 4.3.  (a) The number line between 0 and 1 (b) The number line between 0 and 1 divided into 7 equal parts (c) 6 of the 7 equal parts The fraction is read as "six sevenths." Example 4.4.  Figure 4.4.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 4 equal parts (c) 4 of the 4 equal parts When the numerator and denominator are equal, the fraction represents the entire quantity, and its value is 1. Practice Set A Specify the numerator and denominator of the following fractions. Exercise 4.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.5. (Go to Solution) The Parts of a Fraction A fraction has three parts. The fraction bar . Fraction Bar The fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol. It separates a quantity into individual groups. These groups have names, as noted in 2 and 3 below. The nonzero number below the fraction bar. Denominator This number is called the denominator of the fraction, and it indicates the number of parts the whole quantity has been divided into. Notice that the denominator must be a nonzero whole number since the least number of parts any quantity can have is one. The number above the fraction bar. Numerator This number is called the numerator of the fraction, and it indicates how many of the specified parts are being considered. Notice that the numerator can be any whole number (including zero) since any number of the specified parts can be considered. Sample Set A The diagrams in the following problems are illustrations of fractions. Example 4.1.  Figure 4.1.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 3 equal parts (c) 1 of the 3 equal parts The fraction is read as "one third." Example 4.2.  Figure 4.2.  (a) A whole rectangle (b) The whole rectangle divided into 5 equal parts (c) 3 of the 5 equal parts The fraction "is read as "three fifths." Example 4.3.  Figure 4.3.  (a) The number line between 0 and 1 (b) The number line between 0 and 1 divided into 7 equal parts (c) 6 of the 7 equal parts The fraction is read as "six sevenths." Example 4.4.  Figure 4.4.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 4 equal parts (c) 4 of the 4 equal parts When the numerator and denominator are equal, the fraction represents the entire quantity, and its value is 1. Practice Set A Specify the numerator and denominator of the following fractions. Exercise 4.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.5. (Go to Solution)  || 