 ||  || Systems of Equations Systems of Equations A collection of two linear equations in two variables is called a system of linear equations in two variables, or more briefly, a system of equations. The pair of equations is a system of equations. The brace { is used to denote that the two equations occur together (simultaneously).  || Solution to A System of Equations Solution to a System We know that one of the infinitely many solutions to one linear equation in two variables is an ordered pair. An ordered pair that is a solution to both of the equations in a system is called a solution to the system of equations. For example, the ordered pair ( 3, 5 ) is a solution to the system since ( 3, 5 ) is a solution to both equations.  || Graphs of Systems of Equations One method of solving a system of equations is by graphing. We know that the graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line. The graph of a system will consist of two straight lines. When two straight lines are graphed, one of three possibilities may result. Example 11.1.  The lines intersect at the point ( a, b ) . The point ( a, b ) is the solution to the corresponding system. Example 11.2.  The lines are parallel. They do not intersect. The system has no solution. Example 11.3.  The lines are coincident (one on the other). They intersect at infinitely many points. The system has infinitely many solutions.  || Independent, Inconsistent, and Dependent Systems Independent Systems Systems in which the lines intersect at precisely one point are called independent systems. In applications, independent systems can arise when the collected data are accurate and complete. For example, The sum of two numbers is 10 and the product of the two numbers is 21. Find the numbers. In this application, the data are accurate and complete. The solution is 7 and 3. Inconsistent Systems Systems in which the lines are parallel are called inconsistent systems. In applications, inconsistent systems can arise when the collected data are contradictory. For example, The sum of two even numbers is 30 and the difference of the same two numbers is 0. Find the numbers. The data are contradictory. There is no solution to this application. Dependent Systems Systems in which the lines are coincident are called dependent systems. In applications, dependent systems can arise when the collected data are incomplete. For example. The difference of two numbers is 9 and twice one number is 18 more than twice the other. The data are incomplete. There are infinitely many solutions.  || The Method of Solving A System Graphically The Method of Solving a System Graphically To solve a system of equations graphically: Graph both equations. If the lines intersect, the solution is the ordered pair that corresponds to the point of intersection. The system is independent. If the lines are parallel, there is no solution. The system is inconsistent. If the lines are coincident, there are infinitely many solutions. The system is dependent.  ||  || When Substitution Works Best We know how to solve a linear equation in one variable. We shall now study a method for solving a system of two linear equations in two variables by transforming the two equations in two variables into one equation in one variable.To make this transformation, we need to eliminate one equation and one variable. We can make this elimination by substitution. When Substitution Works Best The substitution method works best when either of these conditions exists: One of the variables has a coefficient of 1,  or One of the variables can be made to have a coefficient of 1 without introducing fractions.  || The Substitution Method The Substitution Method To solve a system of two linear equations in two variables, Solve one of the equations for one of the variables. Substitute the expression for the variable chosen in step 1 into the other equation. Solve the resulting equation in one variable. Substitute the value obtained in step 3 into the equation obtained in step 1 and solve to obtain the value of the other variable. Check the solution in both equations. Write the solution as an ordered pair.  || Substitution And Parallel Lines The following rule alerts us to the fact that the two lines of a system are parallel. Substitution and Parallel Lines If computations eliminate all the variables and produce a contradiction, the two lines of a system are parallel, and the system is called inconsistent.  || Substitution And Coincident Lines The following rule alerts us to the fact that the two lines of a system are coincident. Substitution and Coincident Lines If computations eliminate all the variables and produce an identity, the two lines of a system are coincident and the system is called dependent.  ||  || The Properties Used in the Addition Method Another method of solving a system of two linear equations in two variables is called the method of elimination by addition. It is similar to the method of elimination by substitution in that the process eliminates one equation and one variable. The method of elimination by addition makes use of the following two properties. If A , B , and C are algebraic expressions such that a x + ( − a x ) = 0 Property 1 states that if we add the left sides of two equations together and the right sides of the same two equations together, the resulting sums will be equal. We call this adding equations. Property 2 states that the sum of two opposites is zero.  || The Addition Method To solve a system of two linear equations in two variables by addition, Write, if necessary, both equations in general form, a x + b y = c. If necessary, multiply one or both equations by factors that will produce opposite coefficients for one of the variables. Add the equations to eliminate one equation and one variable. Solve the equation obtained in step 3. Do one of the following: (a)  Substitute the value obtained in step 4 into either of the original equations and solve to obtain the value of the other variable, or (b)  Repeat steps 1-5 for the other variable. Check the solutions in both equations. Write the solution as an ordered pair. The addition method works well when the coefficient of one of the variables is 1 or a number other than 1.  || Addition And Parallel Or Coincident Lines When the lines of a system are parallel or coincident, the method of elimination produces results identical to that of the method of elimination by substitution. Addition and Parallel Lines If computations eliminate all variables and produce a contradiction, the two lines of the system are parallel and the system is called inconsistent. Addition and Coincident Lines If computations eliminate all variables and produce an identity, the two lines of the system are coincident and the system is called dependent.  ||  || The Five-Step Method When solving practical problems, it is often more convenient to introduce two variables rather than only one. Two variables should be introduced only when two relationships can be found within the problem. Each relationship will produce an equation, and a system of two equations in two variables will result.We will use the five-step method to solve these problems. Introduce two variables, one for each unknown quantity. Look for two relationships within the problem. Translate the verbal phrases into mathematical expressions to form two equations. Solve the resulting system of equations. Check the solution. Write a conclusion.  || 