Combining Like Terms From our examination of terms in Section 11.2, we know that like terms are terms in which the variable parts are identical. Like terms is an appropriate name since terms with identical variable parts and different numerical coefficients represent different amounts of the same quantity. When we are dealing with quantities of the same type, we may combine them using addition and subtraction. Simplifying an Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression may be simplified by combining like terms. This concept is illustrated in the following examples. Eight and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. We have combined quantities of the same type. Eight and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. Thus, we have 13 of one type and 3 of another type. We have combined only quantities of the same type. Suppose we let the letter represent "record." Then, . The terms and are like terms. So, 8 and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. We have combined like terms. Suppose we let the letter represent "record" and represent "tape." Then, We have combined only the like terms. After observing the problems in these examples, we can suggest a method for simplifying an algebraic expression by combining like terms. Combining Like Terms Like terms may be combined by adding or subtracting their coefficients and affixing the result to the common variable. Sample Set A Simplify each expression by combining like terms. Example 11.12.  . All three terms are alike. Combine their coefficients and affix this result to : . Thus, . Example 11.13.  The terms and are like terms. Combine their coefficients: . Thus, . Example 11.14.  The like terms are Thus, Example 11.15.  . The like terms are Thus, . Practice Set A Simplify each expression by combining like terms. Exercise 11.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.5. (Go to Solution) Combining Like Terms From our examination of terms in Section 11.2, we know that like terms are terms in which the variable parts are identical. Like terms is an appropriate name since terms with identical variable parts and different numerical coefficients represent different amounts of the same quantity. When we are dealing with quantities of the same type, we may combine them using addition and subtraction. Simplifying an Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression may be simplified by combining like terms. This concept is illustrated in the following examples. Eight and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. We have combined quantities of the same type. Eight and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. Thus, we have 13 of one type and 3 of another type. We have combined only quantities of the same type. Suppose we let the letter represent "record." Then, . The terms and are like terms. So, 8 and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. We have combined like terms. Suppose we let the letter represent "record" and represent "tape." Then, We have combined only the like terms. After observing the problems in these examples, we can suggest a method for simplifying an algebraic expression by combining like terms. Combining Like Terms Like terms may be combined by adding or subtracting their coefficients and affixing the result to the common variable. Sample Set A Simplify each expression by combining like terms. Example 11.12.  . All three terms are alike. Combine their coefficients and affix this result to : . Thus, . Example 11.13.  The terms and are like terms. Combine their coefficients: . Thus, . Example 11.14.  The like terms are Thus, Example 11.15.  . The like terms are Thus, . Practice Set A Simplify each expression by combining like terms. Exercise 11.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.5. (Go to Solution)  || 