Rational Numbers All numbers of the form , where a and b are integers (but b cannot be zero) Rational numbers include what we usually call fractions Notice that the word “rational” contains the word “ratio,” which should remind you of fractions.   The bottom of the fraction is called the denominator. Think of it as the denomination—it tells you what size fraction we are talking about: fourths, fifths, etc.   The top of the fraction is called the numerator. It tells you how many fourths, fifths, or whatever.   RESTRICTION: The denominator cannot be zero! (But the numerator can) If the numerator is zero, then the whole fraction is just equal to zero. If I have zero thirds or zero fourths, than I don’t have anything. However, it makes no sense at all to talk about a fraction measured in “zeroths.” Fractions can be numbers smaller than 1, like 1/2 or 3/4 (called proper fractions), or they can be numbers bigger than 1 (called improper fractions), like two-and-a-half, which we could also write as 5/2 All integers can also be thought of as rational numbers, with a denominator of 1: This means that all the previous sets of numbers (natural numbers, whole numbers, and integers) are subsets of the rational numbers. Now it might seem as though the set of rational numbers would cover every possible case, but that is not so. There are numbers that cannot be expressed as a fraction, and these numbers are called irrational because they are not rational. Rational Numbers All numbers of the form , where a and b are integers (but b cannot be zero) Rational numbers include what we usually call fractions Notice that the word “rational” contains the word “ratio,” which should remind you of fractions.   The bottom of the fraction is called the denominator. Think of it as the denomination—it tells you what size fraction we are talking about: fourths, fifths, etc.   The top of the fraction is called the numerator. It tells you how many fourths, fifths, or whatever.   RESTRICTION: The denominator cannot be zero! (But the numerator can) If the numerator is zero, then the whole fraction is just equal to zero. If I have zero thirds or zero fourths, than I don’t have anything. However, it makes no sense at all to talk about a fraction measured in “zeroths.” Fractions can be numbers smaller than 1, like 1/2 or 3/4 (called proper fractions), or they can be numbers bigger than 1 (called improper fractions), like two-and-a-half, which we could also write as 5/2 All integers can also be thought of as rational numbers, with a denominator of 1: This means that all the previous sets of numbers (natural numbers, whole numbers, and integers) are subsets of the rational numbers. Now it might seem as though the set of rational numbers would cover every possible case, but that is not so. There are numbers that cannot be expressed as a fraction, and these numbers are called irrational because they are not rational.  || 