 || Rational Equations Rational Equations When one rational expression is set equal to another rational expression, a rational equation results.Some examples of rational equations are the following (except for number 5): Example 8.93.  Example 8.94.  Example 8.95.  Example 8.96.  Example 8.97.  is a rational expression, not a rational equation.  || Rational Equations When one rational expression is set equal to another rational expression, a rational equation results.Some examples of rational equations are the following (except for number 5): Example 8.93.  Example 8.94.  Example 8.95.  Example 8.96.  Example 8.97.  is a rational expression, not a rational equation.  || The Logic Behind The Process It seems most reasonable that an equation without any fractions would be easier to solve than an equation with fractions. Our goal, then, is to convert any rational equation to an equation that contains no fractions. This is easily done.To develop this method, let’s consider the rational equation The LCD is 12. We know that we can multiply both sides of an equation by the same nonzero quantity, so we’ll multiply both sides by the LCD, 12. Now distribute 12 to each term on the left side using the distributive property. Now divide to eliminate all denominators. Now there are no more fractions, and we can solve this equation using our previous techniques to obtain 5 as the solution.  || The Process We have cleared the equation of fractions by multiplying both sides by the LCD. This development generates the following rule. Clearing an Equation of Fractions To clear an equation of fractions, multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD. When multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD, we use the distributive property to distribute the LCD to each term. This means we can simplify the above rule. Clearing an Equation of Fractions To clear an equation of fractions, multiply every term on both sides of the equation by the LCD. The complete method for solving a rational equation is 1. Determine all the values that must be excluded from consideration by finding the values that will produce zero in the denominator (and thus, division by zero). These excluded values are not in the domain of the equation and are called nondomain values. 2. Clear the equation of fractions by multiplying every term by the LCD. 3. Solve this nonfractional equation for the variable. Check to see if any of these potential solutions are excluded values. 4. Check the solution by substitution.  || Extraneous Solutions Extraneous Solutions Potential solutions that have been excluded because they make an expression undefined (or produce a false statement for an equation) are called extraneous solutions. Extraneous solutions are discarded. If there are no other potential solutions, the equation has no solution.  || 