Distance Formula Frequently you need to calculate the distance between two points in a plane. To do this, form a right triangle using the two points as vertices of the triangle and then apply the Pythagorean theorem. Recall that the Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . states that if given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units, then the square of the measure of the hypotenuse c is equal to the sum of the squares of the legs: a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . In other words, the hypotenuse of any right triangle is equal to the square root of the sum of the squares of its legs.   Example 5: Find the distance between (−1, 2) and (3, 5). Solution: Form a right triangle by drawing horizontal and vertical lines through the two points. This creates a right triangle as shown below: The length of leg b is calculated by finding the distance between the x-values of the given points, and the length of leg a is calculated by finding the distance between the given y-values. Next, use the Pythagorean theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: The distance between the two points is 5 units.   Generalize this process to produce a formula that can be used to algebraically calculate the distance between any two given points. Given two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 )   and ( x 2 ,   y 2 )   , then the distance, d, between them is given by the distance formula Given two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , calculate the distance d between them using the formula d = ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − √ . : d = ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − √   Example 6: Calculate the distance between (−3, −1) and (−2, 4). Solution: Use the distance formula. It is a good practice to include the formula in its general form as a part of the written solution before substituting values for the variables. This improves readability and reduces the chance for errors. Answer: 26 − − √ units   Try this! Calculate the distance between (−7, 5) and (−1, 13). Answer: 10 units Video Solution   Example 7: Do the three points (1, −1), (3, −3), and (3, 1) form a right triangle? Solution: The Pythagorean theorem states that having side lengths that satisfy the property a 2 + b 2 = c 2 is a necessary and sufficient condition of right triangles. In other words, if you can show that the sum of the squares of the leg lengths of the triangle is equal to the square of the length of the hypotenuse, then the figure must be a right triangle. First, calculate the length of each side using the distance formula. Now we check to see if a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . Answer: Yes, the three points form a right triangle. In fact, since two of the legs are equal in length, the points form an isosceles right triangle. Distance Formula Frequently you need to calculate the distance between two points in a plane. To do this, form a right triangle using the two points as vertices of the triangle and then apply the Pythagorean theorem. Recall that the Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . states that if given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units, then the square of the measure of the hypotenuse c is equal to the sum of the squares of the legs: a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . In other words, the hypotenuse of any right triangle is equal to the square root of the sum of the squares of its legs.   Example 5: Find the distance between (−1, 2) and (3, 5). Solution: Form a right triangle by drawing horizontal and vertical lines through the two points. This creates a right triangle as shown below: The length of leg b is calculated by finding the distance between the x-values of the given points, and the length of leg a is calculated by finding the distance between the given y-values. Next, use the Pythagorean theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: The distance between the two points is 5 units.   Generalize this process to produce a formula that can be used to algebraically calculate the distance between any two given points. Given two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 )   and ( x 2 ,   y 2 )   , then the distance, d, between them is given by the distance formula Given two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , calculate the distance d between them using the formula d = ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − √ . : d = ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − √   Example 6: Calculate the distance between (−3, −1) and (−2, 4). Solution: Use the distance formula. It is a good practice to include the formula in its general form as a part of the written solution before substituting values for the variables. This improves readability and reduces the chance for errors. Answer: 26 − − √ units   Try this! Calculate the distance between (−7, 5) and (−1, 13). Answer: 10 units Video Solution   Example 7: Do the three points (1, −1), (3, −3), and (3, 1) form a right triangle? Solution: The Pythagorean theorem states that having side lengths that satisfy the property a 2 + b 2 = c 2 is a necessary and sufficient condition of right triangles. In other words, if you can show that the sum of the squares of the leg lengths of the triangle is equal to the square of the length of the hypotenuse, then the figure must be a right triangle. First, calculate the length of each side using the distance formula. Now we check to see if a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . Answer: Yes, the three points form a right triangle. In fact, since two of the legs are equal in length, the points form an isosceles right triangle.  || 