 || Definition of a Linear System Real-world applications are often modeled using more than one variable and more than one equation. A system of equations A set of two or more equations with the same variables. consists of a set of two or more equations with the same variables. In this section, we will study linear systems In this section, we restrict our study to systems of two linear equations with two variables. consisting of two linear equations each with two variables. For example, A solution to a linear system An ordered pair that satisfies both equations and corresponds to a point of intersection. , or simultaneous solution Used when referring to a solution of a system of equations. , to a linear system is an ordered pair (x, y) that solves both of the equations. In this case, (3, 2) is the only solution. To check that an ordered pair is a solution, substitute the corresponding x- and y-values into each equation and then simplify to see if you obtain a true statement for both equations.   Example 1: Determine whether (1, 0) is a solution to the system { x − y = 1 − 2 x + 3 y = 5 . Solution: Substitute the appropriate values into both equations. Answer: Since (1, 0) does not satisfy both equations, it is not a solution.   Try this! Is (−2, 4) a solution to the system {   x − y = − 6 − 2 x + 3 y = 16 ? Answer: Yes Video Solution  || Solve by Graphing Geometrically, a linear system consists of two lines, where a solution is a point of intersection. To illustrate this, we will graph the following linear system with a solution of (3, 2): First, rewrite the equations in slope-intercept form so that we may easily graph them. Next, replace these forms of the original equations in the system to obtain what is called an equivalent system A system consisting of equivalent equations that share the same solution set. . Equivalent systems share the same solution set. If we graph both of the lines on the same set of axes, then we can see that the point of intersection is indeed (3, 2), the solution to the system. To summarize, linear systems described in this section consist of two linear equations each with two variables. A solution is an ordered pair that corresponds to a point where the two lines in the rectangular coordinate plane intersect. Therefore, we can solve linear systems by graphing both lines on the same set of axes and determining the point where they cross. When graphing the lines, take care to choose a good scale and use a straightedge to draw the line through the points; accuracy is very important here. The steps for solving linear systems using the graphing method A means of solving a system by graphing the equations on the same set of axes and determining where they intersect. are outlined in the following example.   Example 2: Solve by graphing: { x − y = − 4 2 x + y = 1 . Solution: Step 1: Rewrite the linear equations in slope-intercept form. Step 2: Write the equivalent system and graph the lines on the same set of axes. Step 3: Use the graph to estimate the point where the lines intersect and check to see if it solves the original system. In the above graph, the point of intersection appears to be (−1, 3). Answer: (−1, 3)   Example 3: Solve by graphing: { 2 x + y = 2 − 2 x + 3 y = − 18 . Solution: We first solve each equation for y to obtain an equivalent system where the lines are in slope-intercept form. Graph the lines and determine the point of intersection. Answer: (3, −4)   Example 4: Solve by graphing: { 3 x + y = 6 y = − 3 . Solution: Answer: (3, −3)   The graphing method for solving linear systems is not ideal when the solution consists of coordinates that are not integers. There will be more accurate algebraic methods in sections to come, but for now, the goal is to understand the geometry involved when solving systems. It is important to remember that the solutions to a system correspond to the point, or points, where the graphs of the equations intersect.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { − x + y = 6   5 x + 2 y = − 2 . Answer: (−2, 4) Video Solution  || Dependent and Inconsistent Systems Systems with at least one solution are called consistent systems A system with at least one solution. . Up to this point, all of the examples have been of consistent systems with exactly one ordered pair solution. It turns out that this is not always the case. Sometimes systems consist of two linear equations that are equivalent. If this is the case, the two lines are the same and when graphed will coincide. Hence the solution set consists of all the points on the line. This is a dependent system A system that consists of equivalent equations with infinitely many ordered pair solutions, denoted by (x, mx + b). . Given a consistent linear system with two variables, there are two possible results: The solutions to independent systems A system of equations with one ordered pair solution (x, y). are ordered pairs (x, y). We need some way to express the solution sets to dependent systems, since these systems have infinitely many solutions, or points of intersection. Recall that any line can be written in slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . Here, y depends on x. So we may express all the ordered pair solutions ( x ,   y ) in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) , where x is any real number.   Example 5: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 3 y = − 9   4 x − 6 y = 18 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation in the system. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and same y-intercept. They are, in fact, the same line. And the system is dependent. Answer: ( x ,   2 3 x − 3 )   In this example, it is important to notice that the two lines have the same slope and same y-intercept. This tells us that the two equations are equivalent and that the simultaneous solutions are all the points on the line y = 2 3 x − 3 . This is a dependent system, and the infinitely many solutions are expressed using the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Other resources may express this set using set notation, {(x, y) | y = 2 3 x − 3 }, which reads “the set of all ordered pairs (x, y) such that y equals two-thirds x minus 3.” Sometimes the lines do not cross and there is no point of intersection. Such systems have no solution, Ø, and are called inconsistent systems A system with no simultaneous solution. .   Example 6: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 5 y = − 15 − 4 x + 10 y = 10 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and different y-intercepts. Therefore, they are parallel and will never intersect. Answer: There is no simultaneous solution, Ø.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { x + y = − 1 − 2 x − 2 y = 2 . Answer: ( x ,   − x − 1 ) Video Solution  || 