Slope The steepness of any incline can be measured as the ratio of the vertical change to the horizontal change. For example, a 5% incline can be written as 5/100, which means that for every 100 feet forward, the height increases 5 feet. In mathematics, we call the incline of a line the slope The incline of a line measured as the ratio of the vertical change to the horizontal change, often referred to as rise over run. and use the letter m to denote it. The vertical change is called the rise The vertical change between any two points on a line. and the horizontal change is called the run The horizontal change between any two points on a line. . The rise and the run can be positive or negative. A positive rise corresponds to a vertical change up and a negative rise corresponds to a vertical change down. A positive run denotes a horizontal change to the right and a negative run corresponds to a horizontal change to the left. Given the graph, we can calculate the slope by determining the vertical and horizontal changes between any two points.   Example 1: Find the slope of the given line: Solution: From the given points on the graph, count 3 units down and 4 units right. Answer: m = − 3 4   Here we have a negative slope, which means that for every 4 units of movement to the right, the vertical change is 3 units downward. There are four geometric cases for the value of the slope. Reading the graph from left to right, we see that lines with an upward incline have positive slopes and lines with a downward incline have negative slopes. If the line is horizontal, then the rise is 0: The slope of a horizontal line is 0. If the line is vertical, then the run is 0: The slope of a vertical line is undefined.   Try this! Find the slope of the given line: Answer: m = 2 3 Video Solution Calculating the slope can be difficult if the graph does not have points with integer coordinates. Therefore, we next develop a formula that allows us to calculate the slope algebraically. Given any two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , we can obtain the rise and run by subtracting the corresponding coordinates. This leads us to the slope formula Given two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , then the slope of the line is given by the formula m = r i s e r u n = y 2 − y 1 x 2 − x 1 . . Given any two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , the slope is given by   Example 2: Find the slope of the line passing through (−3, −5) and (2, 1). Solution: Given (−3, −5) and (2, 1), calculate the difference of the y-values divided by the difference of the x-values. Since subtraction is not commutative, take care to be consistent when subtracting the coordinates. Answer: m = 6 5   We can graph the line described in the previous example and verify that the slope is 6/5. Certainly the graph is optional; the beauty of the slope formula is that we can obtain the slope, given two points, using only algebra.   Example 3: Find the slope of the line passing through (−4, 3) and (−1, −7). Solution: Answer: m = − 10 3   When using the slope formula, take care to be consistent since order does matter. You must subtract the coordinates of the first point from the coordinates of the second point for both the numerator and the denominator in the same order.   Example 4: Find the slope of the line passing through (7, −2) and (−5, −2). Solution: Answer: m = 0 . As an exercise, plot the given two points and verify that they lie on a horizontal line.   Example 5: Find the slope of the line passing through (−4, −3) and (−4, 5). Solution: Answer: The slope m is undefined. As an exercise, plot the given two points and verify that they lie on a vertical line.   Try this! Calculate the slope of the line passing through (−2, 3) and (5, −5). Answer: m = − 8 7 Video Solution When considering the slope as a rate of change it is important to include the correct units.   Example 6: A Corvette Coupe was purchased new in 1970 for about $5,200 and depreciated in value over time until it was sold in 1985 for $1,300. At this point, the car was beginning to be considered a classic and started to increase in value. In the year 2000, when the car was 30 years old, it sold at auction for $10,450. The following line graph depicts the value of the car over time. a. Determine the rate at which the car depreciated in value from 1970 to 1985. b. Determine the rate at which the car appreciated in value from 1985 to 2000. Solution: Notice that the value depends on the age of the car and that the slope measures the rate in dollars per year. a. The slope of the line segment depicting the value for the first 15 years is Answer: The value of the car depreciated $260 per year from 1970 to 1985. b. The slope of the line segment depicting the value for the next 15 years is Answer: The value of the car appreciated $610 per year from 1985 to 2000. Slope The steepness of any incline can be measured as the ratio of the vertical change to the horizontal change. For example, a 5% incline can be written as 5/100, which means that for every 100 feet forward, the height increases 5 feet. In mathematics, we call the incline of a line the slope The incline of a line measured as the ratio of the vertical change to the horizontal change, often referred to as rise over run. and use the letter m to denote it. The vertical change is called the rise The vertical change between any two points on a line. and the horizontal change is called the run The horizontal change between any two points on a line. . The rise and the run can be positive or negative. A positive rise corresponds to a vertical change up and a negative rise corresponds to a vertical change down. A positive run denotes a horizontal change to the right and a negative run corresponds to a horizontal change to the left. Given the graph, we can calculate the slope by determining the vertical and horizontal changes between any two points.   Example 1: Find the slope of the given line: Solution: From the given points on the graph, count 3 units down and 4 units right. Answer: m = − 3 4   Here we have a negative slope, which means that for every 4 units of movement to the right, the vertical change is 3 units downward. There are four geometric cases for the value of the slope. Reading the graph from left to right, we see that lines with an upward incline have positive slopes and lines with a downward incline have negative slopes. If the line is horizontal, then the rise is 0: The slope of a horizontal line is 0. If the line is vertical, then the run is 0: The slope of a vertical line is undefined.   Try this! Find the slope of the given line: Answer: m = 2 3 Video Solution Calculating the slope can be difficult if the graph does not have points with integer coordinates. Therefore, we next develop a formula that allows us to calculate the slope algebraically. Given any two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , we can obtain the rise and run by subtracting the corresponding coordinates. This leads us to the slope formula Given two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , then the slope of the line is given by the formula m = r i s e r u n = y 2 − y 1 x 2 − x 1 . . Given any two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , the slope is given by   Example 2: Find the slope of the line passing through (−3, −5) and (2, 1). Solution: Given (−3, −5) and (2, 1), calculate the difference of the y-values divided by the difference of the x-values. Since subtraction is not commutative, take care to be consistent when subtracting the coordinates. Answer: m = 6 5   We can graph the line described in the previous example and verify that the slope is 6/5. Certainly the graph is optional; the beauty of the slope formula is that we can obtain the slope, given two points, using only algebra.   Example 3: Find the slope of the line passing through (−4, 3) and (−1, −7). Solution: Answer: m = − 10 3   When using the slope formula, take care to be consistent since order does matter. You must subtract the coordinates of the first point from the coordinates of the second point for both the numerator and the denominator in the same order.   Example 4: Find the slope of the line passing through (7, −2) and (−5, −2). Solution: Answer: m = 0 . As an exercise, plot the given two points and verify that they lie on a horizontal line.   Example 5: Find the slope of the line passing through (−4, −3) and (−4, 5). Solution: Answer: The slope m is undefined. As an exercise, plot the given two points and verify that they lie on a vertical line.   Try this! Calculate the slope of the line passing through (−2, 3) and (5, −5). Answer: m = − 8 7 Video Solution When considering the slope as a rate of change it is important to include the correct units.   Example 6: A Corvette Coupe was purchased new in 1970 for about $5,200 and depreciated in value over time until it was sold in 1985 for $1,300. At this point, the car was beginning to be considered a classic and started to increase in value. In the year 2000, when the car was 30 years old, it sold at auction for $10,450. The following line graph depicts the value of the car over time. a. Determine the rate at which the car depreciated in value from 1970 to 1985. b. Determine the rate at which the car appreciated in value from 1985 to 2000. Solution: Notice that the value depends on the age of the car and that the slope measures the rate in dollars per year. a. The slope of the line segment depicting the value for the first 15 years is Answer: The value of the car depreciated $260 per year from 1970 to 1985. b. The slope of the line segment depicting the value for the next 15 years is Answer: The value of the car appreciated $610 per year from 1985 to 2000.  || 