Set-Builder Notation In this text, we use interval notation. However, other resources that you are likely to encounter use an alternate method for describing sets called set-builder notation A system for describing sets using familiar mathematical notation. . We have used set notation to list the elements such as the integers The braces group the elements of the set and the ellipsis marks indicate that the integers continue forever. In this section, we wish to describe intervals of real numbers—for example, the real numbers greater than or equal to 2. Since the set is too large to list, set-builder notation allows us to describe it using familiar mathematical notation. An example of set-builder notation follows: Here x∈R describes the type of number, where the symbol (∈) is read “element of.” This implies that the variable x represents a real number. The vertical bar (|) is read “such that.” Finally, the statement x ≥ 2 is the condition that describes the set using mathematical notation. At this point in our study of algebra, it is assumed that all variables represent real numbers. For this reason, you can omit the “∈R” and write { x | x ≥ 2 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal to 2.” To describe compound inequalities such as x < 3   or   x ≥ 6 , write { x | x < 3   or   x ≥ 6 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is less than 3 or x is greater than or equal to 6.” Write bounded intervals, such as − 1 ≤ x < 3 , as { x | − 1 ≤ x < 3 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal to −1 and less than 3.” Set-Builder Notation In this text, we use interval notation. However, other resources that you are likely to encounter use an alternate method for describing sets called set-builder notation A system for describing sets using familiar mathematical notation. . We have used set notation to list the elements such as the integers The braces group the elements of the set and the ellipsis marks indicate that the integers continue forever. In this section, we wish to describe intervals of real numbers—for example, the real numbers greater than or equal to 2. Since the set is too large to list, set-builder notation allows us to describe it using familiar mathematical notation. An example of set-builder notation follows: Here x∈R describes the type of number, where the symbol (∈) is read “element of.” This implies that the variable x represents a real number. The vertical bar (|) is read “such that.” Finally, the statement x ≥ 2 is the condition that describes the set using mathematical notation. At this point in our study of algebra, it is assumed that all variables represent real numbers. For this reason, you can omit the “∈R” and write { x | x ≥ 2 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal to 2.” To describe compound inequalities such as x < 3   or   x ≥ 6 , write { x | x < 3   or   x ≥ 6 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is less than 3 or x is greater than or equal to 6.” Write bounded intervals, such as − 1 ≤ x < 3 , as { x | − 1 ≤ x < 3 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal to −1 and less than 3.”  || 