3.2 The Graphing Calculator It’s time to learn how to use a graphing calculator to sketch the graph of an equation. We will use the TI-84 graphing calculator in this section, but the skills we introduce will work equally well on the ancient TI-82 and the less ancient TI-83 graphing calculators. In this introduction to the graphing calculator, you will need to use several keys on the upper half of the graphing calculator (see Figure 3.21). The up- and-down and left-and-right arrow keys are located in the upper right corner of Figure 3.21. These are used for moving the cursor on the calculator view screen and various menus. Immediately below these arrow keys is the CLEAR button, used to clear the view screen and equations in the Y= menu. Figure 3.21: Top half of calculator. It is not uncommon that people share their graphing calculators with Above each button are one or more commands located on the calculator’s case. Press the 2ND key to access a command having the same color as the 2ND key. Press the ALPHA key to access a command having the same color as the ALPHA key. friends who make changes to the settings in the calculator. Let’s take a moment to make sure we have some common settings on our calculators. Locate and push the MODE in the first row of Figure 3.21. This will open the window shown in Figure 3.22. Make sure that the mode settings on your calculator are identical to the ones shown in Figure 3.22. If not, use the up-and- down arrow keys to move to the non-matching line item. This should place a blinking cursor over the first item on the line. Press the ENTER button on the lower-right corner of your calculator to make the selection permanent. Once you’ve completed your changes, press 2ND MODE again to quit the MODE menu. Next, note the buttons across the first row of the calculator, located imme- The QUIT command is located above the MODE button on the calculator case and is used to exit the current menu. diately below the view screen. Y= WINDOW ZOOM TRACE GRAPH 172 CHAPTER 3. INTRODUCTION TO GRAPHING Just above the Y= button are the words STAT PLOT, printed in the same color as the 2ND button located near the top left of the calculator (see Figure 3.21). Press the 2ND button, then the Y= button. This opens the stat plot menu shown in Figure 3.23. Figure 3.22: Settings in the MODE window. Figure 3.23: The STAT PLOT menu. We need all of the stat plots to be “off.” If any of the three stat plots are “on,” select 4:PlotsOff (press the number 4 on your keyboard), then press the ENTER key on the lower right corner of your calculator. That’s it! Your calculator should now be ready for the upcoming exercises. You Try It! EXAMPLE 1. Use the graphing calculator to sketch the graph of y = x+1.Use the graphing calculator to sketch the graph of y = −x+ 3. Solution: Recall that we drew the graph of y = x + 1 by hand in Example 1 of Section 3.1 (see Figure 3.9). In this example, we will use the graphing cal- culator to produce the same result. Press the Y= button. The window shown in Figure 3.24 appears. If any equations appear in the Y= menu of Figure 3.24, use the up-and-down arrow keys and the CLEAR button (located below the up-and-down and left-and- right arrow keys) to delete them. Figure 3.24: Press the Y= button to open the Y= menu. Figure 3.25: Enter y = x + 1 in Y1=. Next, move the cursor to Y1=, then enter the equation y = x+ 1 in Y1 with the following button keystrokes. The result is shown in Figure 3.25. 3.2. THE GRAPHING CALCULATOR 173 X,T, θ, n + 1 ENTER Next, select the ZOOM key on the top row of the calculator. This will open the window shown in Figure 3.26. From the ZOOM menu, select 6:ZStandard. There are two ways to make this selection: 1. Use the down-arrow key to move downward in the ZOOM menu until 6:ZStandard is highlighted, then press the ENTER key. 2. A quicker alternative is to simply press the number 6 on the calculator keyboard to select 6:ZStandard. The resulting graph of y = x+1 is shown in Figure 3.27. Note that the result is identical to the graph of y = x+1 drawn by hand in Example 3 of Section 3.1 (see Figure 3.9). Figure 3.26: Select 6:ZStandard from the ZOOM menu. Figure 3.27: The graph of y = x+1 is a line. Answer: ! You Try It! EXAMPLE 2. Use the graphing calculator to sketch the graph of y = x2−7. Use the graphing calculator to sketch the graph of y = −x2 + 4.Solution: Recall that we drew the graph of y = x 2− 7 by hand in Example 4 of Section 3.1 (see Figure 3.20). In this example, we will use the graphing calculator to produce the same result. Press the Y= button and enter the equation y = x2 − 7 into Y1 (see Figure 3.28) with the following keystrokes: X,T, θ, n ∧ 2 − 7 ENTER The caret (∧) symbol (see Figure 3.21) is located in the last column of buttons on the calculator, just underneath the CLEAR button, and means “raised to.” The caret button is used for entering exponents. For example, x2 is entered as X∧2, x3 is entered as X∧3, and so on. 174 CHAPTER 3. INTRODUCTION TO GRAPHING Press the ZOOM button, then select 6:ZStandard from the ZOOM menu to produce the graph of y = x2−7 shown in Figure 3.29. Note that the result in Figure 3.29 agrees with the graph of y = x2−7 we drew by hand in Example 4 of Section 3.1 (see Figure 3.20). Figure 3.28: Enter y = x2 − 7 in Y1. Figure 3.29: The graph of y = x2−7 is a parabola. Answer: ! 3.2 The Graphing Calculator It’s time to learn how to use a graphing calculator to sketch the graph of an equation. We will use the TI-84 graphing calculator in this section, but the skills we introduce will work equally well on the ancient TI-82 and the less ancient TI-83 graphing calculators. In this introduction to the graphing calculator, you will need to use several keys on the upper half of the graphing calculator (see Figure 3.21). The up- and-down and left-and-right arrow keys are located in the upper right corner of Figure 3.21. These are used for moving the cursor on the calculator view screen and various menus. Immediately below these arrow keys is the CLEAR button, used to clear the view screen and equations in the Y= menu. Figure 3.21: Top half of calculator. It is not uncommon that people share their graphing calculators with Above each button are one or more commands located on the calculator’s case. Press the 2ND key to access a command having the same color as the 2ND key. Press the ALPHA key to access a command having the same color as the ALPHA key. friends who make changes to the settings in the calculator. Let’s take a moment to make sure we have some common settings on our calculators. Locate and push the MODE in the first row of Figure 3.21. This will open the window shown in Figure 3.22. Make sure that the mode settings on your calculator are identical to the ones shown in Figure 3.22. If not, use the up-and- down arrow keys to move to the non-matching line item. This should place a blinking cursor over the first item on the line. Press the ENTER button on the lower-right corner of your calculator to make the selection permanent. Once you’ve completed your changes, press 2ND MODE again to quit the MODE menu. Next, note the buttons across the first row of the calculator, located imme- The QUIT command is located above the MODE button on the calculator case and is used to exit the current menu. diately below the view screen. Y= WINDOW ZOOM TRACE GRAPH 172 CHAPTER 3. INTRODUCTION TO GRAPHING Just above the Y= button are the words STAT PLOT, printed in the same color as the 2ND button located near the top left of the calculator (see Figure 3.21). Press the 2ND button, then the Y= button. This opens the stat plot menu shown in Figure 3.23. Figure 3.22: Settings in the MODE window. Figure 3.23: The STAT PLOT menu. We need all of the stat plots to be “off.” If any of the three stat plots are “on,” select 4:PlotsOff (press the number 4 on your keyboard), then press the ENTER key on the lower right corner of your calculator. That’s it! Your calculator should now be ready for the upcoming exercises. You Try It! EXAMPLE 1. Use the graphing calculator to sketch the graph of y = x+1.Use the graphing calculator to sketch the graph of y = −x+ 3. Solution: Recall that we drew the graph of y = x + 1 by hand in Example 1 of Section 3.1 (see Figure 3.9). In this example, we will use the graphing cal- culator to produce the same result. Press the Y= button. The window shown in Figure 3.24 appears. If any equations appear in the Y= menu of Figure 3.24, use the up-and-down arrow keys and the CLEAR button (located below the up-and-down and left-and- right arrow keys) to delete them. Figure 3.24: Press the Y= button to open the Y= menu. Figure 3.25: Enter y = x + 1 in Y1=. Next, move the cursor to Y1=, then enter the equation y = x+ 1 in Y1 with the following button keystrokes. The result is shown in Figure 3.25. 3.2. THE GRAPHING CALCULATOR 173 X,T, θ, n + 1 ENTER Next, select the ZOOM key on the top row of the calculator. This will open the window shown in Figure 3.26. From the ZOOM menu, select 6:ZStandard. There are two ways to make this selection: 1. Use the down-arrow key to move downward in the ZOOM menu until 6:ZStandard is highlighted, then press the ENTER key. 2. A quicker alternative is to simply press the number 6 on the calculator keyboard to select 6:ZStandard. The resulting graph of y = x+1 is shown in Figure 3.27. Note that the result is identical to the graph of y = x+1 drawn by hand in Example 3 of Section 3.1 (see Figure 3.9). Figure 3.26: Select 6:ZStandard from the ZOOM menu. Figure 3.27: The graph of y = x+1 is a line. Answer: ! You Try It! EXAMPLE 2. Use the graphing calculator to sketch the graph of y = x2−7. Use the graphing calculator to sketch the graph of y = −x2 + 4.Solution: Recall that we drew the graph of y = x 2− 7 by hand in Example 4 of Section 3.1 (see Figure 3.20). In this example, we will use the graphing calculator to produce the same result. Press the Y= button and enter the equation y = x2 − 7 into Y1 (see Figure 3.28) with the following keystrokes: X,T, θ, n ∧ 2 − 7 ENTER The caret (∧) symbol (see Figure 3.21) is located in the last column of buttons on the calculator, just underneath the CLEAR button, and means “raised to.” The caret button is used for entering exponents. For example, x2 is entered as X∧2, x3 is entered as X∧3, and so on. 174 CHAPTER 3. INTRODUCTION TO GRAPHING Press the ZOOM button, then select 6:ZStandard from the ZOOM menu to produce the graph of y = x2−7 shown in Figure 3.29. Note that the result in Figure 3.29 agrees with the graph of y = x2−7 we drew by hand in Example 4 of Section 3.1 (see Figure 3.20). Figure 3.28: Enter y = x2 − 7 in Y1. Figure 3.29: The graph of y = x2−7 is a parabola. Answer: !  || Reproducing Calculator Results on Homework Paper In this section we delineate recommendations and requirements when repro- ducing graphing calculator results on your homework paper. Consider again the final result of Example 2 shown in Figure 3.29. To determine the scale at each end of each axis, press the WINDOW button on the topmost row of buttons on your calculator. The WINDOW settings for Figure 3.29 are shown in Figure 3.30. Figure 3.31 presents a visual explanation of each of the entries Xmin, Xmax, Ymin, and Ymax. Figure 3.30: The WINDOW pa- rameters. x y −10 10 −10 10 Xmin Xmax Ymin Ymax Figure 3.31: Xmin, Xmax, Ymin, and Ymax contain the scale at the end of each axis. 3.2. THE GRAPHING CALCULATOR 175 Xmin and Xmax indicate the scale at the left- and right-hand ends of the x-axis, respectively, while Ymin and Ymax indicate the scale at the bottom- and top-ends of the y-axis. Finally, as we shall see shortly, Xscl and Yscl control the spacing between tick marks on the x- and y-axes, respectively. When reproducing the graph in your calculator viewing window on your homework paper, follow the Calculator Submission Guidelines. Calculator Submission Guidelines. 1. All lines (including the horizontal and vertical axes) should be drawn with a ruler. All curves should be drawn freehand. 2. Set up a coordinate system on your homework paper that mimics closely the coordinate system in your calculator’s view screen. Label your axes (usually with x and y). 3. Indicate the scale at each end of each axis. Use Xmin, Xmax, Ymin, and Ymax in the WINDOW menu for this purpose. 4. Copy the graph from your calculator’s viewing window onto your coordi- nate system. Label the graph with its equation. For example, to report the results of Figure 3.29, draw the axes with a ruler, label the horizontal axis with x, the vertical axis with y, then place the values of Xmin, Xmax, Ymin, and Ymax at the appropriate end of each axis (see Figure 3.32). x y −10 10 −10 10 y = x2 − 7 Figure 3.32: Reporting the graph of y = x2 − 7 on your homework paper. Because the graph is a curve, make a freehand copy that closely mimics the graph shown in Figure 3.29, then label it with its equation, as shown in 176 CHAPTER 3. INTRODUCTION TO GRAPHING Figure 3.32.  || Adjusting the Viewing Window Note that Figure 3.31 gives us some sense of the meaning of the “standard viewing window” produced by selecting 6:ZStandard from the ZOOM menu. Each time you select 6:ZStandard from the ZOOMmenu, Xmin is set to −10, Xmax to 10, and Xscl to 1 (distance between the tick marks on the x-axis). Similarly, Ymin is set to −10, Ymax to 10, and Yscl to 1 (distance between the tick marks on the y-axis). You can, however, override these settings as we shall see in the next example. You Try It! EXAMPLE 3. Sketch the graphs of the following equations on the sameApproximate the point of intersection of the graphs of y = x− 4 and y = 5− x using the TRACE button. viewing screen. y = 5 4 x− 3 and y = 2 3 x+ 4 Adjust the viewing window so that the point at which the graphs intersect (where the graphs cross one another) is visible in the viewing window, then use the TRACE button to approximate the coordinates of the point of intersection. Solution: We must first decide on the proper syntax to use when entering the equations. In the case of the first equation, note that y = 5 4 x− 3 is pronounced “y equals five-fourths x minus three,” and means “y equals five- fourths times x minus three.” Enter this equation into Y1 in the Y= menu as 5/4*X−3 (see Figure 3.33), using the button keystrokes: 5 ÷ 4 × X,T, θ, n − 3 The division and times buttons are located in the rightmost column of the calculuator. Similarly, enter the second equation into Y2 as 2/3*X+4 using the button keystrokes: 2 ÷ 3 × X,T, θ, n + 4 Select 6:ZStandard in the ZOOM menu to produce the lines in Figure 3.34. When we examine the resulting graphs in Figure 3.34, it appears that their point of intersection will occur off the screen above and to the right of the upper right-corner of the current viewing window. With this thought in mind, let’s extend the x-axis to the right by increasing the value of Xmax to 20. Further, let’s extend the y-axis upward by increasing the value of Ymin to 20. Press the WINDOW button on the top row of the calculator, then make the adjustments shown in Figure 3.35. 3.2. THE GRAPHING CALCULATOR 177 Figure 3.33: Enter equations. Figure 3.34: The graphs. Figure 3.35: Adjusting the viewing window. Figure 3.36: The point of intersec- tion is visible in the new viewing window. If we select 6:ZStandard from the ZOOM menu, our changes to the WIN- DOW parameters will be discarded and the viewing window will be returned to the “standard viewing window.” If we want to keep our changes to the WIN- DOW parameters, the correct approach at this point is to push the GRAPH button on the top row of the calculator. The resulting graph is shown in Figure 3.36. Note that the point of intersection of the two lines is now visible in the viewing window. The image in Figure 3.36 is ready for recording onto your homework. How- ever, we think we would have a better picture if we made a couple more changes: 1. It would be nicer if the point of intersection were more centered in the viewing window. 2. There are far too many tick marks. With these thoughts in mind, make the changes to the WINDOW parame- ters shown in Figure 3.37, then push the GRAPH button to produce the image in Figure 3.38. 178 CHAPTER 3. INTRODUCTION TO GRAPHING Figure 3.37: A final adjustment of the viewing window. Figure 3.38: A centered point of in- tersection and fewer tick marks. Finally, push the TRACE button on the top row of buttons, then use theThe TRACE button is only capable of providing a very rough approximation of the point of intersection. In Chapter 4, we’ll introduce the intersection utility on the CALC menu, which will report a much more accurate result. left- and right-arrow keys to move the cursor atop the point of intersection. An approximation of the coordinates of the point of intersection are reported at the bottom of the viewing window (see Figure 3.39). Figure 3.39: Approximate coordi- nates of the point of intersection re- ported by the TRACE button. x y −5 25 −5 25 (11.914894, 11.893617) y = 5 4 x− 3 y = 2 3 x+ 4 Figure 3.40: Reporting the answer on your homework. In reporting the answer on our homework paper, note that we followed the Calculator Submission Guidelines on page 175. Answer: (4.68, 0.68) ! 3.2. THE GRAPHING CALCULATOR 179 ! ! !  || 