Opposites The opposite Real numbers whose graphs are on opposite sides of the origin with the same distance to the origin. of any real number a is −a. Opposite real numbers are the same distance from the origin on a number line, but their graphs lie on opposite sides of the origin and the numbers have opposite signs. For example, we say that the opposite of 10 is −10. Next, consider the opposite of a negative number. Given the integer −7, the integer the same distance from the origin and with the opposite sign is +7, or just 7. Therefore, we say that the opposite of −7 is −(−7) = 7. This idea leads to what is often referred to as the double-negative property The opposite of a negative number is positive: −(−a) = a. . For any real number a,   Example 3: What is the opposite of − 3 4 ? Solution: Here we apply the double-negative property. Answer: 3 4   Example 4: Simplify: − ( − ( 4 ) ) . Solution: Start with the innermost parentheses by finding the opposite of +4. Answer: 4   Example 5: Simplify: − ( − ( − 2 ) ) . Solution: Apply the double-negative property starting with the innermost parentheses. Answer: −2 Tip If there is an even number of consecutive negative signs, then the result is positive. If there is an odd number of consecutive negative signs, then the result is negative.   Try this! Simplify: − ( − ( − ( 5 ) ) ) . Answer: −5 Video Solution Opposites The opposite Real numbers whose graphs are on opposite sides of the origin with the same distance to the origin. of any real number a is −a. Opposite real numbers are the same distance from the origin on a number line, but their graphs lie on opposite sides of the origin and the numbers have opposite signs. For example, we say that the opposite of 10 is −10. Next, consider the opposite of a negative number. Given the integer −7, the integer the same distance from the origin and with the opposite sign is +7, or just 7. Therefore, we say that the opposite of −7 is −(−7) = 7. This idea leads to what is often referred to as the double-negative property The opposite of a negative number is positive: −(−a) = a. . For any real number a,   Example 3: What is the opposite of − 3 4 ? Solution: Here we apply the double-negative property. Answer: 3 4   Example 4: Simplify: − ( − ( 4 ) ) . Solution: Start with the innermost parentheses by finding the opposite of +4. Answer: 4   Example 5: Simplify: − ( − ( − 2 ) ) . Solution: Apply the double-negative property starting with the innermost parentheses. Answer: −2 Tip If there is an even number of consecutive negative signs, then the result is positive. If there is an odd number of consecutive negative signs, then the result is negative.   Try this! Simplify: − ( − ( − ( 5 ) ) ) . Answer: −5 Video Solution  || 