Applications Involving Quadratic Equations In this section, the algebraic setups usually consist of a quadratic equation where the solutions may not be integers.   Example 10: The height of a triangle is 2 inches less than twice the length of its base. If the total area of the triangle is 11 square inches, then find the lengths of the base and height. Round answers to the nearest hundredth. Solution: Use the formula A = 1 2 b h and the fact that the area is 11 square inches to set up an algebraic equation. To rewrite this quadratic equation in standard form, first distribute 1 2 x . Use the coefficients, a = 1, b = −1, and c = −11, to determine the type of solutions. Since the discriminant is positive, expect two real solutions. In this problem, disregard the negative solution and consider only the positive solution. Back substitute to find the height. Answer: The base measures 1 + 3 5 √ 2 ≈ 3.85 inches and the height is − 1 + 3 5 √ ≈ 5.71 inches.   Example 11: The sum of the squares of two consecutive positive integers is 481. Find the integers. Solution: The algebraic setup follows: Rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form. When the coefficients are large, sometimes it is less work to use the quadratic formula instead of trying to factor it. In this case, a = 1 , b = 1 , and c = − 240 . Substitute into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Since the problem calls for positive integers, disregard the negative solution and choose n = 15. Answer: The positive integers are 15 and 16. Applications Involving Quadratic Equations In this section, the algebraic setups usually consist of a quadratic equation where the solutions may not be integers.   Example 10: The height of a triangle is 2 inches less than twice the length of its base. If the total area of the triangle is 11 square inches, then find the lengths of the base and height. Round answers to the nearest hundredth. Solution: Use the formula A = 1 2 b h and the fact that the area is 11 square inches to set up an algebraic equation. To rewrite this quadratic equation in standard form, first distribute 1 2 x . Use the coefficients, a = 1, b = −1, and c = −11, to determine the type of solutions. Since the discriminant is positive, expect two real solutions. In this problem, disregard the negative solution and consider only the positive solution. Back substitute to find the height. Answer: The base measures 1 + 3 5 √ 2 ≈ 3.85 inches and the height is − 1 + 3 5 √ ≈ 5.71 inches.   Example 11: The sum of the squares of two consecutive positive integers is 481. Find the integers. Solution: The algebraic setup follows: Rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form. When the coefficients are large, sometimes it is less work to use the quadratic formula instead of trying to factor it. In this case, a = 1 , b = 1 , and c = − 240 . Substitute into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Since the problem calls for positive integers, disregard the negative solution and choose n = 15. Answer: The positive integers are 15 and 16.  || 