 ||  || Whole Numbers Natural Numbers together with “zero” 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, . . .   About the Number Zero What is zero? Is it a number? How can the number of nothing be a number? Is zero nothing, or is it something? Well, before this starts to sound like a Zen koan, let’s look at how we use the numeral “0.” Arab and Indian scholars were the first to use zero to develop the place-value number system that we use today. When we write a number, we use only the ten numerals 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. These numerals can stand for ones, tens, hundreds, or whatever depending on their position in the number. In order for this to work, we have to have a way to mark an empty place in a number, or the place values won’t come out right. This is what the numeral “0” does. Think of it as an empty container, signifying that that place is empty. For example, the number 302 has 3 hundreds, no tens, and 2 ones. So is zero a number? Well, that is a matter of definition, but in mathematics we tend to call it a duck if it acts like a duck, or at least if it’s behavior is mostly duck-like. The number zero obeys most of the same rules of arithmetic that ordinary numbers do, so we call it a number. It is a rather special number, though, because it doesn’t quite obey all the same laws as other numbers—you can’t divide by zero, for example. Note for math purists: In the strict axiomatic field development of the real numbers, both 0 and 1 are singled out for special treatment. Zero is the additive identity, because adding zero to a number does not change the number. Similarly, 1 is the multiplicative identity because multiplying a number by 1 does not change it.     Even more abstract than zero is the idea of negative numbers. If, in addition to not having any sheep, the farmer owes someone 3 sheep, you could say that the number of sheep that the farmer owns is negative 3. It took longer for the idea of negative numbers to be accepted, but eventually they came to be seen as something we could call “numbers.” The expanded set of numbers that we get by including negative versions of the counting numbers is called the integers.  || Integers Whole numbers plus negatives . . . –4, –3, –2, –1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . .   About Negative Numbers How can you have less than zero? Well, do you have a checking account? Having less than zero means that you have to add some to it just to get it up to zero. And if you take more out of it, it will be even further less than zero, meaning that you will have to add even more just to get it up to zero. The strict mathematical definition goes something like this: For every real number n, there exists its opposite, denoted – n, such that the sum of n and – n is zero, or n + (– n) = 0 Note that the negative sign in front of a number is part of the symbol for that number: The symbol “–3” is one object—it stands for “negative three,” the name of the number that is three units less than zero. The number zero is its own opposite, and zero is considered to be neither negative nor positive. Read the discussion of subtraction for more about the meanings of the symbol “–.”     The next generalization that we can make is to include the idea of fractions. While it is unlikely that a farmer owns a fractional number of sheep, many other things in real life are measured in fractions, like a half-cup of sugar. If we add fractions to the set of integers, we get the set of rational numbers.  || Rational Numbers All numbers of the form , where a and b are integers (but b cannot be zero) Rational numbers include what we usually call fractions Notice that the word “rational” contains the word “ratio,” which should remind you of fractions.   The bottom of the fraction is called the denominator. Think of it as the denomination—it tells you what size fraction we are talking about: fourths, fifths, etc.   The top of the fraction is called the numerator. It tells you how many fourths, fifths, or whatever.   RESTRICTION: The denominator cannot be zero! (But the numerator can) If the numerator is zero, then the whole fraction is just equal to zero. If I have zero thirds or zero fourths, than I don’t have anything. However, it makes no sense at all to talk about a fraction measured in “zeroths.” Fractions can be numbers smaller than 1, like 1/2 or 3/4 (called proper fractions), or they can be numbers bigger than 1 (called improper fractions), like two-and-a-half, which we could also write as 5/2 All integers can also be thought of as rational numbers, with a denominator of 1: This means that all the previous sets of numbers (natural numbers, whole numbers, and integers) are subsets of the rational numbers. Now it might seem as though the set of rational numbers would cover every possible case, but that is not so. There are numbers that cannot be expressed as a fraction, and these numbers are called irrational because they are not rational.  || Irrational Numbers Cannot be expressed as a ratio of integers. As decimals they never repeat or terminate (rationals always do one or the other) Examples:  Rational (terminates) Rational (repeats) Rational (repeats) Rational (repeats) Irrational (never repeats or terminates) Irrational (never repeats or terminates)  || More on Irrational Numbers More on Irrational Numbers It might seem that the rational numbers would cover any possible number. After all, if I measure a length with a ruler, it is going to come out to some fraction—maybe 2 and 3/4 inches. Suppose I then measure it with more precision. I will get something like 2 and 5/8 inches, or maybe 2 and 23/32 inches. It seems that however close I look it is going to be some fraction. However, this is not always the case. Imagine a line segment exactly one unit long:     Now draw another line one unit long, perpendicular to the first one, like this:     Now draw the diagonal connecting the two ends: Congratulations! You have just drawn a length that cannot be measured by any rational number. According to the Pythagorean Theorem, the length of this diagonal is the square root of 2; that is, the number which when multiplied by itself gives 2. According to my calculator, But my calculator only stops at eleven decimal places because it can hold no more. This number actually goes on forever past the decimal point, without the pattern ever terminating or repeating. This is because if the pattern ever stopped or repeated, you could write the number as a fraction—and it can be proven that the square root of 2 can never be written as for any choice of integers for a and b. The proof of this was considered quite shocking when it was first demonstrated by the followers of Pythagoras 26 centuries ago.    || The Real Numbers Rationals + Irrationals All points on the number line Or all possible distances on the number line When we put the irrational numbers together with the rational numbers, we finally have the complete set of real numbers. Any number that represents an amount of something, such as a weight, a volume, or the distance between two points, will always be a real number. The following diagram illustrates the relationships of the sets that make up the real numbers.  || An Ordered Set The real numbers have the property that they are ordered, which means that given any two different numbers we can always say that one is greater or less than the other. A more formal way of saying this is: For any two real numbers a and b, one and only one of the following three statements is true: 1.      a is less than b, (expressed as a < b) 2.      a is equal to b, (expressed as a = b) 3.      a is greater than b, (expressed as a > b)  || The Number Line The ordered nature of the real numbers lets us arrange them along a line (imagine that the line is made up of an infinite number of points all packed so closely together that they form a solid line). The points are ordered so that points to the right are greater than points to the left: Every real number corresponds to a distance on the number line, starting at the center (zero). Negative numbers represent distances to the left of zero, and positive numbers are distances to the right. The arrows on the end indicate that it keeps going forever in both directions.  || Absolute Value  When we want to talk about how “large” a number is without regard as to whether it is positive or negative, we use the absolute value function. The absolute value of a number is the distance from that number to the origin (zero) on the number line. That distance is always given as a non-negative number. In short: If a number is positive (or zero), the absolute value function does nothing to it: If a number is negative, the absolute value function makes it positive: WARNING: If there is arithmetic to do inside the absolute value sign, you must do it before taking the absolute value—the absolute value function acts on the result of whatever is inside it. For example, a common error is    (WRONG) The correct result is  ||  || Addition of Negative Numbers What does it mean to add negative numbers? We view a negative number as a displacement to the left on the number line, so we follow the same procedure as before but when we add a negative number we take that many steps to the left instead of the right. Examples:  2 + (–3) = –1 First we move two steps to the right, and then three steps to the left: (–2) + 3 = 1 We move two steps to the left, and then three steps to the right:  (–2) + (–3) = –5 Two steps to the left, and then three more steps to the left:   From these examples, we can make the following observations: 1.      If we add two positive numbers together, the result will be positive 2.      If we add two negative numbers together, the result will be negative 3.      If we add a positive and a negative number together, the result could be positive or negative, depending on which number represents the biggest step.  ||  Subtraction There are two ways to define subtraction: by a related addition statement, or as adding the opposite. Subtraction as Related Addition a – b = c if and only if a = b + c Subtraction as Adding the Opposite For every real number b there exists its opposite –b, and we can define subtraction as adding the opposite: a – b = a + (-b) ·        In algebra it usually best to always think of subtraction as adding the opposite  || Distinction Between Subtraction and Negation The symbol “–” means two different things in math. If it is between two numbers it means subtraction, but if it is in front of one number it means the opposite (or negative) of that number. Subtraction is binary (acts on two numbers), but negation is unary (acts on only one number).           Calculators have two different keys to perform these functions. The key with a plain minus sign is only for subtraction:   Negation is performed by a key that looks like one of these: Remember that subtraction can always be thought of as adding the opposite. In fact, we could get along just fine without ever using subtraction.  || Subtraction on the Number Line Addition of a positive number moves to the right, and adding a negative moves to the left. Subtraction is just the opposite: Subtraction of a positive number moves to the left, and subtracting a negative moves to the right. ·     Notice that subtracting a negative is the same thing as adding a positive.  ||  || Multiplication with Signed Numbers We can apply this same rule to make sense out of what we mean by a positive number times a negative number. For example, 3 × (–4) just means to take 3 of the number “negative four” and add them together: 3 × (–4) = (–4) + (–4) + (–4) = –12 Unfortunately, this scheme breaks down when we try to multiply a negative number times a number. It doesn’t make sense to try to write down a number a negative number of times. There are two ways to look at this problem. One way is to use the fact that multiplication obeys the commutative law, which means that the order of multiplication does not matter: a × b = b × a. This lets us write a negative times a positive as a positive times a negative and proceed as before: (–3) × 4 = 4 × (–3) = (–3) + (–3) + (–3) + (–3) = –12 However, we are still in trouble when it comes to multiplying a negative times a negative. A better way to look at this problem is to demand that multiplication obey a consistent pattern. If we look at a multiplication table for positive numbers and then extend it to include negative numbers, the results in the table should continue to change in the same pattern. For example, consider the following multiplication table: a b a × b 3 2 6 2 2 4 1 2 2 0 2 0 The numbers in the last column are decreasing by 2 each time, so if we let the values for a continue into the negative numbers we should keep decreasing the product by 2: a b a × b 3 2 6 2 2 4 1 2 2 0 2 0 –1 2 –2 –2 2 –4 –3 2 –6 We can make a bigger multiplication table that shows many different possibilities. By keeping the step sizes the same in each row and column, even as we extend into the negative numbers, we see that the following sign rules hold for multiplication:  || Sign Rules for Multiplication (+)(+) = (+) (–)(–) = (+) (–)(+) = (–) (+)(–) = (–) Multiplication Table Notice how the step size in each row or column remains consistent, regardless of whether we are multiplying positive or negative numbers.   -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 -5 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 -20 -25 -4 20 16 12 8 4 0 -4 -8 -12 -16 -20 -3 15 12 9 6 3 0 -3 -6 -9 -12 -15 -2 10 8 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 -10 -1 5 4 3 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 -4 -5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 2 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 3 -15 -12 -9 -6 -3 0 3 6 9 12 15 4 -20 -16 -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 16 20 5 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25   For math purists, here’s the real reason: The Real Reason It should be obvious that the presentation of the rules of arithmetic given here is just a collection of motivational arguments, not a formal development. The formal development of the real number system starts with the field axioms. The field axioms are postulated, and then all the other properties follow from them. The field axioms are The associative and commutative laws for addition and multiplication The existence of the additive and multiplicative identities (0 and 1) The existence of the additive inverse (opposites, or negatives) and the multiplicative inverse (the reciprocal) The distributive law All of these are essential, but the distributive law is particularly important because it is what distinguishes the behavior of multiplication from addition. Namely, multiplication distributes over addition but not vice-versa. The rules of arithmetic like “a negative times a negative gives a positive” are what they are because that is the only way the field axioms would still hold. For example, the distributive law requires that –2(3 – 2) = (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) We can evaluate the left side of this equation by following the order of operations, which says to do what is in parentheses first, so –2(3 – 2) = –2(1) = –2. Now for the distributive law to be true, the right side must also be equal to -2, so (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) = –2 If we use our sign rules for multiplication then it works out the way it should: (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) = –6 + 4 = –2    || Notation for Multiplication We are used to using the symbol “×” to represent multiplication in arithmetic, but in algebra we prefer to avoid that symbol because we like to use the letter “x” to represent a variable, and the two symbols can be easily confused. So instead, we adopt the following notation for multiplication: 1.      Multiplication is implied if two quantities are written side-by-side with no other symbol between them. Example:  ab means a × b. 2.      If a symbol is needed to prevent confusion, we use a dot.   Example:  If we need to show 3 times 5, we cannot just write them next to each other or it would look like the number thirty-five, so we write 3 · 5. We can also use parentheses to separate factors. 3 times 5 could be written as 3(5) or (3)5 or (3)(5).  || Division There are two ways to think of division: as implying a related multiplication, or as multiplying by the reciprocal. Division as Related Multiplication The statement “12 ÷ 3 = 4” is true only because 3 × 4 = 12. A division problem is really asking the question “What number can I multiply the divisor by to get the dividend?”; and so every division equation implies an equivalent multiplication equation. In general: a ÷ b = c if and only if a = b × c This also shows why you cannot divide by zero. If we asked “What is six divided by zero?” we would mean “What number times zero is equal to six?”, but any number times zero gives zero, so there is no answer to this question.  || Multiplicative Inverse (The Reciprocal) For every real number a (except zero) there exists a real number denoted by 1/a such that a(1/a) = 1 The number 1/a is called the reciprocal or multiplicative inverse of a. Note that the reciprocal of 1/a is a. The reciprocal of the reciprocal gives you back what you started with. This allows us to define division as multiplication by the reciprocal: a ÷ b = a × (1/b) This is usually the most convenient way to think of division when you are doing algebra.  || Notation for Division Instead of using the symbol “ ¸ ” to represent division, we prefer to write it using the fraction notation:  || Sign Rules for Division Because division can always be written as a multiplication by the reciprocal, it obeys the same sign rules as multiplication. If a positive is divided by a negative, or a negative divided by a positive, the result is negative: but if both numbers are the same sign, the result is positive:  ||  || Rules Product of Different Powers:    aman = am + n IMPORTANT: all the numbers must have the same bases  (the same ‘a’) Example:  (42)(43) = 45   This is easy to see if you write out the exponents:   (42)(43) = (4 · 4) · (4 · 4 · 4) = 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 = 45    WARNING: Do not attempt to use this rule for addition:   42 + 43 is NOT 45. In fact there is no way to simplify xn + xm if n and m are different powers. Power Raised to a Power:      Example:  (42)3 = 46   This is also easy to see if you expand the exponents:   (42)3 = (42)(42)(42) = (4 · 4) (4 · 4) (4 · 4) = 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 = 46   There are more rules for combining numbers with exponents, but this is enough for now.  || When we encounter an expression such as 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 22+3, it makes quite a difference how we choose which operations to perform first. We need a set of rules that would guide anyone to one unique value for this kind of expression. Some of these rules are simply based on convention, while others are forced on us by mathematical logic. In the chapter on the Properties of Real Numbers, you will see how the distributive law is consistent with these rules. The universally agreed-upon order in which to evaluate a mathematical expression is as follows:1. Parentheses from Inside OutBy “parentheses” we mean anything that acts as a grouping symbol, including anything inside symbols such as [ ], { }, |  | and . Any expression in the numerator or denominator of a fraction or in an exponent are also considered grouped and should be simplified before carrying out further operations. ·        If there are nested parentheses (parentheses inside parentheses), you work from the innermost parentheses outward.2. ExponentsAlso other special functions such as log, sin, cos, etc.3. Multiplication and Division, left to rightThe left-to-right order does not matter if only multiplication is involved, but it matters for division.4. Addition and Subtraction, left to rightThe left-to-right order does not matter if only addition is involved, but it matters for subtraction.Example:  Going back to our original example, 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 22+3Given: 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 22+3 The exponent is an implied grouping, so the 2 + 3 must be evaluated first: = 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 25 Now the exponent is carried out: = 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 32 Now the multiplication and division, left to right, using 15 ¸ 3 = 5 and 5 ´ 32 = 160: = 3 + 5 + 160 Now the addition, left to right: = 168  Calculator Note: Most modern calculators “know” the order of operations, and you can enter expressions pretty much as they are written. Some older calculators will carry out each operation as soon as its key is pushed, which can result in the operations being carried out in the wrong order. Try some examples if you are not sure how your calculator behaves.For example, if you enter3 + 4 × 5 =The correct answer should be 23, because the multiplication should be performed before the addition, giving 3 + 20. But if your calculator carries out the “3 + 4” before getting to the “ × 5”, it will show a result of 35 because it will see it as 7 × 5.  Calculator  Note: Use the parenthesis keys to force grouping. If you are evaluating an expression such asthe denominator needs to be simplified before doing the division. If you enter it into your calculator as 4 ÷ 3 + 5, it will evaluate the “ 4 ÷ 3 “ first, and then add 5 to the result, giving the incorrect answer of 6.3333. To make it perform the addition first, use parentheses:4 ÷ (3 + 5) = 0.5 In our example problem above, the “2 + 3” in the exponent is an implied grouping, and you would need to use parentheses. To enter that expression in your calculator, you would enter it as3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 2 ^ (2 + 3) =(on some calculators the exponent button is labeled “ ^ ”, while on others it is labeled “ yx ”) ||  || Mixed Number  Notation One way of expressing the improper fraction 5/4 is as the mixed number , which is read as “one and one-fourth.” This notation is potentially confusing and is not advised in algebra. One cause of confusion is that in algebra we use the convention that multiplication is implied when two quantities are written next to each other with no symbols in between. However, the mixed number notation implies addition, not multiplication. For example, means 1 plus one-quarter, and 3 1/2 = 3 + 1/2. It is possible to do arithmetic with mixed numbers by treating the whole number parts and the fractional parts separately, but it is generally more convenient in algebra to always write improper fractions. When you encounter a problem with mixed numbers, the first thing you should do is convert them to improper fractions.  || Conversion Mixed Number to Improper Fraction A.     Multiply the integer part with the bottom of the fraction part. B.     Add the result to the top of the fraction. The general formula is Improper Fraction to Mixed Number Do the division to get the integer part Put the remainder over the old denominator to get the fractional part.  || Equivalent Fractions Equivalent fractions are fractions that have the same value, for example     etc. Although all these fractions are written differently, they all represent the same quantity. You can measure a half-cup of sugar or two quarter-cups of sugar, or even four eighth-cups of sugar, and you will still have the same amount of sugar. ·       Multiply by a form of One A fraction can be converted into an equivalent fraction by multiplying it by a form of 1. The number 1 can be represented as a fraction because any number divided by itself is equal to 1 (remember that the fraction notation means the same thing as division). In other words,   etc. Now if you multiply a number by 1 it does not change its value, so if we multiply a fraction by another fraction that is equal to 1, we will not be changing the value of the original fraction. For example, In this case, 2/3 represents exactly the same quantity as 4/6, because all we did was to multiply 2/3 by the number 1, represented as the fraction 2/2. Multiplying the numerator and denominator by the same number to produce an equivalent fraction is called building up the fraction.  || Reduced Form Numerator and Denominator Have No Common Factors Procedure: 1.      Write out prime factorization of Numerator and Denominator 2.      Cancel all common factors This procedure is just the opposite of building up a fraction by multiplying it by a fraction equivalent to 1.   Prime Factors A number is prime if it has no whole number factors other than 1 times itself, that is, the number cannot be written as a product of two whole numbers (except 1 times itself). Example:  6 is not prime because it can be written as 2 × 3 Example:  7 is prime because the only way to write it as a product of whole numbers is 1 × 7 The first few prime numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, . . . There are an infinite number of prime numbers (the list goes on forever).  Any non-prime number can be decomposed into a product of prime numbers Example:  4 = 2 × 2 Example:  12 = 2 × 2 × 3 The Branching Method This method works well for larger numbers that might have many factors. All you need to do is think of any two numbers that multiply to give your original number, and write them below it. Continue this process for each number until each branch ends in a prime number. The factors of the original number are the prime numbers on the ends of all the branches. Example:  Factor the number 60     60 = 2 × 2 × 3 × 5 Notes Notice how I started with the smallest numbers: first 2’s, then 3’s, and so on. This is not required but it keeps the result nicely in order. If a number is even, then it is divisible by 2. If a number ends in 0 or 5, then it is divisible by 5. If the digits of a number add up to a number divisible by 3, then the number is divisible by 3. In this example 15 gives 1 + 5 = 6, which is divisible by 3, and therefore 15 is divisible by 3. Large numbers with large prime factors are notoriously hard to factor—it is mainly just a matter of trial and error. The public-key encryption system for sending secure computer data uses very large numbers that need to be factored in order to break the code. The code is essentially unbreakable because it would take an enormous amount of computer time to try every possible prime factor.      || Multiplying Fractions Multiply Numerators and Denominators Example:      And reduce result if needed   Canceling common factors first makes multiplication easier If you don’t reduce the factors before multiplying, the answer will have to be reduced. Example:  Remember that canceling always leaves a “1” behind, because you are really dividing the numerator and the denominator by the same number.  || Adding and Subtracting Fractions ·            Add Numerators when Denominators Are the Same ·        If the denominators are not the same, make them the same by building up the fractions so that they both have a common denominator. ·        Any common denominator will work, but the answer will have to be reduced if it is not the Least Common Denominator. ·        The product of all the denominators is always a common denominator (but not necessarily the Least Common Denominator).  || Least Common Denominator (LCD) By Inspection The smallest number that is evenly divisible by all the denominators In General The LCD is the product of all the prime factors of all the denominators, each factor taken the greatest number of times that it appears in any single denominator. Example:    Factor the denominators:     Assemble LCD:   Note that the three only appears once, because it is only needed once to make either the 12 or the 15:   Now that you have found the LCD, multiply each fraction (top and bottom) by whatever is needed to build up the denominator to the LCD:   Then add the numerators and reduce if needed (using the LCD does not guarantee that you won’t have to reduce):    ||  || Converting Decimals to Fractions Because all the denominators are powers of 10, it is very easy to add these fractions by finding a common denominator. In this example, the common denominator is 1000, and we get This suggests a general rule for converting a decimal number to its fraction form: Put all the digits over the denominator that corresponds to the last decimal place value. In the number 2.345, the last decimal place value is the thousandths place, so we put the digits 2345 over the denominator 1000. Of course we would usually want to reduce the resulting fraction to its simplest form. In this case  || Repeating Fractions The only time this method does not work is for repeating fractions. We know that 1/3 = 0.3333333... but how could we go from 0.3333333... back to 1/3? There is no ‘last decimal place’ because the decimals repeat forever. Fortunately, there is a simple trick for this: ·         Put the repeating digit over a denominator of 9. So we see that in the case of 0.3333333...., the repeating digit is 3, and we make the fraction 3/9, which reduces to 1/3. If there is a group of more than one digit that repeats, Put the repeating group of digits over as many 9’s as there are digits. For example, in the fraction we see that the group of digits ‘15’ repeats, so we put ‘15’ over a denominator of ‘99’ to get o        One warning: This only works for the repeating fraction part of a number. If you have a number like 2.33333..., you should just work with the decimal part and rejoin it with the whole part after you have converted it to a fraction. o        Irrational numbers like p or  have non-repeating decimals, and so they cannot be written as fractions. You can, however, round them off at some point and produce an approximate fraction for them.   Why This Trick Works  If you have learned enough algebra to follow these steps, it is not difficult to see why this works. Let’s start with the simple example 0.3333333... Since we already know that the answer is 1/3, we can concentrate on the procedure, not the answer. Let x = 0.3333333... Multiply both sides by 10 to get 10x = 3.33333... Notice that the decimal part (.33333…) is still the same. In fact, it is the very thing that we called x in the first place, so we can say that 10x= 3 + x Now solve for x: This method will also work for repeating fractions that contain a group of repeating digits, but you have to multiply by a higher power of 10 in order to make the decimal portion stay the same as it was before. For example, suppose we had 0.345345345.... Let x = 0.345345345.... Multiply both sides by 1000 to get 1000x = 345.345345345.... Notice that the decimal part is still the same. In fact, it is still the thing that we called x in the first place, so we can say that 1000x = 345 + x Now solve for x:      || Converting Fractions to Decimals We know the decimal equivalents for some common fractions without having to think about it: 1/2 = 0.5, 3/4 = 0.75, etc. But how do we arrive at these numbers? Remember that the fraction bar means the same thing as division. To convert a fraction to a decimal, do the division. For example, You can do the division with a calculator or by hand with long division.  || Rounding Look only one digit to the right ‘5’s or higher round up (there is some dispute about this rule, but it is good enough for most purposes)   Rounding 5’s Why round fives up? The number 3.5 is exactly halfway between 3.0 and 4.0, so it makes just as much sense to round it down as it does to round it up. Most of the time there is no harm in using the ‘always round fives up’ rule. This is the rule that the United States Internal Revenue Service advises you to use on your taxes, and who is going to argue with them? Sometimes, though, it can cause problems. Suppose you are adding a very large number of values that have all been rounded by this rule. The sum that you get will be a little bit bigger than it ought to be. This can be a very serious problem in computer programs. When thousands or even millions of additions are being performed, the accumulated roundoff error can be quite large. One way of dealing with this problem is the even-odd rule. This rule says that: If the five is the last significant digit and the round-off digit (the one to the left of the 5) is odd, round up. If the five is the last significant digit and the round-off digit is even, don’t round up. Actually, you could reverse even and odd in this rule. All that matters is that about half the time you will be rounding up on a 5, and half the time down. The reason it matters that the five is the last significant digit is because if there are any other non-zero digits past the five then you must round up, because the part that you are chopping off is more than 50% of the roundoff place-value. For example, suppose you want to round 3.351 to the nearest tenth. The decimal part represents the fraction 351/1000, which is 1/1000 closer to 400/1000 than it is to 300/100. Therefore you would always round this up to 3.4.     Example:  Round 11.3826 to the nearest hundredth. Solution: The hundredths place is where the ‘8’ is. We look one digit to the right and see a ‘2’, so we do not round up, leaving us with 11.38. Example:  Round 11.3826 to the nearest thousandth. Solution: The thousandths place is where the ‘2’ is. We look one place to the right and see a ‘6’, so we round the ‘2’ up, getting 11.383. Trouble with ‘9’s. If the digit you are rounding up is a ‘9’, then rounding it up will make it a ‘10’, which is too big for one place. What happens is that the extra ‘1’ gets added to the place to the left. Example:  Round 3.49721 to the nearest hundredth. Solution: The hundredth place has a ‘9’ in it. One step to the right is a ‘7’, so we have to round up. This makes the ‘9’ into a ‘10’, but we really can’t write the new number as 3.4(10). Instead, the extra ‘1’ moves one place to the left and is added to the ‘4’, giving us 3.50. It can happen that the place to the left contains another ‘9’, in which case the extra ‘1’ will cause it to become a ‘10’, which pushes the ‘1’ still further on to the next place to the left. Example:  Round 75.69996217 to the nearest ten-thousandth Solution: The ten-thousandths place is the last ‘9’ in the number, and the place to its right is a ‘6’, which means we round up. This makes the ‘9’ into a ‘10’, like this: 75.699(10) But of course we cannot put a ‘10’ in that place, so the ‘1’ moves to the left and gets added to the ‘9’ there, making it into a ‘10’: 75.69(10)0 This leaves us with the same problem, a ‘10’ in one decimal place, so the extra ‘1’ moves one more step to the left, turning that ‘9’ into a ‘10’: 75.6(10)00 Well, we still have the same problem, so we move the ‘1’ yet another step to the left, where it adds on to the ‘6’, finally leaving us with an acceptable answer: 75.7000 In general, ·        The extra ‘1’ migrates to the left until it finds a resting-place. This means that the ‘1’ moves to the left until it can be added to a digit less than ‘9’, or until it falls off the end as a new digit out in front. Example:  Round 999.96 to the nearest tenth. The digit to the right of the tenths place is a ‘6’, so we have to round up. But when we round up the ‘9’ it becomes a ‘10’, forcing the one to be added to the left. Unfortunately, we find another ‘9’ there and the process is repeated for each of the ‘9’s until we reach the leading ‘9’, which becomes a ‘10’ resulting in 1000.0  || Arithmetic with Decimals Although calculators have made it much easier to do arithmetic with decimal numbers, it is nice to know that you can still do it without a calculator. Addition and Subtraction To add or subtract decimal numbers, you use the familiar column method that you learned back in grade school. To use this method, the place values of the two numbers must be lined up. This means that the decimal points must be lined up, and you can fill in with zeros if one number has more decimal places than the other.   Example:     5.46 + 11.2   Becomes:   Multiplication To multiply two decimal numbers, you can use the column method just as you would with whole numbers. You ignore the decimal points as you carry out the multiplication, and then you put the decimal point in the result at the correct place. The product will have the number of decimal places as the total number of decimal places in the factors. In the following example, the first factor has 2 decimal places and the second factor has 1 decimal place, so the product must have 3 decimal places:   Division You can divide decimal numbers using the familiar (?) technique of long division. This can be awkward, though, because it is hard to guess at products of decimals (long division, you may recall, is basically a guess-and-check technique). It can be made easier by multiplying both the dividend and divisor by ‘10’s to make the divisor a whole number. This will not change the result of the division, because division is the same thing as fractions, and multiplying both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same number will not change the value of the fraction. For example, consider This is the same as the fraction , which is equivalent to the fraction , obtained by multiplying the numerator and denominator by 10. Thus   ,   which can be attacked with long division:      ||  || To convert a decimal to a percent Multiply the decimal number by 100 (or move the decimal point two places to the right). Since x% = x/100, it is also true that 100 x% = x. Another way to look at is to consider that in order to convert a number into a percent, you have to express it in hundredths. Recall that the hundredths place is the second place to the right of the decimal, so this is the digit that gives the units digit of the percent. Of course, all this means is that you move the decimal point two places to the right. WARNING: If you just remember these rules as “move the decimal two places to the left” and “move the decimal two places to the right,” you are very likely to get them confused. If you accidentally move the decimal in the wrong direction it will end up four places off from where it should be, which means that your answer will be either ten-thousand times too big or ten-thousand times too small. This is generally not an acceptable range of error. It is much better to remember these rules by simply remembering the meaning of the percent sign, namely that “ % “ means “ /100.” If you just write the problem that way, you should be able to see what you need to do in order to solve it. Converting between percents and their decimal equivalents is so simple that it is usually best to express all percents in decimal form when you are working percent problems. The decimal numbers are what you will need to put in your calculator, and you can always express the result as a percent if you need to.   Calculator  note: Some calculators have a percent key that essentially just divides by 100, but it can do other useful things that might save you a few keystrokes. For instance, if you need to add 5% to a number (perhaps to include the sales tax on a purchase), on most calculators you can enter the original number and then press “ + 5 % = “. Just make sure you understand what it does before you blindly trust it. What it is doing in this example is multiplying the original number by 0.05 and then adding the result onto the original number. You should be able to work any percent problem without using this key, but once you understand what is going on it can be a convenient short-cut.  || To convert a percent to a fraction ·        Put the percentage over a denominator of 100 and reduce Writing a percent as a fraction is very simple if you remember that the percent is the numerator of a fraction with a denominator equal to 100. Examples:  In this last example, the first fraction has a decimal in it, which is not a proper way to represent a fraction. To clear the decimal, just multiply both the numerator and the denominator by 10 to produce an equivalent fraction written with whole numbers.  || To convert a fraction to a percent ·         Divide the numerator by the denominator and multiply by 100 To write a fraction as a percent you need to convert the fraction into hundredths. Sometimes this is easy to do without a calculator. For example, if you saw the fraction , you should notice that doubling the numerator and the denominator will produce an equivalent fraction that has a denominator of 100. Then the numerator will be the percent that you are seeking: With other fractions, though, it is not always so easy. It is not at all obvious how to convert a fraction like 5/7 into something over 100. In this case, the best thing to do is to convert the fraction into its decimal form, and then convert the decimal into a percent. To convert the fraction to a decimal, remember that the fraction bar indicates division: The “approximately equal to” sign () is used because the decimal parts have been rounded off. Because it is understood that approximate numbers are rounded, we will not continue to use the approximately equal sign. It is more conventional to just use the standard equal sign with approximate numbers, even though it is not entirely accurate.  || Working percent problems In percent problems, just as in fraction problems, the word “of” implies multiplication: “x percent of a number” means “x% times a number” Example:  What is 12% of 345? 12% is 12/100, which we can express in decimal form as 0.12. 12% of 345 means 12% times 345, or Notice how it is easier to just move the decimal over two places instead of explicitly dividing by 100. We solve a problem like this by translating the question into mathematical symbols, using x to stand for the unknown “what” and that the “of” means “times”: Example:  What percent of 2342 is 319? Once again we translate this into mathematical symbols: Solving this equation involves a little bit of algebra. To isolate the x% on one side of the equation we must divide both sides by 2342: The calculator tells us that x% = 0.1362 Now the right-hand side of this equation is the decimal equivalent that is equal to x%, which means that x = 13.62, or 319 is 13.62% of 2342 If that last step confused you, remember that the percent symbol means “over 100”, so the equation x% = 0.1362 really says or x = 100(0.1362) x = 13.62 Example:  2.4 is what percent of 19.7? Translating into math symbols: Solving for x: 2.4 = x% (19.7) x% = 0.1218 x = 12.18 So we can say that 2.4 is 12% of 19.7 (rounding to 2 significant figures) Example:  46 is 3.2% of what? Translating into math symbols: Solving for x: 46 = 3.2% (x) 46 = 0.032x x = 1437.5 Therefore, we can say that 46 is 3.2% of 1400 (rounding to 2 significant figures). Notice that in the second step the percentage (3.2%) is converted into its decimal form (0.032).  || The following table lists the defining properties of the real numbers (technically called the field axioms). These laws define how the things we call numbers should behave. Addition Multiplication Commutative For all real a, b a + b = b + a Commutative For all real a, b ab = ba Associative For all real a, b, c a + (b + c) = (a + b) + c Associative For all real a, b, c (ab)c = a(bc) Identity There exists a real number 0 such that for every real a a + 0 = a Identity There exists a real number 1 such that for every real a a × 1 = a Additive Inverse (Opposite) For every real number a there exist a real number, denoted (-a), such that a + (–a) = 0 Multiplicative Inverse (Reciprocal) For every real number a except 0 there exist a real number, denoted , such that a ×  = 1 Distributive Law For all real a, b, c a(b + c) = ab + ac, and (a + b)c = ac + bcThe commutative and associative laws do not hold for subtraction or division:a – b is not equal to b – aa ÷ b is not equal to b ÷ aa – (b – c) is not equal to (a – b) – ca ÷ (b ÷ c) is not equal to (a ÷ b) ÷ cTry some examples with numbers and you will see that they do not work.What these laws mean is that order and grouping don't matter for addition and multiplication, but they certainly do matter for subtraction and division. In this way, addition and multiplication are “cleaner” than subtraction and division. This will become important when we start talking about algebraic expressions. Often what we will want to do with an algebraic expression will involve rearranging it somehow. If the operations are all addition and multiplication, we don't have to worry so much that we might be changing the value of an expression by rearranging its terms or factors. Fortunately, we can always think of subtraction as an addition problem (adding the opposite), and we can always think of division as a multiplication (multiplying by the reciprocal).You may have noticed that the commutative and associative laws read exactly the same way for addition and multiplication, as if there was no difference between them other than notation. The law that makes them behave differently is the distributive law, because multiplication distributes over addition, not vice-versa.. The distributive law is extremely important, and it is impossible to understand algebra without being thoroughly familiar with this law.Example:  2(3 + 4)According to the order of operations rules, we should evaluate this expression by first doing the addition inside the parentheses, giving us2(3 + 4) = 2(7) = 14But we can also look at this problem with the distributive law, and of course still get the same answer. The distributive law says that || 