Similar Triangles We will often encounter proportion problems in geometry and trigonometry. One application involves similar triangles Triangles with the same shape but not necessarily the same size. The measures of corresponding angles are equal and the corresponding sides are proportional. , which have the same shape, but not necessarily the same size. The measures of the corresponding angles of similar triangles are equal, and the measures of the corresponding sides are proportional. Given similar triangles ABC and RST, We may write A B C   ~   R S T and conclude that all of the corresponding angles are equal. The notation indicates that angle A corresponds to angle R and that the measures of these angles are equal: A = R. In addition, the measures of other pairs of corresponding angles are equal: B = S and C = T. Use uppercase letters for angles and a lowercase letter to denote the side opposite of the given angle. Denote the proportionality of the sides as follows:   Example 10: If triangle ABC is similar to RST, where a = 3 , b = 4 , c = 5 , and r = 9 , then find the remaining two sides. Solution: Draw a picture and identify the variables pictorially. Represent the remaining unknown sides by s and t. Set up proportions and solve for the missing sides. Answer: The two remaining sides measure 12 units and 15 units.   The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles is called the scale factor The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles. . In the previous example, the ratio of the two given sides a and r is Therefore, triangle ABC is similar to triangle RST with a scale factor of 1/3. This means that each leg of triangle ABC is 1/3 of the measure of the corresponding legs of triangle RST. Also, another interesting fact is that the perimeters of similar triangles are in the same proportion as their sides and share the same scale factor.   Example 11: If a triangle ABC has a perimeter of 12 units and is similar to RST with a scale factor of 1/3, then find the perimeter of triangle RST. Solution: Scale factor 1/3 implies that the perimeters are in proportion to this ratio. Set up a proportion as follows: Cross multiply and solve for x. Answer: The perimeter of triangle RST is 36 units. Similar Triangles We will often encounter proportion problems in geometry and trigonometry. One application involves similar triangles Triangles with the same shape but not necessarily the same size. The measures of corresponding angles are equal and the corresponding sides are proportional. , which have the same shape, but not necessarily the same size. The measures of the corresponding angles of similar triangles are equal, and the measures of the corresponding sides are proportional. Given similar triangles ABC and RST, We may write A B C   ~   R S T and conclude that all of the corresponding angles are equal. The notation indicates that angle A corresponds to angle R and that the measures of these angles are equal: A = R. In addition, the measures of other pairs of corresponding angles are equal: B = S and C = T. Use uppercase letters for angles and a lowercase letter to denote the side opposite of the given angle. Denote the proportionality of the sides as follows:   Example 10: If triangle ABC is similar to RST, where a = 3 , b = 4 , c = 5 , and r = 9 , then find the remaining two sides. Solution: Draw a picture and identify the variables pictorially. Represent the remaining unknown sides by s and t. Set up proportions and solve for the missing sides. Answer: The two remaining sides measure 12 units and 15 units.   The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles is called the scale factor The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles. . In the previous example, the ratio of the two given sides a and r is Therefore, triangle ABC is similar to triangle RST with a scale factor of 1/3. This means that each leg of triangle ABC is 1/3 of the measure of the corresponding legs of triangle RST. Also, another interesting fact is that the perimeters of similar triangles are in the same proportion as their sides and share the same scale factor.   Example 11: If a triangle ABC has a perimeter of 12 units and is similar to RST with a scale factor of 1/3, then find the perimeter of triangle RST. Solution: Scale factor 1/3 implies that the perimeters are in proportion to this ratio. Set up a proportion as follows: Cross multiply and solve for x. Answer: The perimeter of triangle RST is 36 units.  || 