Midpoint Formula The point that bisects the line segment formed by two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , is called the midpoint Given two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , the midpoint is an ordered pair given by ( x 1 + x 2 2 ,   y 1 + y 2 2 ) . and is given by the following formula: The midpoint is an ordered pair formed by finding the average of the x-values and the average of the y-values of the given points.   Example 8: Calculate the midpoint between (−1, −2) and (7, 4). Solution: First, calculate the average of the x- and y-values of the given points. Next, form the midpoint as an ordered pair using the averaged coordinates. Answer: (3, 1)   To verify that this is indeed the midpoint, calculate the distance between the two given points and verify that the result is equal to the sum of the two equal distances from the endpoints to this midpoint. This verification is left to the reader as an exercise.   Try this! Find the midpoint between (−6, 5) and (6, −11). Answer: (0, −3) Video Solution Midpoint Formula The point that bisects the line segment formed by two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , is called the midpoint Given two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , the midpoint is an ordered pair given by ( x 1 + x 2 2 ,   y 1 + y 2 2 ) . and is given by the following formula: The midpoint is an ordered pair formed by finding the average of the x-values and the average of the y-values of the given points.   Example 8: Calculate the midpoint between (−1, −2) and (7, 4). Solution: First, calculate the average of the x- and y-values of the given points. Next, form the midpoint as an ordered pair using the averaged coordinates. Answer: (3, 1)   To verify that this is indeed the midpoint, calculate the distance between the two given points and verify that the result is equal to the sum of the two equal distances from the endpoints to this midpoint. This verification is left to the reader as an exercise.   Try this! Find the midpoint between (−6, 5) and (6, −11). Answer: (0, −3) Video Solution  || 