Division by and Into Zero (Zero as a Dividend and Divisor:) We are now curious about zero divided by zero . If we let represent a potential quotient, we get Converting to the multiplication form, This results in This is a statement that is true regardless of the number used in place of . For example, , since . , since . , since . A unique quotient cannot be determined. Indeterminant Since the result of the division is inconclusive, we say that is indeterminant. is Indeterminant The division is indeterminant. Sample Set B Perform, if possible, each division. Example 2.16.  . Since division by 0 does not name a whole number, no quotient exists, and we state is undefined Example 2.17.  . Since division by 0 does not name a defined number, no quotient exists, and we state is undefined Example 2.18.  . Since division into 0 by any nonzero whole number results in 0, we have Example 2.19.  . Since division into 0 by any nonzero whole number results in 0, we have Practice Set B Perform, if possible, the following divisions. Exercise 2.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.12. (Go to Solution) Division by and Into Zero (Zero as a Dividend and Divisor:) We are now curious about zero divided by zero . If we let represent a potential quotient, we get Converting to the multiplication form, This results in This is a statement that is true regardless of the number used in place of . For example, , since . , since . , since . A unique quotient cannot be determined. Indeterminant Since the result of the division is inconclusive, we say that is indeterminant. is Indeterminant The division is indeterminant. Sample Set B Perform, if possible, each division. Example 2.16.  . Since division by 0 does not name a whole number, no quotient exists, and we state is undefined Example 2.17.  . Since division by 0 does not name a defined number, no quotient exists, and we state is undefined Example 2.18.  . Since division into 0 by any nonzero whole number results in 0, we have Example 2.19.  . Since division into 0 by any nonzero whole number results in 0, we have Practice Set B Perform, if possible, the following divisions. Exercise 2.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.12. (Go to Solution)  || 