The Negative Property of Fractions A useful property of fractions is the negative property of fractions. Negative Property of Fractions The negative sign of a fraction may be placed in front of the fraction, , in the numerator of the fraction, , in the denominator of the fraction, . All three fractions will have the same value, that is, The negative property of fractions is illustrated by the fractions To see this, consider . Is this correct?By the equality property of fractions, – (3 · 4) = – 12 and – 3 · 4 = – 12. Thus, . Convince yourself that the other two fractions are equal as well. This same property holds for rational expressions and negative signs. This property is often quite helpful in simplifying a rational expression (as we shall need to do in subsequent sections). If either the numerator or denominator of a fraction or a fraction itself is immediately preceded by a negative sign, it is usually most convenient to place the negative sign in the numerator for later operations. The Negative Property of Fractions A useful property of fractions is the negative property of fractions. Negative Property of Fractions The negative sign of a fraction may be placed in front of the fraction, , in the numerator of the fraction, , in the denominator of the fraction, . All three fractions will have the same value, that is, The negative property of fractions is illustrated by the fractions To see this, consider . Is this correct?By the equality property of fractions, – (3 · 4) = – 12 and – 3 · 4 = – 12. Thus, . Convince yourself that the other two fractions are equal as well. This same property holds for rational expressions and negative signs. This property is often quite helpful in simplifying a rational expression (as we shall need to do in subsequent sections). If either the numerator or denominator of a fraction or a fraction itself is immediately preceded by a negative sign, it is usually most convenient to place the negative sign in the numerator for later operations.  || 