Equivalent Fractions Equivalent fractions are fractions that have the same value, for example     etc. Although all these fractions are written differently, they all represent the same quantity. You can measure a half-cup of sugar or two quarter-cups of sugar, or even four eighth-cups of sugar, and you will still have the same amount of sugar. ·       Multiply by a form of One A fraction can be converted into an equivalent fraction by multiplying it by a form of 1. The number 1 can be represented as a fraction because any number divided by itself is equal to 1 (remember that the fraction notation means the same thing as division). In other words,   etc. Now if you multiply a number by 1 it does not change its value, so if we multiply a fraction by another fraction that is equal to 1, we will not be changing the value of the original fraction. For example, In this case, 2/3 represents exactly the same quantity as 4/6, because all we did was to multiply 2/3 by the number 1, represented as the fraction 2/2. Multiplying the numerator and denominator by the same number to produce an equivalent fraction is called building up the fraction. Equivalent Fractions Equivalent fractions are fractions that have the same value, for example     etc. Although all these fractions are written differently, they all represent the same quantity. You can measure a half-cup of sugar or two quarter-cups of sugar, or even four eighth-cups of sugar, and you will still have the same amount of sugar. ·       Multiply by a form of One A fraction can be converted into an equivalent fraction by multiplying it by a form of 1. The number 1 can be represented as a fraction because any number divided by itself is equal to 1 (remember that the fraction notation means the same thing as division). In other words,   etc. Now if you multiply a number by 1 it does not change its value, so if we multiply a fraction by another fraction that is equal to 1, we will not be changing the value of the original fraction. For example, In this case, 2/3 represents exactly the same quantity as 4/6, because all we did was to multiply 2/3 by the number 1, represented as the fraction 2/2. Multiplying the numerator and denominator by the same number to produce an equivalent fraction is called building up the fraction.  || 