Adding and Subtracting Fractions Negative fractions are indicated with the negative sign in front of the fraction bar, in the numerator, or in the denominator. All such forms are equivalent and interchangeable. Adding or subtracting fractions requires a common denominator A denominator that is shared by more than one fraction. . In this section, assume the common denominator c is a nonzero integer. It is good practice to use positive common denominators by expressing negative fractions with negative numerators. In short, avoid negative denominators.   Example 10: Subtract: 12 15 − 3 15 . Solution: The two fractions have a common denominator 15. Therefore, subtract the numerators and write the result over the common denominator: Answer: 3 5   Most problems that you are likely to encounter will have unlike denominators Denominators of fractions that are not the same. . In this case, first find equivalent fractions with a common denominator before adding or subtracting the numerators. One way to obtain equivalent fractions is to divide the numerator and the denominator by the same number. We now review a technique for finding equivalent fractions by multiplying the numerator and the denominator by the same number. It should be clear that 5/5 is equal to 1 and that 1 multiplied times any number is that number: We have equivalent fractions 1 2 = 5 10 . Use this idea to find equivalent fractions with a common denominator to add or subtract fractions. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 11: Subtract: 7 15 − 3 10 . Solution: Step 1: Determine a common denominator. To do this, use the least common multiple (LCM) The smallest number that is evenly divisible by a set of numbers. of the given denominators. The LCM of 15 and 10 is indicated by LCM(15, 10). Try to think of the smallest number that both denominators divide into evenly. List the multiples of each number: Common multiples are listed in bold, and the least common multiple is 30. Step 2: Multiply the numerator and the denominator of each fraction by values that result in equivalent fractions with the determined common denominator. Step 3: Add or subtract the numerators, write the result over the common denominator and then reduce if possible. Answer: 1 6   The least common multiple of the denominators is called the least common denominator (LCD) The least common multiple of a set of denominators. . Finding the LCD is often the difficult step. It is worth finding because if any common multiple other than the least is used, then there will be more steps involved when reducing.   Example 12: Add: 5 10 + 1 18 . Solution: First, determine that the LCM(10, 18) is 90 and then find equivalent fractions with 90 as the denominator. Answer: 5 9   Try this! Add: 2 30 + 5 21 . Answer: 32 105 Video Solution   Example 13: Simplify: 2 1 3 + 3 5 − 1 2 . Solution: Begin by converting 2 1 3 to an improper fraction. Answer: 2 13 30   In general, it is preferable to work with improper fractions. However, when the original problem involves mixed numbers, if appropriate, present your answers as mixed numbers. Also, mixed numbers are often preferred when working with numbers on a number line and with real-world applications.   Try this! Subtract: 5 7 − 2 1 7 . Answer: − 1 3 7 Video Solution   Example 14: How many 1 2 inch thick paperback books can be stacked to fit on a shelf that is 1 1 2 feet in height? Solution: First, determine the height of the shelf in inches. To do this, use the fact that there are 12 inches in 1 foot and multiply as follows: Next, determine how many notebooks will fit by dividing the height of the shelf by the thickness of each book. Answer: 36 books can be stacked on the shelf. Adding and Subtracting Fractions Negative fractions are indicated with the negative sign in front of the fraction bar, in the numerator, or in the denominator. All such forms are equivalent and interchangeable. Adding or subtracting fractions requires a common denominator A denominator that is shared by more than one fraction. . In this section, assume the common denominator c is a nonzero integer. It is good practice to use positive common denominators by expressing negative fractions with negative numerators. In short, avoid negative denominators.   Example 10: Subtract: 12 15 − 3 15 . Solution: The two fractions have a common denominator 15. Therefore, subtract the numerators and write the result over the common denominator: Answer: 3 5   Most problems that you are likely to encounter will have unlike denominators Denominators of fractions that are not the same. . In this case, first find equivalent fractions with a common denominator before adding or subtracting the numerators. One way to obtain equivalent fractions is to divide the numerator and the denominator by the same number. We now review a technique for finding equivalent fractions by multiplying the numerator and the denominator by the same number. It should be clear that 5/5 is equal to 1 and that 1 multiplied times any number is that number: We have equivalent fractions 1 2 = 5 10 . Use this idea to find equivalent fractions with a common denominator to add or subtract fractions. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 11: Subtract: 7 15 − 3 10 . Solution: Step 1: Determine a common denominator. To do this, use the least common multiple (LCM) The smallest number that is evenly divisible by a set of numbers. of the given denominators. The LCM of 15 and 10 is indicated by LCM(15, 10). Try to think of the smallest number that both denominators divide into evenly. List the multiples of each number: Common multiples are listed in bold, and the least common multiple is 30. Step 2: Multiply the numerator and the denominator of each fraction by values that result in equivalent fractions with the determined common denominator. Step 3: Add or subtract the numerators, write the result over the common denominator and then reduce if possible. Answer: 1 6   The least common multiple of the denominators is called the least common denominator (LCD) The least common multiple of a set of denominators. . Finding the LCD is often the difficult step. It is worth finding because if any common multiple other than the least is used, then there will be more steps involved when reducing.   Example 12: Add: 5 10 + 1 18 . Solution: First, determine that the LCM(10, 18) is 90 and then find equivalent fractions with 90 as the denominator. Answer: 5 9   Try this! Add: 2 30 + 5 21 . Answer: 32 105 Video Solution   Example 13: Simplify: 2 1 3 + 3 5 − 1 2 . Solution: Begin by converting 2 1 3 to an improper fraction. Answer: 2 13 30   In general, it is preferable to work with improper fractions. However, when the original problem involves mixed numbers, if appropriate, present your answers as mixed numbers. Also, mixed numbers are often preferred when working with numbers on a number line and with real-world applications.   Try this! Subtract: 5 7 − 2 1 7 . Answer: − 1 3 7 Video Solution   Example 14: How many 1 2 inch thick paperback books can be stacked to fit on a shelf that is 1 1 2 feet in height? Solution: First, determine the height of the shelf in inches. To do this, use the fact that there are 12 inches in 1 foot and multiply as follows: Next, determine how many notebooks will fit by dividing the height of the shelf by the thickness of each book. Answer: 36 books can be stacked on the shelf.  || 