Terms and Factors In algebra, it is extremely important to be able to distinguish between terms and factors. Distinction Between Terms and Factors Terms are parts of sums and are therefore connected by + signs. Factors are parts of products and are therefore separated by ⋅ signs. Note While making the distinction between sums and products, we must re­member that subtraction and division are functions of these operations. In some expressions it will appear that terms are separated by minus signs. We must keep in mind that subtraction is addition of the opposite, that is, In some expressions it will appear that factors are separated by division signs. We must keep in mind that Sample Set A State the number of terms in each expression and name them. Example 11.1.  . In this expression, x and 4 are connected by a "+" sign. Therefore, they are terms. This expression consists of two terms. Example 11.2.  . The expression can be expressed as . We can now see that this expres­sion consists of the two terms and . Rather than rewriting the expression when a subtraction occurs, we can identify terms more quickly by associating the + or - sign with the individual quantity. Example 11.3.  . Associating the sign with the individual quantities, we see that this expression consists of the four terms , 7, , . Example 11.4.  . This expression consists of the two terms, and . Notice that the term is composed of the two factors 5 and . The term is composed of the two factors and . Example 11.5.  . This expression consists of one term. Notice that can be expressed as or (indicating the connecting signs of arithmetic). Note that no operation sign is necessary for multiplication. Practice Set A Specify the terms in each expression. Exercise 11.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.5. (Go to Solution) Terms and Factors In algebra, it is extremely important to be able to distinguish between terms and factors. Distinction Between Terms and Factors Terms are parts of sums and are therefore connected by + signs. Factors are parts of products and are therefore separated by ⋅ signs. Note While making the distinction between sums and products, we must re­member that subtraction and division are functions of these operations. In some expressions it will appear that terms are separated by minus signs. We must keep in mind that subtraction is addition of the opposite, that is, In some expressions it will appear that factors are separated by division signs. We must keep in mind that Sample Set A State the number of terms in each expression and name them. Example 11.1.  . In this expression, x and 4 are connected by a "+" sign. Therefore, they are terms. This expression consists of two terms. Example 11.2.  . The expression can be expressed as . We can now see that this expres­sion consists of the two terms and . Rather than rewriting the expression when a subtraction occurs, we can identify terms more quickly by associating the + or - sign with the individual quantity. Example 11.3.  . Associating the sign with the individual quantities, we see that this expression consists of the four terms , 7, , . Example 11.4.  . This expression consists of the two terms, and . Notice that the term is composed of the two factors 5 and . The term is composed of the two factors and . Example 11.5.  . This expression consists of one term. Notice that can be expressed as or (indicating the connecting signs of arithmetic). Note that no operation sign is necessary for multiplication. Practice Set A Specify the terms in each expression. Exercise 11.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.5. (Go to Solution)  || 