Rational Expressions In arithmetic it is noted that a fraction is a quotient of two whole numbers. The expression , where a and b are any two whole numbers and b ≠ 0, is called a fraction. The top number, a , is called the numerator, and the bottom number, b , is called the denominator. Simple Algebraic Fraction We define a simple algebraic fraction in a similar manner. Rather than restrict­ing ourselves only to numbers, we use polynomials for the numerator and denomi­nator. Another term for a simple algebraic fraction is a rational expression. A rational expression is an expression of the form , where P and Q are both polyno­mials and Q never represents the zero polynomial. Rational Expression A rational expression is an algebraic expression that can be written as the quotient of two polynomials. Examples 1–4 are rational expressions: Example 8.1.  is a rational expression: P is x + 9 and Q is x – 7. Example 8.2.  is a rational expression: P is x 3 + 5x 2 – 12x + 1 and Q is x 4 – 10. Example 8.3.  is a rational expression: P is 3 and Q is 8. Example 8.4.  4x – 5 is a rational expression since 4x – 5 can be written as : P is 4x – 5 and Q is 1. Example 8.5.  is not a rational expression since is not a polynomial. In the rational expression , P is called the numerator and Q is called the denominator. Domain of a Rational Expression Since division by zero is not defined, we must be careful to note the values for which the rational expression is valid. The collection of values for which the rational expression is defined is called the domain of the rational expression. (Recall our study of the domain of an equation in Section Section 4.8.) Finding the Domain of a Rational Expression To find the domain of a rational expression we must ask, "What values, if any, of the variable will make the denominator zero?" To find these values, we set the denominator equal to zero and solve. If any zero-producing values are obtained, they are not included in the domain. All other real numbers are included in the domain (unless some have been excluded for particular situational reasons). Rational Expressions In arithmetic it is noted that a fraction is a quotient of two whole numbers. The expression , where a and b are any two whole numbers and b ≠ 0, is called a fraction. The top number, a , is called the numerator, and the bottom number, b , is called the denominator. Simple Algebraic Fraction We define a simple algebraic fraction in a similar manner. Rather than restrict­ing ourselves only to numbers, we use polynomials for the numerator and denomi­nator. Another term for a simple algebraic fraction is a rational expression. A rational expression is an expression of the form , where P and Q are both polyno­mials and Q never represents the zero polynomial. Rational Expression A rational expression is an algebraic expression that can be written as the quotient of two polynomials. Examples 1–4 are rational expressions: Example 8.1.  is a rational expression: P is x + 9 and Q is x – 7. Example 8.2.  is a rational expression: P is x 3 + 5x 2 – 12x + 1 and Q is x 4 – 10. Example 8.3.  is a rational expression: P is 3 and Q is 8. Example 8.4.  4x – 5 is a rational expression since 4x – 5 can be written as : P is 4x – 5 and Q is 1. Example 8.5.  is not a rational expression since is not a polynomial. In the rational expression , P is called the numerator and Q is called the denominator. Domain of a Rational Expression Since division by zero is not defined, we must be careful to note the values for which the rational expression is valid. The collection of values for which the rational expression is defined is called the domain of the rational expression. (Recall our study of the domain of an equation in Section Section 4.8.) Finding the Domain of a Rational Expression To find the domain of a rational expression we must ask, "What values, if any, of the variable will make the denominator zero?" To find these values, we set the denominator equal to zero and solve. If any zero-producing values are obtained, they are not included in the domain. All other real numbers are included in the domain (unless some have been excluded for particular situational reasons).  || 