 || Ratios, Rates, and Proportions Ratio, Rate We have defined a ratio as a comparison, by division, of two pure numbers or two like denominate numbers. We have defined a rate as a comparison, by division, of two unlike denominate numbers. Proportion A proportion is a statement that two ratios or rates are equal. The following two examples show how to read proportions. Sample Set A Write or read each proportion. Example 7.9.  3 is to 5 as 12 is to 20 Example 7.10.  10 items is to 5 dollars as 2 items is to 1 dollar Example 7.11.  8 is to 12 as 16 is to 24. Example 7.12.  50 milligrams of vitamin C is to 1 tablet as 300 milligrams of vitamin C is to 6 tablets. Practice Set A Write or read each proportion. Exercise 7.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.3. (Go to Solution) 15 is to 4 as 75 is to 20. Exercise 7.3.4. (Go to Solution) 2 plates are to 1 tray as 20 plates are to 10 trays.  || Finding the Missing Factor in a Proportion Many practical problems can be solved by writing the given information as propor­tions. Such proportions will be composed of three specified numbers and one unknown number. It is customary to let a letter, such as x , represent the unknown number. An example of such a proportion is This proportion is read as " x is to 4 as 20 is to 16." There is a method of solving these proportions that is based on the equality of fractions. Recall that two fractions are equivalent if and only if their cross products are equal. For example, Notice that in a proportion that contains three specified numbers and a letter representing an unknown quantity, that regardless of where the letter appears, the following situation always occurs. We recognize this as a multiplication statement. Specifically, it is a missing factor statement. (See Section 4.7 for a discussion of multiplication statements.) For example, Each of these statements is a multiplication statement. Specifically, each is a missing factor statement. (The letter used here is x , whereas M was used in Section 4.7.) Finding the Missing Factor in a Proportion The missing factor in a missing factor statement can be determined by dividing the product by the known factor, that is, if x represents the missing factor, then x = ( product ) ÷ ( known factor ) Sample Set B Find the unknown number in each proportion. Example 7.13.  . Find the cross product. This mean that , or 5 is to 4 as 20 is to 16. Example 7.14.  . Find the cross product. This means that , or, 5 is to 4 as 20 is to 6. Example 7.15.  Find the cross product. The means that , or, 16 is to 3 as 64 is to 12. Example 7.16.  Find the cross products. Practice Set B Find the unknown number in each proportion. Exercise 7.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.8. (Go to Solution)  || Proportions Involving Rates Recall that a rate is a comparison, by division, of unlike denominate numbers. We must be careful when setting up proportions that involve rates. The form is impor­tant. For example, if a rate involves two types of units, say unit type 1 and unit type 2, we can write or Both cross products produce a statement of the type (unit type 1) ⋅ (unit type 2) = (unit type 1) ⋅ (unit type 2) which we take to mean the comparison Examples of correctly expressed proportions are the following: However, if we write the same type of units on different sides, such as, the cross product produces a statement of the form We can see that this is an incorrect comparison by observing the following example: It is incorrect to write for two reason. The cross product is numerically wrong: (2⋅4 ≠ 3⋅6). The cross product produces the statement “hooks are to hooks as poles are to poles,” which makes no sense.  || 