Method Let’s consider the product of the two binomials ( x + 4 ) and ( x + 7 ) . Notice that the first term in the resulting trinomial comes from the product of the first terms in the binomials: x⋅x = x 2 . The last term in the trinomial comes from the product of the last terms in the binomials: 4⋅7 = 28 . The middle term comes from the addition of the outer and inner products: 7 x + 4 x = 11 x . Also, notice that the coefficient of the middle term is exactly the sum of the last terms in the binomials: 4 + 7 = 11 . The problem we’re interested in is that given a trinomial, how can we find the factors? When the leading coefficient (the coefficient of the quadratic term) is 1, the observations we made above lead us to the following method of factoring. Method of Factoring Write two sets of parentheses:. Place a binomial into each set of parentheses. The first term of each binomial is a factor of the first term of the trinomial. Determine the second terms of the binomials by determining the factors of the third term that when added together yield the coefficient of the middle term. Method Let’s consider the product of the two binomials ( x + 4 ) and ( x + 7 ) . Notice that the first term in the resulting trinomial comes from the product of the first terms in the binomials: x⋅x = x 2 . The last term in the trinomial comes from the product of the last terms in the binomials: 4⋅7 = 28 . The middle term comes from the addition of the outer and inner products: 7 x + 4 x = 11 x . Also, notice that the coefficient of the middle term is exactly the sum of the last terms in the binomials: 4 + 7 = 11 . The problem we’re interested in is that given a trinomial, how can we find the factors? When the leading coefficient (the coefficient of the quadratic term) is 1, the observations we made above lead us to the following method of factoring. Method of Factoring Write two sets of parentheses:. Place a binomial into each set of parentheses. The first term of each binomial is a factor of the first term of the trinomial. Determine the second terms of the binomials by determining the factors of the third term that when added together yield the coefficient of the middle term.  || 