Decimal Fractions Decimal Point, Decimal If we are to write numbers with digits appearing to the right of the units digit, we must have a way of denoting where the whole number part ends and the fractional part begins. Mathematicians denote the separation point of the units digit and the tenths digit by writing a decimal point. The word decimal comes from the Latin prefix "deci" which means ten, and we use it because we use a base ten number system. Numbers written in this form are called decimal fractions, or more simply, decimals. Notice that decimal numbers have the suffix "th." Decimal Fraction A decimal fraction is a fraction in which the denominator is a power of 10. The following numbers are examples of decimals. 42.6 The 6 is in the tenths position. 9.8014 The 8 is in the tenths position. The 0 is in the hundredths position. The 1 is in the thousandths position. The 4 is in the ten thousandths position. 0.93 The 9 is in the tenths position. The 3 is in the hundredths position. Note Quite often a zero is inserted in front of a decimal point (in the units position) of a decimal fraction that has a value less than one. This zero helps keep us from overlooking the decimal point. 0.7 The 7 is in the tenths position. Note We can insert zeros to the right of the right-most digit in a decimal fraction without changing the value of the number. Decimal Fractions Decimal Point, Decimal If we are to write numbers with digits appearing to the right of the units digit, we must have a way of denoting where the whole number part ends and the fractional part begins. Mathematicians denote the separation point of the units digit and the tenths digit by writing a decimal point. The word decimal comes from the Latin prefix "deci" which means ten, and we use it because we use a base ten number system. Numbers written in this form are called decimal fractions, or more simply, decimals. Notice that decimal numbers have the suffix "th." Decimal Fraction A decimal fraction is a fraction in which the denominator is a power of 10. The following numbers are examples of decimals. 42.6 The 6 is in the tenths position. 9.8014 The 8 is in the tenths position. The 0 is in the hundredths position. The 1 is in the thousandths position. The 4 is in the ten thousandths position. 0.93 The 9 is in the tenths position. The 3 is in the hundredths position. Note Quite often a zero is inserted in front of a decimal point (in the units position) of a decimal fraction that has a value less than one. This zero helps keep us from overlooking the decimal point. 0.7 The 7 is in the tenths position. Note We can insert zeros to the right of the right-most digit in a decimal fraction without changing the value of the number.  || 