Multiplying by a Binomial In the same way that we used the distributive property to find the product of a monomial and a binomial, we will use it to to find the product of two binomials. Here we apply the distributive property multiple times to produce the final result. This same result is obtained in one step if we apply the distributive property to a and b separately as follows: This is often called the FOIL When multiplying binomials we apply the distributive property multiple times in such a way as to multiply the first terms, outer terms, inner terms, and last terms. method. We add the products of the first terms of each binomial ac, the outer terms ad, the inner terms bc, and finally the last terms bd. This mnemonic device only works for products of binomials; hence it is best to just remember that the distributive property applies.   Example 4: Multiply: ( 2 x + 3 ) ( 5 x − 2 ) . Solution: Distribute 2 x and then distribute 3. Simplify by combining like terms. Answer: 10 x 2 + 11 x − 6   Example 5: Multiply: ( 1 2 x − 1 4 ) ( 1 2 x + 1 4 ) . Solution: Distribute 1 2 x and then distribute − 1 4 . Answer: 1 4 x 2 − 1 16   Example 6: Multiply: ( 3 y 2 − 1 ) ( 2 y + 1 ) . Solution: Answer: 6 y 3 + 3 y 2 − 2 y − 1   After applying the distributive property, combine any like terms.   Example 7: Multiply: . Solution: After multiplying each term of the trinomial by and , simplify. Answer:   Example 8: Multiply: . Solution: Perform one product at a time. Answer:   At this point, it is worth pointing out a common mistake: The confusion comes from the product to a power rule of exponents, where we apply the power to all factors. Since there are two terms within the parentheses, that rule does not apply. Care should be taken to understand what is different in the following two examples:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution Multiplying by a Binomial In the same way that we used the distributive property to find the product of a monomial and a binomial, we will use it to to find the product of two binomials. Here we apply the distributive property multiple times to produce the final result. This same result is obtained in one step if we apply the distributive property to a and b separately as follows: This is often called the FOIL When multiplying binomials we apply the distributive property multiple times in such a way as to multiply the first terms, outer terms, inner terms, and last terms. method. We add the products of the first terms of each binomial ac, the outer terms ad, the inner terms bc, and finally the last terms bd. This mnemonic device only works for products of binomials; hence it is best to just remember that the distributive property applies.   Example 4: Multiply: ( 2 x + 3 ) ( 5 x − 2 ) . Solution: Distribute 2 x and then distribute 3. Simplify by combining like terms. Answer: 10 x 2 + 11 x − 6   Example 5: Multiply: ( 1 2 x − 1 4 ) ( 1 2 x + 1 4 ) . Solution: Distribute 1 2 x and then distribute − 1 4 . Answer: 1 4 x 2 − 1 16   Example 6: Multiply: ( 3 y 2 − 1 ) ( 2 y + 1 ) . Solution: Answer: 6 y 3 + 3 y 2 − 2 y − 1   After applying the distributive property, combine any like terms.   Example 7: Multiply: . Solution: After multiplying each term of the trinomial by and , simplify. Answer:   Example 8: Multiply: . Solution: Perform one product at a time. Answer:   At this point, it is worth pointing out a common mistake: The confusion comes from the product to a power rule of exponents, where we apply the power to all factors. Since there are two terms within the parentheses, that rule does not apply. Care should be taken to understand what is different in the following two examples:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || 