Graphing Lines Using Intercepts Since two points determine a line, we can use the x- and y-intercepts to graph linear equations. We have just outlined an easy method for finding intercepts; now we outline the steps for graphing lines using the intercepts.   Example 3: Graph using intercepts: 2 x − 3 y = 12 . Solution: Step 1: Find the x- and y-intercepts. Step 2: Plot the intercepts and draw the line through them. Use a straightedge to create a nice straight line. Add an arrow on either end to indicate that the line continues indefinitely in either direction. Answer:   Example 4: Graph using intercepts: y = − 1 5 x + 3 . Solution: Begin by determining the x- and y-intercepts. Next, graph the two points and draw a line through them with a straightedge. Answer:   Example 5: Graph using intercepts: y = − 2 x . Solution: Here the x- and y-intercepts are actually the same point, the origin. We will need at least one more point so that we can graph the line. Choose any value for x and determine the corresponding value for y. Use the ordered pair solutions (0, 0), (−1, 2), and (1, −2) to graph the line. Answer: To summarize, any linear equation can be graphed by finding two points and connecting them with a line drawn with a straightedge. Two important and useful points are the x- and y-intercepts; find these points by substituting y = 0 and x = 0, respectively. This method for finding intercepts will be used throughout our study of algebra.   Try this! Graph using intercepts: 3 x − 5 y = 15 . Answer: x-intercept: (5, 0); y-intercept: (0, −3) Video Solution Graphing Lines Using Intercepts Since two points determine a line, we can use the x- and y-intercepts to graph linear equations. We have just outlined an easy method for finding intercepts; now we outline the steps for graphing lines using the intercepts.   Example 3: Graph using intercepts: 2 x − 3 y = 12 . Solution: Step 1: Find the x- and y-intercepts. Step 2: Plot the intercepts and draw the line through them. Use a straightedge to create a nice straight line. Add an arrow on either end to indicate that the line continues indefinitely in either direction. Answer:   Example 4: Graph using intercepts: y = − 1 5 x + 3 . Solution: Begin by determining the x- and y-intercepts. Next, graph the two points and draw a line through them with a straightedge. Answer:   Example 5: Graph using intercepts: y = − 2 x . Solution: Here the x- and y-intercepts are actually the same point, the origin. We will need at least one more point so that we can graph the line. Choose any value for x and determine the corresponding value for y. Use the ordered pair solutions (0, 0), (−1, 2), and (1, −2) to graph the line. Answer: To summarize, any linear equation can be graphed by finding two points and connecting them with a line drawn with a straightedge. Two important and useful points are the x- and y-intercepts; find these points by substituting y = 0 and x = 0, respectively. This method for finding intercepts will be used throughout our study of algebra.   Try this! Graph using intercepts: 3 x − 5 y = 15 . Answer: x-intercept: (5, 0); y-intercept: (0, −3) Video Solution  || 