 ||  || Graphs We have, thus far in our study of algebra, developed and used several methods for obtaining solutions to linear equations in both one and two variables. Quite often it is helpful to obtain a picture of the solutions to an equation. These pictures are called graphs and they can reveal information that may not be evident from the equation alone. The Graph of an Equation The geometric representation (picture) of the solutions to an equation is called the graph of the equation.  || Axes, Coordinate Systems, and Dimension Axis The basic structure of the graph is the axis. It is with respect to the axis that all solutions to an equation are located. The most fundamental type of axis is the number line. The Number Line is an Axis We have the following general rules regarding axes. Number of Variables and Number of Axes An equation in one variable requires one axis. An equation in two variables requires two axes. An equation in three variables requires three axes. ... An equation in n variables requires n axes. We shall always draw an axis as a straight line, and if more than one axis is required, we shall draw them so they are all mutually perpendicular (the lines forming the axes will be at 90° angles to one another). Coordinate System A system of axes constructed for graphing an equation is called a coordinate system. The Phrase, Graphing an Equation The phrase graphing an equation is used frequently and should be interpreted as meaning geometrically locating the solutions to an equation. Relating the Number of Variables and the Number of Axes We will not start actually graphing equations until Section Section 7.3, but in the following examples we will relate the number of variables in an equation to the number of axes in the coordinate system. 1. One-Dimensional Graphs: If we wish to graph the equation 5x + 2 = 17 , we would need to construct a coordinate system consisting of a single axis (a single number line) since the equation consists of only one variable. We label the axis with the variable that appears in the equation. We might interpret an equation in one variable as giving information in one-dimensional space. Since we live in three-dimensional space, one-dimensional space might be hard to imagine. Objects in one-dimensional space would have only length, no width or depth. 2. Two-Dimensional Graphs: To graph an equation in two variables such as y = 2x–3 , we would need to construct a coordinate system consisting of two mutually perpendicular number lines (axes). We call the intersection of the two axes the origin and label it with a 0. The two axes are simply number lines; one drawn horizontally, one drawn vertically. Recall that an equation in two variables requires a solution to be a pair of numbers. The solutions can be written as ordered pairs (x,y) . Since the equation y = 2x–3 involves the variables x and y , we label one axis x and the other axis y . In mathematics it is customary to label the horizontal axis with the independent variable and the vertical axis with the dependent variable. We might interpret equations in two variables as giving information in two-dimensional space. Objects in two-dimensional space would have length and width, but no depth. 3. Three-Dimensional Graphs: An equation in three variables, such as 3x 2 –4y 2 + 5z = 0 , requires three mutually perpendicular axes, one for each variable. We would construct the following coordinate system and graph. We might interpret equations in three variables as giving information about three-dimensional space. 4. Four-Dimensional Graphs: To graph an equation in four variables, such as 3x–2y + 8x–5w = –7 , would require four mutually perpendicular number lines. These graphs are left to the imagination. We might interpret equations in four variables as giving information in four-dimensional space. Four-dimensional objects would have length, width, depth, and some other dimension. Black Holes These other spaces are hard for us to imagine, but the existence of “black holes” makes the possibility of other universes of one-, two-, four-, or n-dimensions not entirely unlikely. Although it may be difficult for us “3-D” people to travel around in another dimensional space, at least we could be pretty sure that our mathematics would still work (since it is not restricted to only three dimensions)!  || Graphing in One Dimension Graphing a linear equation in one variable involves solving the equation, then locating the solution on the axis (number line), and marking a point at this location. We have observed that graphs may reveal information that may not be evident from the original equation. The graphs of linear equations in one variable do not yield much, if any, information, but they serve as a foundation to graphs of higher dimension (graphs of two variables and three variables).  ||  || The Plane Ordered Pairs We are now interested in studying graphs of linear equations in two variables. We know that solutions to equations in two variables consist of a pair of values, one value for each variable. We have called these pairs of values ordered pairs. Since we have a pair of values to graph, we must have a pair of axes (number lines) upon which the values can be located. Origin We draw the axes so they are perpendicular to each other and so that they intersect each other at their 0 ' s . This point is called the origin. Rectangular Coordinate System These two lines form what is called a rectangular coordinate system. They also determine a plane. x y-plane   A plane is a flat surface, and a result from geometry states that through any two intersecting lines (the axes) exactly one plane (flat surface) may be passed. If we are dealing with a linear equation in the two variables x and y , we sometimes say we are graphing the equation using a rectangular coordinate system, or that we are graphing the equation in the x y-plane . Quadrant Notice that the two intersecting coordinate axes divide the plane into four equal regions. Since there are four regions, we call each one a quadrant and number them counterclockwise using Roman numerals. Recall that when we first studied the number line we observed the following: For each real number there exists a unique point on the number line, and for each point on the number line we can associate a unique real number. We have a similar situation for the plane. For each ordered pair (a, b) , there exists a unique point in the plane, and to each point in the plane we can associate a unique ordered pair (a, b) of real numbers.  || Coordinates of a Point Coordinates of a Point The numbers in an ordered pair that are associated with a particular point are called the coordinates of the point. The first number in the ordered pair expresses the point’s horizontal distance and direction (left or right) from the origin. The second number expresses the point’s vertical distance and direction (up or down) from the origin. The Coordinates Determine Distance and Direction A positive number means a direction to the right or up. A negative number means a direction to the left or down.  || Plotting Points Since points and ordered pairs are so closely related, the two terms are sometimes used interchangeably. The following two phrases have the same meaning: Plot the point (a, b) . Plot the ordered pair (a, b) . Plotting a Point Both phrases mean: Locate, in the plane, the point associated with the ordered pair (a, b) and draw a mark at that position.  ||  || Solutions and Lines We know that solutions to linear equations in two variables can be expressed as ordered pairs. Hence, the solutions can be represented by point in the plane. We also know that the phrase “graph the equation” means to locate the solution to the given equation in the plane. Consider the equation y − 2x = − 3 . We’ll graph six solutions (ordered pairs) to this equation on the coordinates system below. We’ll find the solutions by choosing x-values (from − 1 to  + 4 ), substituting them into the equation y − 2x = − 3 , and then solving to obtain the corresponding y-values . We can keep track of the ordered pairs by using a table. y − 2x = − 3 Table 7.8. If x = Then y = Ordered Pairs − 1 − 5 ( − 1,  − 5 ) 0 − 3 ( 0,  − 3 ) 1 − 1 ( 1,  − 1 ) 2 1 ( 2, 1 ) 3 3 ( 3, 3 ) 4 5 ( 4, 5 ) We have plotted only six solutions to the equation y − 2x = − 3 . There are, as we know, infinitely many solutions. By observing the six points we have plotted, we can speculate as to the location of all the other points. The six points we plotted seem to lie on a straight line. This would lead us to believe that all the other points (solutions) also lie on that same line. Indeed, this is true. In fact, this is precisely why first-degree equations are called linear equations. Linear Equations Produce Straight Lines  || General Form of a Linear Equation General Form of a Linear Equation in Two Variables There is a standard form in which linear equations in two variables are written. Suppose that a , b , and c are any real numbers and that a and b cannot both be zero at the same time. Then, the linear equation in two variables a x + b y = c is said to be in general form. We must stipulate that a and b cannot both equal zero at the same time, for if they were we would have 0x + 0y = c 0 = c This statement is true only if c = 0 . If c were to be any other number, we would get a false statement. Now, we have the following: The graphing of all ordered pairs that solve a linear equation in two variables produces a straight line. This implies, The graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line. From these statements we can conclude, If an ordered pair is a solution to a linear equations in two variables, then it lies on the graph of the equation. Also, Any point (ordered pairs) that lies on the graph of a linear equation in two variables is a solution to that equation.  || The Intercept Method of Graphing When we want to graph a linear equation, it is certainly impractical to graph infinitely many points. Since a straight line is determined by only two points, we need only find two solutions to the equation (although a third point is helpful as a check). Intercepts When a linear equation in two variables is given in general from, a x + b y = c , often the two most convenient points (solutions) to fine are called the Intercepts: these are the points at which the line intercepts the coordinate axes. Of course, a horizontal or vertical line intercepts only one axis, so this method does not apply. Horizontal and vertical lines are easily recognized as they contain only one variable. (See Sample Set C .) y-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the y-axis is called the y-intercept . The x-value at this point is zero (since the point is neither to the left nor right of the origin). x-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the x-axis is called the x-intercept  and the y-value at that point is zero. The y-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for x into the equation and solving for y . The x-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for y into the equation and solving for x . Intercept Method Since we are graphing an equation by finding the intercepts, we call this method the intercept method  || Graphing Using any Two or More Points The graphs we have constructed so far have been done by finding two particular points, the intercepts. Actually, any two points will do. We chose to use the intercepts because they are usually the easiest to work with. In the next example, we will graph two equations using points other than the intercepts. We’ll use three points, the extra point serving as a check.  || Slanted, Horizontal, and Vertical Lines In all the graphs we have observed so far, the lines have been slanted. This will always be the case when both variables appear in the equation. If only one variable appears in the equation, then the line will be either vertical or horizontal. To see why, let’s consider a specific case: Using the general form of a line, a x + b y = c , we can produce an equation with exactly one variable by choosing a = 0 , b = 5 , and c = 15 . The equation a x + b y = c then becomes 0x + 5y = 15 Since 0⋅( any number ) = 0 , the term 0x is 0 for any number that is chosen for x . Thus, 0x + 5y = 15 becomes 0 + 5y = 15 But, 0 is the additive identity and 0 + 5y = 5y . 5y = 15 Then, solving for y we get y = 3 This is an equation in which exactly one variable appears. This means that regardless of which number we choose for x , the corresponding y-value is 3. Since the y-value is always the same as we move from left-to-right through the x-values , the height of the line above the x-axis is always the same (in this case, 3 units). This type of line must be horizontal. An argument similar to the one above will show that if the only variable that appears is x , we can expect to get a vertical line.  || Calculator Problems Exercise 7.4.33. (Go to Solution) 2.53x + 4.77y = 8.45 Exercise 7.4.34. 1.96x + 2.05y = 6.55 Exercise 7.4.35. (Go to Solution) 4.1x − 6.6y = 15.5 Exercise 7.4.36. 626.01x − 506.73y = 2443.50  ||  || The General Form of a Line We have seen that the general form of a linear equation in two variables is a x + b y = c (Section Section 7.4). When this equation is solved for y , the resulting form is called the slope-intercept form. Let's generate this new form. This equation is of the form y = m x + b if we replace with m and constant with b . (Note: The fact that we let is unfortunate and occurs beacuse of the letters we have chosen to use in the general form. The letter b occurs on both sides of the equal sign and may not represent the same value at all. This problem is one of the historical convention and, fortunately, does not occur very often.) The following examples illustrate this procedure. Example 7.15.  Solve 3x + 2y = 6 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, and b = 3 . Example 7.16.  Solve – 15x + 5y = 20 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, m = 3 and b = 4 . Example 7.17.  Solve 4x – y = 0 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, m = 4 and b = 0 . Notice that we can write y = 4x as y = 4x + 0 .  || The Slope-Intercept Form of a Line The Slope-Intercept Form of a Line y = m x + b A linear equation in two variables written in the form y = m x + b is said to be in slope-intercept form.  || Slope and Intercept When the equation of a line is written in slope-intercept form, two important properties of the line can be seen: the slope and the intercept. Let's look at these two properties by graphing several lines and observing them carefully.  || The Formula for the Slope of a Line We have observed that the slope is a measure of the steepness of a line. We wish to develop a formula for measuring this steepness. It seems reasonable to develop a slope formula that produces the following results: Steepness of line 1 > steepness of line 2. Consider a line on which we select any two points. We’ll denote these points with the ordered pairs (x 1,  y 1  ) and (x 2,  y 2  ) . The subscripts help us to identify the points. (x 1,  y 1  ) is the first point. Subscript 1 indicates the first point. (x 2,  y 2  ) is the second point. Subscript 2 indicates the second point. The difference in x values (x 2 − x 1 ) gives us the horizontal change, and the difference in y values (y 2 − y 1 ) gives us the vertical change. If the line is very steep, then when going from the first point to the second point, we would expect a large vertical change compared to the horizontal change. If the line is not very steep, then when going from the first point to the second point, we would expect a small vertical change compared to the horizontal change. We are comparing changes. We see that we are comparing This is a comparison and is therefore a ratio. Ratios can be expressed as fractions. Thus, a measure of the steepness of a line can be expressed as a ratio. The slope of a line is defined as the ratio Mathematically, we can write these changes as Finding the Slope of a Line The slope of a nonvertical line passing through the points (x 1,  y 1  ) and (x 2,  y 2  ) is found by the formula  || Calculator Problems For the following problems, determine the slope and y-intercept of the lines. Round to two decimal places. Exercise 7.5.73. (Go to Solution) 3.8x + 12.1y = 4.26 Exercise 7.5.74. 8.09x + 5.57y = − 1.42 Exercise 7.5.75. (Go to Solution) 10.813x − 17.0y = − 45.99 Exercise 7.5.76. − 6.003x − 92.388y = 0.008 For the following problems, find the slope of the line through the pairs of points. Round to two decimal places. Exercise 7.5.77. (Go to Solution) (5.56, 9.37), (2.16, 4.90) Exercise 7.5.78. (33.1, 8.9), (42.7,  − 1.06) Exercise 7.5.79. (Go to Solution) (155.89, 227.61), (157.04,227.61) Exercise 7.5.80. (0.00426,  − 0.00404), ( − 0.00191,  − 0.00404) Exercise 7.5.81. (Go to Solution) (88.81,  − 23.19), (88.81,  − 26.87) Exercise 7.5.82. ( − 0.0000567,  − 0.0000567), ( − 0.00765, 0.00764)  ||  || Using the Slope and Intercept to Graph a Line When a linear equation is given in the general form, a x + b y = c , we observed that an efficient graphical approach was the intercept method. We let x = 0 and computed the corresponding value of y , then let y = 0 and computed the corresponding value of x . When an equation is written in the slope-intercept form, y = m x + b , there are also efficient ways of constructing the graph. One way, but less efficient, is to choose two or three x-values and compute to find the corresponding y-values . However, computations are tedious, time consuming, and can lead to errors. Another way, the method listed below, makes use of the slope and the y-intercept for graphing the line. It is quick, simple, and involves no computations. Graphing Method Plot the y-intercept (0, b) . Determine another point by using the slope m . Draw a line through the two points. Recall that we defined the slope m as the ratio . The numerator y 2 − y 1 represents the number of units that y changes and the denominator x 2 − x 1 represents the number of units that x changes. Suppose . Then p is the number of units that y changes and q is the number of units that x changes. Since these changes occur simultaneously, start with your pencil at the y-intercept , move p units in the appropriate vertical direction, and then move q units in the appropriate horizontal direction. Mark a point at this location.  || Excersise for Review Exercise 7.6.21. (Go to Solution) (Section 5.7) Solve the inequality 2 − 4x ≥ x − 3 . Exercise 7.6.22. (Section 7.2) Graph the inequality y + 3 > 1 . Exercise 7.6.23. (Go to Solution) (Section 7.4) Graph the equation y = − 2 . Exercise 7.6.24. (Section 7.5) Determine the slope and y-intercept of the line − 4y − 3x = 16 . Exercise 7.6.25. (Go to Solution) (Section 7.5) Find the slope of the line passing through the points ( − 1, 5) and (2, 3) .  ||  || The Slope-Intercept and Point-Slope Forms In the pervious sections we have been given an equation and have constructed the line to which it corresponds. Now, however, suppose we're given some geometric information about the line and we wish to construct the corresponding equation. We wish to find the equation of a line. We know that the formula for the slope of a line is We can find the equation of a line using the slope formula in either of two ways: Example 7.40.  If we’re given the slope, m , and any point (x, y 1 ) on the line, we can substitute this information into the formula for slope.Let (x, y 1 ) be the known point on the line and let (x,y) be any other point on the line. Then Since this equation was derived using a point and the slope of a line, it is called the point-slope form of a line. Example 7.41.  If we are given the slope, m , y-intercept, (0,b) , we can substitute this information into the formula for slope.Let (0,b) be the y-intercept and (x,y) be any other point on the line. Then, Since this equation was derived using the slope and the intercept, it was called the slope-intercept form of a line. We summarize these two derivations as follows. Forms of the Equation of a Line We can find the equation of a line if we’re given either of the following sets of information: The slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0,b), by substituting these values into This is the slope-intercept form. The slope, m, and any point, (x 1 ,y 1 ), by substituting these values into This is the point-slope form. Notice that both forms rely on knowing the slope. If we are given two points on the line we may still find the equation of the line passing through them by first finding the slope of the line, then using the point-slope form. It is customary to use either the slope-intercept form or the general form for the final form of the line. We will use the slope-intercept form as the final form.  ||  || Location of Solutions In our study of linear equations in two variables, we observed that all the solutions to the equation, and only the solutions to the equation, were located on the graph of the equation. We now wish to determine the location of the solutions to linear inequalities in two variables. Linear inequalities in two variables are inequalities of the forms: Half-Planes A straight line drawn through the plane divides the plane into two half-planes. Boundary Line The straight line is called the boundary line. Solution to an Inequality in Two Variables Recall that when working with linear equations in two variables, we observed that ordered pairs that produced true statements when substituted into an equation were called solutions to that equation. We can make a similar statement for inequalities in two variables. We say that an inequality in two variables has a solution when a pair of values has been found such that when these values are substituted into the inequality a true statement results. The Location of Solutions in the Plane As with equations, solutions to linear inequalities have particular locations in the plane. All solutions to a linear inequality in two variables are located in one and only in one entire half-plane. For example, consider the inequality 2x + 3y ≤ 6 All the solutions to the inequality 2x + 3y ≤ 6 lie in the shaded half-plane. Example 7.51.  Point A(1,  − 1) is a solution since Example 7.52.  Point B(2, 5) is not a solution since  || Method of Graphing The method of graphing linear inequalities in two variables is as follows: Graph the boundary line (consider the inequality as an equation, that is, replace the inequality sign with an equal sign). If the inequality is ≤ or ≥ , draw the boundary line solid. This means that points on the line are solutions and are part of the graph. If the inequality is < or > , draw the boundary line dotted. This means that points on the line are not solutions and are not part of the graph. Determine which half-plane to shade by choosing a test point. If, when substituted, the test point yields a true statement, shade the half-plane containing it. If, when substituted, the test point yields a false statement, shade the half-plane on the opposite side of the boundary line.  || 