Rectangular Coordinate System The rectangular coordinate system A system with two number lines at right angles uniquely specifying points in a plane using ordered pairs (x, y). consists of two real number lines that intersect at a right angle. The horizontal number line is called the x-axis The horizontal number line used as reference in the rectangular coordinate system. , and the vertical number line is called the y-axis The vertical number line used as reference in the rectangular coordinate system. . These two number lines define a flat surface called a plane The flat surface defined by the x- and y-axes. , and each point on this plane is associated with an ordered pair A pair (x, y) that identifies position relative to the origin on a rectangular coordinate plane. of real numbers (x, y). The first number is called the x-coordinate, and the second number is called the y-coordinate. The intersection of the two axes is known as the origin The point where the x- and y-axes cross, denoted by (0, 0). , which corresponds to the point (0, 0). An ordered pair (x, y) represents the position of a point relative to the origin. The x-coordinate represents a position to the right of the origin if it is positive and to the left of the origin if it is negative. The y-coordinate represents a position above the origin if it is positive and below the origin if it is negative. Using this system, every position (point) in the plane is uniquely identified. For example, the pair (2, 3) denotes the position relative to the origin as shown: Portrait of René Descartes (1596–1650) after Frans Hals, from http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Frans_Hals_-_Portret_van_Ren%C3%A9_Descartes.jpg. This system is often called the Cartesian coordinate system Used in honor of René Descartes when referring to the rectangular coordinate system. , named after the French mathematician René Descartes (1596–1650). The x- and y-axes break the plane into four regions called quadrants The four regions of a rectangular coordinate plane partly bounded by the x- and y-axes and numbered using the roman numerals I, II, III, and IV. , named using roman numerals I, II, III, and IV, as pictured. In quadrant I, both coordinates are positive. In quadrant II, the x-coordinate is negative and the y-coordinate is positive. In quadrant III, both coordinates are negative. In quadrant IV, the x-coordinate is positive and the y-coordinate is negative.   Example 1: Plot the ordered pair (−3, 5) and determine the quadrant in which it lies. Solution: The coordinates x = − 3 and y = 5 indicate a point 3 units to the left of and 5 units above the origin. Answer: The point is plotted in quadrant II (QII) because the x-coordinate is negative and the y-coordinate is positive.   Ordered pairs with 0 as one of the coordinates do not lie in a quadrant; these points are on one axis or the other (or the point is the origin if both coordinates are 0). Also, the scale indicated on the x-axis may be different from the scale indicated on the y-axis. Choose a scale that is convenient for the given situation.   Example 2: Plot this set of ordered pairs: {(4, 0), (−6, 0), (0, 3), (−2, 6), (−4, −6)}. Solution: Each tick mark on the x-axis represents 2 units and each tick mark on the y-axis represents 3 units.   Example 3: Plot this set of ordered pairs: {(−6, −5), (−3, −3), (0, −1), (3, 1), (6, 3)}. Solution: In this example, the points appear to be collinear Describes points that lie on the same line. , or to lie on the same line. The entire chapter focuses on finding and expressing points with this property.   Try this! Plot the set of points {(5, 3), (−3, 2), (−2, −4), (4, −3)} and indicate in which quadrant they lie. ([Link: Click here for printable graph paper in PDF.]) Answer: Video Solution Graphs are used in everyday life to display data visually. A line graph A set of related data values graphed on a coordinate plane and connected by line segments. consists of a set of related data values graphed on a coordinate plane and connected by line segments. Typically, the independent quantity, such as time, is displayed on the x-axis and the dependent quantity, such as distance traveled, on the y-axis.   Example 4: The following line graph shows the number of mathematics and statistics bachelor’s degrees awarded in the United States each year since 1970. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. a. How many mathematics and statistics bachelor’s degrees were awarded in 1975? b. In which years were the number of mathematics and statistics degrees awarded at the low of 11,000? Solution: a. The scale on the x-axis represents time since 1970, so to determine the number of degrees awarded in 1975, read the y-value of the graph at x = 5. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. The y-value corresponding to x = 5 is 18. The graph indicates that this is in thousands; there were 18,000 mathematics and statistics degrees awarded in 1975. b. To find the year a particular number of degrees was awarded, first look at the y-axis. In this case, 11,000 degrees is represented by 11 on the y-axis; look to the right to see in which years this occurred. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. The y-value of 11 occurs at two data points, one where x = 10 and the other where x = 30. These values correspond to the years 1980 and 2000, respectively. Answers: a. In the year 1975, 18,000 mathematics and statistics degrees were awarded. b. In the years 1980 and 2000, the lows of 11,000 mathematics and statistics degrees were awarded. Rectangular Coordinate System The rectangular coordinate system A system with two number lines at right angles uniquely specifying points in a plane using ordered pairs (x, y). consists of two real number lines that intersect at a right angle. The horizontal number line is called the x-axis The horizontal number line used as reference in the rectangular coordinate system. , and the vertical number line is called the y-axis The vertical number line used as reference in the rectangular coordinate system. . These two number lines define a flat surface called a plane The flat surface defined by the x- and y-axes. , and each point on this plane is associated with an ordered pair A pair (x, y) that identifies position relative to the origin on a rectangular coordinate plane. of real numbers (x, y). The first number is called the x-coordinate, and the second number is called the y-coordinate. The intersection of the two axes is known as the origin The point where the x- and y-axes cross, denoted by (0, 0). , which corresponds to the point (0, 0). An ordered pair (x, y) represents the position of a point relative to the origin. The x-coordinate represents a position to the right of the origin if it is positive and to the left of the origin if it is negative. The y-coordinate represents a position above the origin if it is positive and below the origin if it is negative. Using this system, every position (point) in the plane is uniquely identified. For example, the pair (2, 3) denotes the position relative to the origin as shown: Portrait of René Descartes (1596–1650) after Frans Hals, from http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Frans_Hals_-_Portret_van_Ren%C3%A9_Descartes.jpg. This system is often called the Cartesian coordinate system Used in honor of René Descartes when referring to the rectangular coordinate system. , named after the French mathematician René Descartes (1596–1650). The x- and y-axes break the plane into four regions called quadrants The four regions of a rectangular coordinate plane partly bounded by the x- and y-axes and numbered using the roman numerals I, II, III, and IV. , named using roman numerals I, II, III, and IV, as pictured. In quadrant I, both coordinates are positive. In quadrant II, the x-coordinate is negative and the y-coordinate is positive. In quadrant III, both coordinates are negative. In quadrant IV, the x-coordinate is positive and the y-coordinate is negative.   Example 1: Plot the ordered pair (−3, 5) and determine the quadrant in which it lies. Solution: The coordinates x = − 3 and y = 5 indicate a point 3 units to the left of and 5 units above the origin. Answer: The point is plotted in quadrant II (QII) because the x-coordinate is negative and the y-coordinate is positive.   Ordered pairs with 0 as one of the coordinates do not lie in a quadrant; these points are on one axis or the other (or the point is the origin if both coordinates are 0). Also, the scale indicated on the x-axis may be different from the scale indicated on the y-axis. Choose a scale that is convenient for the given situation.   Example 2: Plot this set of ordered pairs: {(4, 0), (−6, 0), (0, 3), (−2, 6), (−4, −6)}. Solution: Each tick mark on the x-axis represents 2 units and each tick mark on the y-axis represents 3 units.   Example 3: Plot this set of ordered pairs: {(−6, −5), (−3, −3), (0, −1), (3, 1), (6, 3)}. Solution: In this example, the points appear to be collinear Describes points that lie on the same line. , or to lie on the same line. The entire chapter focuses on finding and expressing points with this property.   Try this! Plot the set of points {(5, 3), (−3, 2), (−2, −4), (4, −3)} and indicate in which quadrant they lie. ([Link: Click here for printable graph paper in PDF.]) Answer: Video Solution Graphs are used in everyday life to display data visually. A line graph A set of related data values graphed on a coordinate plane and connected by line segments. consists of a set of related data values graphed on a coordinate plane and connected by line segments. Typically, the independent quantity, such as time, is displayed on the x-axis and the dependent quantity, such as distance traveled, on the y-axis.   Example 4: The following line graph shows the number of mathematics and statistics bachelor’s degrees awarded in the United States each year since 1970. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. a. How many mathematics and statistics bachelor’s degrees were awarded in 1975? b. In which years were the number of mathematics and statistics degrees awarded at the low of 11,000? Solution: a. The scale on the x-axis represents time since 1970, so to determine the number of degrees awarded in 1975, read the y-value of the graph at x = 5. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. The y-value corresponding to x = 5 is 18. The graph indicates that this is in thousands; there were 18,000 mathematics and statistics degrees awarded in 1975. b. To find the year a particular number of degrees was awarded, first look at the y-axis. In this case, 11,000 degrees is represented by 11 on the y-axis; look to the right to see in which years this occurred. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. The y-value of 11 occurs at two data points, one where x = 10 and the other where x = 30. These values correspond to the years 1980 and 2000, respectively. Answers: a. In the year 1975, 18,000 mathematics and statistics degrees were awarded. b. In the years 1980 and 2000, the lows of 11,000 mathematics and statistics degrees were awarded.  || 