Solutions and Equivalent Equations Conditional Equations The truth of some equations is conditional upon the value chosen for the variable. Such equations are called conditional equations. There are two additional types of equations. They are examined in courses in algebra, so we will not consider them now. Solutions and Solving an Equation The set of values that, when substituted for the variables, make the equation true, are called the solutions of the equation. An equation has been solved when all its solutions have been found. Sample Set A Example 11.16.  Verify that 3 is a solution to . When , Example 11.17.  Verify that is a solution to When , Example 11.18.  Verify that 5 is not a solution to . When , Example 11.19.  Verify that -2 is a solution to . When , Practice Set A Exercise 11.4.1. (Go to Solution) Verify that 5 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.2. (Go to Solution) Verify that is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.3. (Go to Solution) Verify that 0 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.4. (Go to Solution) Verify that 3 is not a solution to . Exercise 11.4.5. (Go to Solution) Verify that -1 is a solution to . Equivalent Equations Some equations have precisely the same collection of solutions. Such equations are called equivalent equations. For example, , , and are all equivalent equations since the only solution to each is . (Can you verify this?) Solutions and Equivalent Equations Conditional Equations The truth of some equations is conditional upon the value chosen for the variable. Such equations are called conditional equations. There are two additional types of equations. They are examined in courses in algebra, so we will not consider them now. Solutions and Solving an Equation The set of values that, when substituted for the variables, make the equation true, are called the solutions of the equation. An equation has been solved when all its solutions have been found. Sample Set A Example 11.16.  Verify that 3 is a solution to . When , Example 11.17.  Verify that is a solution to When , Example 11.18.  Verify that 5 is not a solution to . When , Example 11.19.  Verify that -2 is a solution to . When , Practice Set A Exercise 11.4.1. (Go to Solution) Verify that 5 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.2. (Go to Solution) Verify that is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.3. (Go to Solution) Verify that 0 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.4. (Go to Solution) Verify that 3 is not a solution to . Exercise 11.4.5. (Go to Solution) Verify that -1 is a solution to . Equivalent Equations Some equations have precisely the same collection of solutions. Such equations are called equivalent equations. For example, , , and are all equivalent equations since the only solution to each is . (Can you verify this?)  || 