Multiplication with Signed Numbers We can apply this same rule to make sense out of what we mean by a positive number times a negative number. For example, 3 × (–4) just means to take 3 of the number “negative four” and add them together: 3 × (–4) = (–4) + (–4) + (–4) = –12 Unfortunately, this scheme breaks down when we try to multiply a negative number times a number. It doesn’t make sense to try to write down a number a negative number of times. There are two ways to look at this problem. One way is to use the fact that multiplication obeys the commutative law, which means that the order of multiplication does not matter: a × b = b × a. This lets us write a negative times a positive as a positive times a negative and proceed as before: (–3) × 4 = 4 × (–3) = (–3) + (–3) + (–3) + (–3) = –12 However, we are still in trouble when it comes to multiplying a negative times a negative. A better way to look at this problem is to demand that multiplication obey a consistent pattern. If we look at a multiplication table for positive numbers and then extend it to include negative numbers, the results in the table should continue to change in the same pattern. For example, consider the following multiplication table: a b a × b 3 2 6 2 2 4 1 2 2 0 2 0 The numbers in the last column are decreasing by 2 each time, so if we let the values for a continue into the negative numbers we should keep decreasing the product by 2: a b a × b 3 2 6 2 2 4 1 2 2 0 2 0 –1 2 –2 –2 2 –4 –3 2 –6 We can make a bigger multiplication table that shows many different possibilities. By keeping the step sizes the same in each row and column, even as we extend into the negative numbers, we see that the following sign rules hold for multiplication: Multiplication with Signed Numbers We can apply this same rule to make sense out of what we mean by a positive number times a negative number. For example, 3 × (–4) just means to take 3 of the number “negative four” and add them together: 3 × (–4) = (–4) + (–4) + (–4) = –12 Unfortunately, this scheme breaks down when we try to multiply a negative number times a number. It doesn’t make sense to try to write down a number a negative number of times. There are two ways to look at this problem. One way is to use the fact that multiplication obeys the commutative law, which means that the order of multiplication does not matter: a × b = b × a. This lets us write a negative times a positive as a positive times a negative and proceed as before: (–3) × 4 = 4 × (–3) = (–3) + (–3) + (–3) + (–3) = –12 However, we are still in trouble when it comes to multiplying a negative times a negative. A better way to look at this problem is to demand that multiplication obey a consistent pattern. If we look at a multiplication table for positive numbers and then extend it to include negative numbers, the results in the table should continue to change in the same pattern. For example, consider the following multiplication table: a b a × b 3 2 6 2 2 4 1 2 2 0 2 0 The numbers in the last column are decreasing by 2 each time, so if we let the values for a continue into the negative numbers we should keep decreasing the product by 2: a b a × b 3 2 6 2 2 4 1 2 2 0 2 0 –1 2 –2 –2 2 –4 –3 2 –6 We can make a bigger multiplication table that shows many different possibilities. By keeping the step sizes the same in each row and column, even as we extend into the negative numbers, we see that the following sign rules hold for multiplication:  || 