1009024	Dependence language model for information retrieval This paper presents a new dependence language modeling approach to information retrieval. The approach extends the basic language modeling approach based on unigram by relaxing the independence assumption. We integrate the linkage of a query as a hidden variable, which expresses the term dependencies within the query as an acyclic, planar, undirected graph. We then assume that a query is generated from a document in two stages: the linkage is generated first, and then each term is generated in turn depending on other related terms according to the linkage. We also present a smoothing method for model parameter estimation and an approach to learning the linkage of a sentence in an unsupervised manner. The new approach is compared to the classical probabilistic retrieval model and the previously proposed language models with and without taking into account term dependencies. Results show that our model achieves substantial and significant improvements on TREC collections.
1009025	Parsimonious language models for information retrieval We systematically investigate a new approach to estimating the parameters of language models for information retrieval, called parsimonious language models. Parsimonious language models explicitly address the relation between levels of language models that are typically used for smoothing. As such, they need fewer (non-zero) parameters to describe the data. We apply parsimonious models at three stages of the retrieval process: 1) at indexing time; 2) at search time; 3) at feedback time. Experimental results show that we are able to build models that are significantly smaller than standard models, but that still perform at least as well as the standard approaches.
1009026	Cluster-based retrieval using language models Previous research on cluster-based retrieval has been inconclusive as to whether it does bring improved retrieval effectiveness over document-based retrieval. Recent developments in the language modeling approach to IR have motivated us to re-examine this problem within this new retrieval framework. We propose two new models for cluster-based retrieval and evaluate them on several TREC collections. We show that cluster-based retrieval can perform consistently across collections of realistic size, and significant improvements over document-based retrieval can be obtained in a fully automatic manner and without relevance information provided by human.
1009027	Corpus structure, language models, and ad hoc information retrieval Most previous work on the recently developed language-modeling approach to information retrieval focuses on document-specific characteristics, and therefore does not take into account the structure of the surrounding corpus. We propose a novel algorithmic framework in which information provided by document-based language models is enhanced by the incorporation of information drawn from clusters of similar documents. Using this framework, we develop a suite of new algorithms. Even the simplest typically outperforms the standard language-modeling approach in precision and recall, and our new interpolation algorithm posts statistically significant improvements for both metrics over all three corpora tested.
1009029	Document clustering by concept factorization In this paper, we propose a new data clustering method called concept factorization that models each concept as a linear combination of the data points, and each data point as a linear combination of the concepts. With this model, the data clustering task is accomplished by computing the two sets of linear coefficients, and this linear coefficients computation is carried out by finding the non-negative solution that minimizes the reconstruction error of the data points. The cluster label of each data point can be easily derived from the obtained linear coefficients. This method differs from the method of clustering based on non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) citeXu03 in that it can be applied to data containing negative values and the method can be implemented in the kernel space. Our experimental results show that the proposed data clustering method and its variations performs best among 11 algorithms and their variations that we have evaluated on both TDT2 and Reuters-21578 corpus. In addition to its good performance, the new method also has the merit in its easy and reliable derivation of the clustering results.
1009030	Learning to cluster web search results Organizing Web search results into clusters facilitates users' quick browsing through search results. Traditional clustering techniques are inadequate since they don't generate clusters with highly readable names. In this paper, we reformalize the clustering problem as a salient phrase ranking problem. Given a query and the ranked list of documents (typically a list of titles and snippets) returned by a certain Web search engine, our method first extracts and ranks salient phrases as candidate cluster names, based on a regression model learned from human labeled training data. The documents are assigned to relevant salient phrases to form candidate clusters, and the final clusters are generated by merging these candidate clusters. Experimental results verify our method's feasibility and effectiveness.
1009031	Document clustering via adaptive subspace iteration Document clustering has long been an important problem in information retrieval. In this paper, we present a new clustering algorithm ASI 1 , which uses explicitly modeling of the subspace structure associated with each cluster. ASI simultaneously performs data reduction and subspace identification via an iterative alternating optimization procedure. Motivated from the optimization procedure, we then provide a novel method to determine the number of clusters. We also discuss the connections of ASI with various existential clustering approaches. Finally, extensive experimental results on real data sets show the effectiveness of ASI algorithm.
1009032	Restrictive clustering and metaclustering for self-organizing document collections This paper addresses the problem of automatically structuring heterogenous document collections by using clustering methods. In contrast to traditional clustering, we study restrictive methods and ensemble-based meta methods that may decide to leave out some documents rather than assigning them to inappropriate clusters with low confidence. These techniques result in higher cluster purity, better overall accuracy, and make unsupervised self-organization more robust. Our comprehensive experimental studies on three different real-world data collections demonstrate these benefits. The proposed methods seem particularly suitable for automatically substructuring personal email folders or personal Web directories that are populated by focused crawlers, and they can be combined with supervised classification techniques.
1009034	Feature selection using linear classifier weights: interaction with classification models This paper explores feature scoring and selection based on weights from linear classification models. It investigates how these methods combine with various learning models. Our comparative analysis includes three learning algorithms: Naïve Bayes, Perceptron, and Support Vector Machines (SVM) in combination with three feature weighting methods: Odds Ratio, Information Gain, and weights from linear models, the linear SVM and Perceptron. Experiments show that feature selection using weights from linear SVMs yields better classification performance than other feature weighting methods when combined with the three explored learning algorithms. The results support the conjecture that it is the sophistication of the feature weighting method rather than its apparent compatibility with the learning algorithm that improves classification performance.
1009035	Web-page classification through summarization Web-page classification is much more difficult than pure-text classification due to a large variety of noisy information embedded in Web pages. In this paper, we propose a new Web-page classification algorithm based on Web summarization for improving the accuracy. We first give empirical evidence that ideal Web-page summaries generated by human editors can indeed improve the performance of Web-page classification algorithms. We then propose a new Web summarization-based classification algorithm and evaluate it along with several other state-of-the-art text summarization algorithms on the LookSmart Web directory. Experimental results show that our proposed summarization-based classification algorithm achieves an approximately 8.8% improvement as compared to pure-text-based classification algorithm. We further introduce an ensemble classifier using the improved summarization algorithm and show that it achieves about 12.9% improvement over pure-text based methods.
1009036	Parameterized generation of labeled datasets for text categorization based on a hierarchical directory Although text categorization is a burgeoning area of IR research, readily available test collections in this field are surprisingly scarce. We describe a methodology and system (named ACCIO) for automatically acquiring labeled datasets for text categorization from the World Wide Web, by capitalizing on the body of knowledge encoded in the structure of existing hierarchical directories such as the Open Directory. We define parameters of categories that make it possible to acquire numerous datasets with desired properties , which in turn allow better control over categorization experiments. In particular, we develop metrics that estimate the difficulty of a dataset by examining the host directory structure. These metrics are shown to be good predictors of categorization accuracy that can be achieved on a dataset, and serve as efficient heuristics for generating datasets subject to user's requirements. A large collection of automatically generated datasets are made available for other researchers to use.
1009038	Information retrieval using word senses: root sense tagging approach Information retrieval using word senses is emerging as a good research challenge on semantic information retrieval. In this paper, we propose a new method using word senses in information retrieval: root sense tagging method. This method assigns coarse-grained word senses defined in WordNet to query terms and document terms by unsupervised way using co-occurrence information constructed automatically. Our sense tagger is crude, but performs consistent disambiguation by considering only the single most informative word as evidence to disambiguate the target word. We also allow multiple-sense assignment to alleviate the problem caused by incorrect disambiguation.Experimental results on a large-scale TREC collection show that our approach to improve retrieval effectiveness is successful, while most of the previous work failed to improve performances even on small text collection. Our method also shows promising results when is combined with pseudo relevance feedback and state-of-the-art retrieval function such as BM25.
1009039	An effective approach to document retrieval via utilizing WordNet and recognizing phrases Noun phrases in queries are identified and classified into four types: proper names, dictionary phrases, simple phrases and complex phrases. A document has a phrase if all content words in the phrase are within a window of a certain size. The window sizes for different types of phrases are different and are determined using a decision tree. Phrases are more important than individual terms. Consequently, documents in response to a query are ranked with matching phrases given a higher priority. We utilize WordNet to disambiguate word senses of query terms. Whenever the sense of a query term is determined, its synonyms, hyponyms, words from its definition and its compound words are considered for possible additions to the query. Experimental results show that our approach yields between 23% and 31% improvements over the best-known results on the TREC 9, 10 and 12 collections for short (title only) queries, without using Web data.
1009040	Web-a-where: geotagging web content We describe Web-a-Where, a system for associating geography with Web pages. Web-a-Where locates mentions of places and determines the place each name refers to. In addition, it assigns to each page a geographic focus --- a locality that the page discusses as a whole. The tagging process is simple and fast, aimed to be applied to large collections of Web pages and to facilitate a variety of location-based applications and data analyses.Geotagging involves arbitrating two types of ambiguities: geo/non-geo and geo/geo. A geo/non-geo ambiguity occurs when a place name also has a non-geographic meaning, such as a person name (e.g., Berlin) or a common word (Turkey). Geo/geo ambiguity arises when distinct places have the same name, as in London, England vs. London, Ontario.An implementation of the tagger within the framework of the WebFountain data mining system is described, and evaluated on several corpora of real Web pages. Precision of up to 82% on individual geotags is achieved. We also evaluate the relative contribution of various heuristics the tagger employs, and evaluate the focus-finding algorithm using a corpus pretagged with localities, showing that as many as 91% of the foci reported are correct up to the country level.
1009042	Focused named entity recognition using machine learning In this paper we study the problem of finding most topical named entities among all entities in a document, which we refer to as focused named entity recognition. We show that these focused named entities are useful for many natural language processing applications, such as document summarization, search result ranking, and entity detection and tracking. We propose a statistical model for focused named entity recognition by converting it into a classification problem. We then study the impact of various linguistic features and compare a number of classification algorithms. From experiments on an annotated Chinese news corpus, we demonstrate that the proposed method can achieve near human-level accuracy.
1009043	Learning phonetic similarity for matching named entity translations and mining new translations We propose a novel named entity matching model which considers both semantic and phonetic clues. The matching is formulated as an optimization problem. One major component is a phonetic matching model which exploits similarity at the phoneme level. We investigate three learning algorithms for obtaining the similarity information of basic phoneme units based on training examples. By applying this proposed named entity matching model, we also develop a mining framework for discovering new, unseen named entity translations from online daily Web news. This framework harvests comparable news in different languages using an existing bilingual dictionary. It is able to discover new name translations not found in the dictionary.
1009044	Text classification and named entities for new event detection New Event Detection is a challenging task that still offers scope for great improvement after years of effort. In this paper we show how performance on New Event Detection (NED) can be improved by the use of text classification techniques as well as by using named entities in a new way. We explore modifications to the document representation in a vector space-based NED system. We also show that addressing named entities preferentially is useful only in certain situations. A combination of all the above results in a multi-stage NED system that performs much better than baseline single-stage NED systems.
1009046	Assigning identifiers to documents to enhance the clustering property of fulltext indexes Web Search Engines provide a large-scale text document retrieval service by processing huge Inverted File indexes. Inverted File indexes allow fast query resolution and good memory utilization since their d -gaps representation can be effectively and efficiently compressed by using variable length encoding methods. This paper proposes and evaluates some algorithms aimed to find an assignment of the document identifiers which minimizes the average values of d -gaps, thus enhancing the effectiveness of traditional compression methods. We ran several tests over the Google contest collection in order to validate the techniques proposed. The experiments demonstrated the scalability and effectiveness of our algorithms. Using the proposed algorithms, we were able to sensibly improve (up to 20.81%) the compression ratios of several encoding schemes.
1009047	Filtering algorithms for information retrieval models with named attributes and proximity operators In the selective dissemination of information (or publish/subscribe) paradigm, clients subscribe to a server with continuous queries (or profiles) that express their information needs. Clients can also publish documents to servers. Whenever a document is published, the continuous queries satisfying this document are found and notifications are sent to appropriate clients. This paper deals with the filtering problem that needs to be solved effciently by each server: Given a database of continuous queries db and a document d , find all queries q ? db that match d . We present data structures and indexing algorithms that enable us to solve the filtering problem efficiently for large databases of queries expressed in the model AWP which is based on named attributes with values of type text, and word proximity operators.
1009048	Hourly analysis of a very large topically categorized web query log We review a query log of hundreds of millions of queries that constitute the total query traffic for an entire week of a general-purpose commercial web search service. Previously, query logs have been studied from a single, cumulative view. In contrast, our analysis shows changes in popularity and uniqueness of topically categorized queries across the hours of the day. We examine query traffic on an hourly basis by matching it against lists of queries that have been topically pre-categorized by human editors. This represents 13% of the query traffic. We show that query traffic from particular topical categories differs both from the query stream as a whole and from other categories. This analysis provides valuable insight for improving retrieval effectiveness and efficiency. It is also relevant to the development of enhanced query disambiguation, routing, and caching algorithms.
1009050	A collaborative filtering algorithm and evaluation metric that accurately model the user experience Collaborative Filtering (CF) systems have been researched for over a decade as a tool to deal with information overload. At the heart of these systems are the algorithms which generate the predictions and recommendations.In this article we empirically demonstrate that two of the most acclaimed CF recommendation algorithms have flaws that result in a dramatically unacceptable user experience.In response, we introduce a new Belief Distribution Algorithm that overcomes these flaws and provides substantially richer user modeling. The Belief Distribution Algorithm retains the qualities of nearest-neighbor algorithms which have performed well in the past, yet produces predictions of belief distributions across rating values rather than a point rating value.In addition, we illustrate how the exclusive use of the mean absolute error metric has concealed these flaws for so long, and we propose the use of a modified Precision metric for more accurately evaluating the user experience.
1009051	An automatic weighting scheme for collaborative filtering Collaborative filtering identifies information interest of a particular user based on the information provided by other similar users. The memory-based approaches for collaborative filtering (e.g., Pearson correlation coefficient approach) identify the similarity between two users by comparing their ratings on a set of items. In these approaches, different items are weighted either equally or by some predefined functions. The impact of rating discrepancies among different users has not been taken into consideration. For example, an item that is highly favored by most users should have a smaller impact on the user-similarity than an item for which different types of users tend to give different ratings. Even though simple weighting methods such as variance weighting try to address this problem, empirical studies have shown that they are ineffective in improving the performance of collaborative filtering. In this paper, we present an optimization algorithm to automatically compute the weights for different items based on their ratings from training users. More specifically, the new weighting scheme will create a clustered distribution for user vectors in the item space by bringing users of similar interests closer and separating users of different interests more distant. Empirical studies over two datasets have shown that our new weighting scheme substantially improves the performance of the Pearson correlation coefficient method for collaborative filtering.
1009052	Using bayesian priors to combine classifiers for adaptive filtering An adaptive information filtering system monitors a document stream to identify the documents that match information needs specified by user profiles. As the system filters, it also refines its knowledge about the user's information needs based on long-term observations of the document stream and periodic feedback(training data) from the user. Low variance profile learning algorithms, such as Rocchio, work well at the early stage of filtering when the system has very few training data. Low bias profile learning algorithms, such as Logistic Regression, work well at the later stage of filtering when the system has accumulated enough training data.However, an empirical system needs to works well consistently at all stages of filtering process. This paper addresses this problem by proposing a new technique to combine different text classification algorithms via a constrained maximum likelihood Bayesian prior. This technique provides a trade off between bias and variance, and the combined classifier may achieve a consistent good performance at different stages of filtering. We implemented the proposed technique to combine two complementary classification algorithms: Rocchio and logistic regression. The new algorithm is shown to compare favorably with Rocchio, Logistic Regression, and the best methods in the TREC-9 and TREC-11 adaptive filtering tracks.
1009053	A nonparametric hierarchical bayesian framework for information filtering Information filtering has made considerable progress in recent years. The predominant approaches are content-based methods and collaborative methods. Researchers have largely concentrated on either of the two approaches since a principled unifying framework is still lacking. This paper suggests that both approaches can be combined under a hierarchical Bayesian framework . Individual content-based user profiles are generated and collaboration between various user models is achieved via a common learned prior distribution. However, it turns out that a parametric distribution (e.g. Gaussian) is too restrictive to describe such a common learned prior distribution. We thus introduce a nonparametric common prior , which is a sample generated from a Dirichlet process which assumes the role of a hyper prior . We describe effective means to learn this nonparametric distribution, and apply it to learn users' information needs. The resultant algorithm is simple and understandable, and offers a principled solution to combine content-based filtering and collaborative filtering. Within our framework, we are now able to interpret various existing techniques from a unifying point of view. Finally we demonstrate the empirical success of the proposed information filtering methods.
1009055	Automatic image annotation by using concept-sensitive salient objects for image content representation Multi-level annotation of images is a promising solution to enable more effective semantic image retrieval by using various keywords at different semantic levels. In this paper, we propose a multi-level approach to annotate the semantics of natural scenes by using both the dominant image components and the relevant semantic concepts. In contrast to the well-known image-based and region-based approaches, we use the salient objects as the dominant image components to achieve automatic image annotation at the content level. By using the salient objects for image content representation, a novel image classification technique is developed to achieve automatic image annotation at the concept level. To detect the salient objects automatically, a set of detection functions are learned from the labeled image regions by using Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifiers with an automatic scheme for searching the optimal model parameters. To generate the semantic concepts, finite mixture models are used to approximate the class distributions of the relevant salient objects. An adaptive EM algorithm has been proposed to determine the optimal model structure and model parameters simultaneously. We have also demonstrated that our algorithms are very effective to enable multi-level annotation of natural scenes in a large-scale dataset.
1009056	A search engine for historical manuscript images Many museum and library archives are digitizing their large collections of handwritten historical manuscripts to enable public access to them. These collections are only available in image formats and require expensive manual annotation work for access to them. Current handwriting recognizers have word error rates in excess of 50% and therefore cannot be used for such material. We describe two statistical models for retrieval in large collections of handwritten manuscripts given a text query. Both use a set of transcribed page images to learn a joint probability distribution between features computed from word images and their transcriptions. The models can then be used to retrieve unlabeled images of handwritten documents given a text query. We show experiments with a training set of 100 transcribed pages and a test set of 987 handwritten page images from the George Washington collection. Experiments show that the precision at 20 documents is about 0.4 to 0.5 depending on the model. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first automatic retrieval system for historical manuscripts using text queries, without manual transcription of the original corpus.
1009057	Display time as implicit feedback: understanding task effects Recent research has had some success using the length of time a user displays a document in their web browser as implicit feedback for document preference. However, most studies have been confined to specific search domains, such as news, and have not considered the effects of task on display time, and the potential impact of this relationship on the effectiveness of display time as implicit feedback. We describe the results of an intensive naturalistic study of the online information-seeking behaviors of seven subjects during a fourteen-week period. Throughout the study, subjects' online information-seeking activities were monitored with various pieces of logging and evaluation software. Subjects were asked to identify the tasks with which they were working, classify the documents that they viewed according to these tasks, and evaluate the usefulness of the documents. Results of a user-centered analysis demonstrate no general, direct relationship between display time and usefulness, and that display times differ significantly according to specific task, and according to specific user.
1009058	Human versus machine in the topic distillation task This paper reports on and discusses a set of user experiments using the TREC 2003 Web interactive track protocol. The focus is on comparing humans and machine algorithms in terms of performance in a topic distillation task. We also investigated the effect of the search results layout in supporting the users' effort.We have demonstrated that machines can perform nearly as well as people on the topic distillation task. Given a system tailored to the task there is significant performance improvement and finally, given a presentation that supports the task, there is strong user satisfaction.
1009060	Learning effective ranking functions for newsgroup search Web communities are web virtual broadcasting spaces where people can freely discuss anything. While such communities function as discussion boards, they have even greater value as large repositories of archived information. In order to unlock the value of this resource, we need an effective means for searching archived discussion threads. Unfortunately the techniques that have proven successful for searching document collections and the Web are not ideally suited to the task of searching archived community discussions. In this paper, we explore the problem of creating an effective ranking function to predict the most relevant messages to queries in community search. We extract a set of predictive features from the thread trees of newsgroup messages as well as features of message authors and lexical distribution within a message thread. Our final results indicate that when using linear regression with this feature set, our search system achieved a 28.5% performance improvement compared to our baseline system.
1009061	Language-specific models in multilingual topic tracking Topic tracking is complicated when the stories in the stream occur in multiple languages. Typically, researchers have trained only English topic models because the training stories have been provided in English. In tracking, non-English test stories are then machine translated into English to compare them with the topic models. We propose a native language hypothesis stating that comparisons would be more effective in the original language of the story. We first test and support the hypothesis for story link detection. For topic tracking the hypothesis implies that it should be preferable to build separate language-specific topic models for each language in the stream. We compare different methods of incrementally building such native language topic models.
1009062	Web taxonomy integration through co-bootstrapping We address the problem of integrating objects from a source taxonomy into a master taxonomy. This problem is not only currently pervasive on the web, but also important to the emerging semantic web. A straightforward approach to automating this process would be to learn a classifier that can classify objects from the source taxonomy into categories of the master taxonomy. The key insight is that the availability of the source taxonomy data could be helpful to build better classifiers for the master taxonomy if their categorizations have some semantic overlap. In this paper, we propose a new approach, co-bootstrapping, to enhance the classification by exploiting such implicit knowledge. Our experiments with real-world web data show substantial improvements in the performance of taxonomy integration.
1009064	Evaluation of an extraction-based approach to answering definitional questions This paper evaluates an extraction-based approach to answering definitional questions. Our system extracted useful linguistic constructs called linguistic features from raw text using information extraction tools and formulated answers based on such features. The features employed include appositives, copulas, structured patterns, relations, propositions and raw sentences. The features were ranked based on feature type and similarity to a question profile . Redundant features were detected using a simple heuristic-based strategy. The approach achieved state of the art performance at the TREC 2003 QA evaluation. Component analysis of the system was carried out using an automatic scoring function called Rouge (Lin and Hovy, 2003). Major findings include 1) answers using linguistic features are significantly better than those using raw sentences; 2) the most useful features are appositives and copulas; 3) question profiles, as a means of modeling user interests, can significantly improve system performance; 4) the Rouge scores are closely correlated with subjective evaluation results, indicating the suitability of using Rouge for evaluating definitional QA systems.
1009065	Query based event extraction along a timeline In this paper, we present a framework and a system that extracts events relevant to a query from a collection C of documents, and places such events along a timeline. Each event is represented by a sentence extracted from C, based on the assumption that "important" events are widely cited in many documents for a period of time within which these events are of interest. In our experiments, we used queries that are event types ("earthquake") and person names (e.g. "George Bush"). Evaluation was performed using G8 leader names as queries: comparison made by human evaluators between manually and system generated timelines showed that although manually generated timelines are on average more preferable, system generated timelines are sometimes judged to be better than manually constructed ones.
1009066	Sentence completion We discuss a retrieval model in which the task is to complete a sentence, given an initial fragment, and given an application specific document collection. This model is motivated by administrative and call center environments, in which users have to write documents with a certain repetitiveness. We formulate the problem setting and discuss appropriate performance metrics. We present an index-based retrieval algorithm and a cluster-based approach, and evaluate our algorithms using collections of emails that have been written by two distinct service centers.
1009068	Block-level link analysis Link Analysis has shown great potential in improving the performance of web search. PageRank and HITS are two of the most popular algorithms. Most of the existing link analysis algorithms treat a web page as a single node in the web graph. However, in most cases, a web page contains multiple semantics and hence the web page might not be considered as the atomic node. In this paper, the web page is partitioned into blocks using the vision-based page segmentation algorithm. By extracting the page-to-block, block-to-page relationships from link structure and page layout analysis, we can construct a semantic graph over the WWW such that each node exactly represents a single semantic topic. This graph can better describe the semantic structure of the web. Based on block-level link analysis, we proposed two new algorithms, Block Level PageRank and Block Level HITS, whose performances we study extensively using web data.
1009069	Usefulness of hyperlink structure for query-biased topic distillation In this paper, we introduce an information theoretic method for estimating the usefulness of the hyperlink structure induced from the set of retrieved documents. We evaluate the effectiveness of this method in the context of an optimal Bayesian decision mechanism, which selects the most appropriate retrieval approaches on a per-query basis for two TREC tasks. The estimation of the hyperlink structure's usefulness is stable when we use different weighting schemes, or when we employ sampling of documents to reduce the computational overhead. Next, we evaluate the effectiveness of the hyperlink structure's usefulness in a realistic setting, by setting the thresholds of a decision mechanism automatically. Our results show that improvements over the baselines are obtained.
1009070	Block-based web search Multiple-topic and varying-length of web pages are two negative factors significantly affecting the performance of web search. In this paper, we explore the use of page segmentation algorithms to partition web pages into blocks and investigate how to take advantage of block-level evidence to improve retrieval performance in the web context. Because of the special characteristics of web pages, different page segmentation method will have different impact on web search performance. We compare four types of methods, including fixed-length page segmentation, DOM-based page segmentation, vision-based page segmentation, and a combined method which integrates both semantic and fixed-length properties. Experiments on block-level query expansion and retrieval are performed. Among the four approaches, the combined method achieves the best performance for web search. Our experimental results also show that such a semantic partitioning of web pages effectively deals with the problem of multiple drifting topics and mixed lengths, and thus has great potential to boost up the performance of current web search engines.
1009072	A hybrid statistical/linguistic model for generating news story gists In this paper, we describe a News Story Gisting system that generates a 10-word short summary of a news story. This system uses a machine learning technique to combine linguistic, statistical and positional information in order to generate an appropriate summary. We also present the results of an automatic evaluation of this system with respect to the performance of other baseline summarisers using the new ROUGE evaluation metric.
1009073	Image based gisting in CLIR In this paper, we describe research which could lead to a novel approach to gathering an overview of a document in a foreign language. The research explores how much of the meaning of a document could be represented using images by researching the ability of subjects to derive the search term that might have been used to return a set of images from an image library. The Google image search engine was used to retrieve the images for this experiment, which uses English throughout. The results were analysed with respect to a previous paper [1] exploring ability to recognise concrete objects in hierarchies. It was found that there is a tendency to use one particular level of categorization.
1009074	Classifying racist texts using a support vector machine In this poster we present an overview of the techniques we used to develop and evaluate a text categorisation system to automatically classify racist texts. Detecting racism is difficult because the presence of indicator words is insufficient to indicate racist texts, unlike some other text classification tasks. Support Vector Machines (SVM) are used to automatically categorise web pages based on whether or not they are racist. Different interpretations of what constitutes a term are taken, and in this poster we look at three representations of a web page within an SVM -- bag-of-words, bigrams and part-of-speech tags.
1009075	Discovery of aggregate usage profiles based on clustering information needs We present an alternative technique for discovering aggregate usage profiles from Web access logs. The technique is based on clustering information needs inferred from users' browsing paths. Browsing paths are extracted from users' access logs. Information need is inferred from each browsing path by using the Ostensive Model[1]. The technique is evaluated in a document recommendation application. We compare the performance of our technique against the well-established transaction-based technique proposed in [2]. Based on an initial evaluation, the results are encouraging.
1009076	Merging retrieval results in hierarchical peer-to-peer networks An abstract is not available.
1009077	The effect of back-formulating questions in question answering evaluation An abstract is not available.
1009078	Effect of varying number of documents in blind feedback: analysis of the 2003 NRRC RIA workshop bf_numdocs experiment suite An abstract is not available.
1009079	Eye-tracking analysis of user behavior in WWW search We investigate how users interact with the results page of a WWW search engine using eye-tracking. The goal is to gain insight into how users browse the presented abstracts and how they select links for further exploration. Such understanding is valuable for improved interface design, as well as for more accurate interpretations of implicit feedback (e.g. clickthrough) for machine learning. The following presents initial results, focusing on the amount of time spent viewing the presented abstracts, the total number of abstract viewed, as well as measures of how thoroughly searchers evaluate their results set.
1009080	Subwebs for specialized search We describe a method to define and use subwebs, user-defined neighborhoods of the Internet. Subwebs help improve search performance by inducing a topic-specific page relevance bias over a collection of documents. Subwebs may be automatically identified using a simple algorithm we describe, and used to provide highly-relevant topic-specific information retrieval. Using subwebs in a Help and Support topic, we see marked improvements in precision compared to generic search engine results.
1009081	Comparison of using passages and documents for blind relevance feedback in information retrieval This paper compares document blind feedback and passage blind feedback in Information Retrieval (IR), based on the work during the NRRC 2003 Reliable Information Access Summer workshop. The analysis of our experimental results shows overall consistency on the performance impact of using passages and documents for blind feedback. However, it is observed that the behavior of passage blind feedback, compared to document blind feedback, is both system dependent and topic dependent. The relationships between the performance impact of passage blind feedback and the number of feedback terms and the topic's average relevant document length, respectively, are examined to illustrate these dependencies.
1009082	Measuring pseudo relevance feedback & CLIR In this poster, we report on the effects of pseudo relevance feedback (PRF) for a cross language image retrieval task using a test collection. Typically PRF has been shown to improve retrieval performance in previous CLIR experiments based on average precision at a fixed rank. However our experiments have shown that queries in which no relevant documents are returned also increases. Because query reformulation for cross language is likely to be harder than with monolingual searching, a great deal of user dissatisfaction would be associated with this scenario. We propose that an additional effectiveness measure based on failed queries may better reflect user satisfaction than average precision alone.
1009083	A two-stage mixture model for pseudo feedback Pseudo feedback is a commonly used technique to improve information retrieval performance. It assumes a few top-ranked documents to be relevant, and learns from them to improve the retrieval accuracy. A serious problem is that the performance is often very sensitive to the number of pseudo feedback documents. In this poster, we address this problem in a language modeling framework. We propose a novel two-stage mixture model, which is less sensitive to the number of pseudo feedback documents than an effective existing feedback model. The new model can tolerate a more flexible setting of the number of pseudo feedback documents without the danger of losing much retrieval accuracy.
1009084	Natural language processing for browse help In this paper, we will present three "browsing" systems that should save user's time. The first uses named entities and gives a way to reduce search space. By using a information visualization system, the user can comprehend more easily the content of a corpus or a document. Named entities are highlighted for quick reading, temporal and geographic representation gives a global view of the result of a query. All these browse and search helps seem to be very useful. Nevertheless, an evaluation would give more practical results.
1009085	Triangulation without translation Transitive retrieval and triangulation have been proposed as ways to improve cross-language retrieval quality when translation resources have poor lexical coverage. We demonstrate that cross-language retrieval is viable for European languages with no translation resources at all; that transitive retrieval without translation does not suffer the drop-off in retrieval quality sometimes reported for transitive retrieval with translation; and that triangulation that combines multiple transitive runs with no translation can boost performance over direct translation-free retrieval.
1009086	A session-based search engine In this poster, we describe a novel session-based search engine, which puts the search in context. The search engine has a number of session-based features including expansion of the current query with user query history and clickthrough data (title and summary of clicked web pages) in the same search session and the session boundary recognition through temporal closeness and probabilistic similarity between query terms. In addition, the search engine visualizes the rank change of web pages as different queries are submitted in the same search session to help the user reformulate the query.
1009087	Evaluation of filtering current news search results We describe an evaluation of result set filtering techniques for providing ultra-high precision in the task of presenting related news for general web queries. In this task, the negative user experience generated by retrieving non-relevant documents has a much worse impact than not retrieving relevant ones. We adapt cost-based metrics from the document filtering domain to this result filtering problem in order to explicitly examine the tradeoff between missing relevant documents and retrieving non-relevant ones. A large manual evaluation of three simple threshold filters shows that the basic approach of counting matching title terms outperforms also incorporating selected abstract terms based on part-of-speech or higher-level linguistic structures. Simultaneously, leveraging these cost-based metrics allows us to explicitly determine what other tasks would benefit from these alternative techniques.
1009088	The document as an ergodic markov chain In recent years, statistical language models are being proposed as alternative to the vector space model. Viewing documents as language samples introduces the issue of defining a joint probability distribution over the terms.The present paper models a document as the result of a Markov process. It argues that this process is ergodic, which is theoretically plausible, and easy to verify in practice.The theoretical result is that the joint distribution can be easily obtained. This can also be applied for search resolutions other than the document level. We verified this in an experiment on query expansion demonstrating both the validity and the practicability of the method. This holds a promise for general language models.
1009089	Expertise community detection Providing knowledge workers with access to experts and communities-of-practice is central to sharing expertise and crucial to organizational performance, adaptation, and even survival. This paper covers ongoing research to develop an Expert Locator prototype, a model-based system for detecting experts and broader communities-of-practice. The underlying expertise model is extensible and supports aggregation of evidence across diverse sources. The prototype is being used to locate critical expertise in key project areas, and current evaluation indicates its potential effectiveness.
1009090	Learning patterns to answer open domain questions on the web While being successful in providing keyword based access to web pages, commercial search portals still lack the ability to answer questions expressed in a natural language. We present a probabilistic approach to automated question answering on the Web, based on trainable patterns, answer triangulation and semantic filtering. In contrast to the other "shallow" approaches, our approach is entirely self-learning. It does not require any manually created scoring and filtering rules while still performing comparably. It also performs better than other fully trainable approaches.
1009091	Email is a stage: discovering people roles from email archives An abstract is not available.
1009092	Searching databases for sematically-related schemas In this paper, we address the problem of searching schema databases for semantically-related schemas. We first give a method of finding semantic similarity between pair-wise schemas based on tokenization, part-of-speech tagging, word expansion, and ontology matching. We then address the problem of indexing the schema database through a semantic hash table. Matching schemas in the database are found by hashing the query attributes and recording peaks in the histogram of schema hits. Results indicated a 90% improvement in search performance while maintaining high precision and recall.
1009093	Topic prediction based on comparative retrieval rankings A new measure, AnchorMap, is introduced to evaluate how close two document retrieval rankings are to each other. It is shown that AnchorMap scores, when run on a set of initial ranked document lists from 8 different systems, are very highly correlated with categorization of topics as easy or hard, and separately, are highly correlated with those topics on which blind feedback works. In another experiment, AnchorMap is used to compare the initial ranked document list from a single system against the ranked document list from that system after blind feedback. Again, high AnchorMap values are highly correlated with both topic difficulty and successful application of blind feedback. Both experiments are examples of using properties of a topic which are independent of relevance information to predict the actual performance of IR systems on the topic. Initial experiments to attempt to improve retrieval performance based upon AnchorMap failed; the causes for failure are discussed.
1009094	Context-based question-answering evaluation In this poster, we will present the results of efforts we have undertaken to conduct evaluations of a QA system in a real world environment and to understand the nature of the dimensions on which users evaluate QA systems when given full reign to comment on whatever dimensions they deem important.
1009095	Design of an e-book user interface and visualizations to support reading for comprehension Current e-Book browsers provide minimal support for comprehending the organization, narrative structure, and themes, of large complex books. In order to build an understanding of such books, readers should be provided with user interfaces that present, and relate, the organizational, narrative and thematic structures. We propose adapting information retrieval techniques for the purpose of discovering these structures, and sketch three distinctive visualizations for presenting these structures to the e-Book reader. These visualizations are presented within an initial design for an e-Book browser.
1009096	Toward better weighting of anchors Okapi BM25 scoring of anchor text surrogate documents has been shown to facilitate effective ranking in navigational search tasks over web data. We hypothesize that even better ranking can be achieved in certain important cases, particularly when anchor scores must be fused with content scores, by avoiding length normalisation and by reducing the attentuation of scores associated with high tf . Preliminary results are presented.
1009097	Aggregated feature retrieval for MPEG-7 via clustering In this paper, we describe an approach to combining text and visual features from MPEG-7 descriptions of video. A video retrieval process is aligned to a text retrieval process based on the TF*IDF vector space model via clustering of low-level visual features. Our assumption is that shots within the same cluster are not only similar visually but also semantically, to a certain extent. Our experiments on the TRECVID2002 and TRECVID2003 collections show that adding extra meaning to a shot based on the shots from the same cluster is useful when each video in a collection contains a high proportion of similar shots, for example in documentaries.
1009098	Answer models for question answering passage retrieval Answer patterns have been shown to improve the perfor-mance of open-domain factoid QA systems. Their use, however, requires either constructing the patterns manually or developing algorithms for learning them automatically. We present here a simpler approach that extends the techniques of language modeling to create answer models. These are language models trained on the correct answers to training questions. We show how they fit naturally into a probabilis-tic model for answer passage retrieval and demonstrate their effectiveness on the TREC 2002 QA Corpus.
1009099	Collaborative filing in a document repository We introduce an emergent, collaborative filing system. In such a system, an individual is allowed to organize a subset of documents in a repository into a personal hierarchy and share the hierarchy with others. The system generates a "consensus" hierarchy from all users' personal hierarchies, which provides a full, common, and emergent view of all documents. We believe that collaborative filing helps translate personal, tacit knowledge into sharable structures, which help the user as well a community of which he or she is a part. Our filing system is suitable for any documents from text to multimedia files. Initial results on an experimental website show promise. For a knowledge task involving extensive document retrieval, hierarchies are not only used frequently but are also effective in identifying high quality documents. One surprising finding is how often subjects use others' personal hierarchies, and upon close examination, social networks play a key role as well.
1009100	A study of topic similarity measures In this poster we describe an investigation of topic similarity measures. We elicit assessments on the similarity of 10 pairs of topic from 76 subjects and use these as a benchmark to assess how well each measure performs. The measures have the potential to form the basis of a predictive technique, for adaptive search systems. The results of our evaluation show that measures based on the level of correlation between topics concords most with general subject perceptions of search topic similarity.
1009101	Effectiveness of web page classification on finding list answers List question answering (QA) offers a unique challenge in effectively and efficiently locating a complete set of distinct answers from huge corpora or the Web. In TREC-12, the median average F 1 performance of list QA systems was only 6.9%. This paper exploits the wealth of freely available text and link structures on the Web to seek complete answers to list questions. We employ natural language parsing, web page classification and clustering to find reliable list answers. We also study the effectiveness of web page classification on both the recall and uniqueness of answers for web-based list QA.
1009102	Detection and translation of OOV terms prior to query time Accurate cross-language information retrieval requires that query terms be correctly translated. Several new techniques to improve the translation of out of vocabulary terms in English-Chinese cross-language information retrieval have been developed. However, these require queries and a document collection to enable translation disambiguation. Although effective, they involve much processing and searching of the Web at query time, and may not be practical in a production web search engine. In this work, we consider what tasks maybe carried out beforehand, the goal being to reduce the processing required at query time. We have successfully developed new techniques to extract and translate out of vocabulary terms using the Web and add them into a translation dictionary prior to query time.
1009103	Evaluation of the real and perceived value of automatic and interactive query expansion The paper describes a user study examining methods for improving users queries, specifically interactive and automatic query expansion and advanced search options. The user study includes subjective and objective evaluation of the effect of the above methods and a comparison between the real and perceived effect.
1009104	The NRRC reliable information access (RIA) workshop An abstract is not available.
1009105	On evaluating web search with very few relevant documents Many common web searches by their nature have a very small number of relevant documents. Homepage and "namedpage" searching are known-item searches where there is only a single relevant document. Topic distillation is a special kind of topical relevance search where the user wishes to find a few key web sites rather than every relevant web page. Because these types of searches are so common, web search evaluations have come to focus on tasks where there are very few relevant documents. Evaluations with few relevant documents pose special challenges for current metrics. In particular, the TREC 2003 topic distillation evaluation is unable to distinguish most submitted runs from each other.
1009106	A music recommender based on audio features Many collaborative music recommender systems ( CMRS ) have succeeded in capturing the similarity among users or items based on ratings, however they have rarely considered about the available information from the multimedia such as genres, let alone audio features from the media stream. Such information is valuable and can be used to solve several problems in RS. In this paper, we design a CMRS based on audio features of the multimedia stream. In the CMRS , we provide recommendation service by our proposed method where a clustering technique is used to integrate the audio features of music into the collaborative filtering ( CF ) framework in hopes of achieving better performance. Experiments are carried out to demonstrate that our approach is feasible.
1009107	Information extraction using two-phase pattern discovery This paper presents a new two-phase pattern (2PP) discovery technique for information extraction. 2PP consists of orthographic pattern discovery (OPD) and semantic pattern discovery (SPD) where the OPD determines the structural features from an identified region of a document and the SPD discovers a dominant semantic pattern for the region via inference, apposition and analogy. Then the discovered pattern is applied back into the region to extract required data items through pattern matching. We evaluated 2PP using 6500 data items and obtained effective result.
1009108	A search engine for imaged documents in PDF files Large quantities of documents in the Internet and digital libraries are simply scanned and archived in image format, many of which are packed in PDF files. The word search tool provided by Adobe Reader/Acrobat does not work for these imaged documents. In this paper, we present a search engine to deal with this issue for imaged documents in PDF files. The experimental results show an encouraging performance.
1009109	Context sensitive vocabulary and its application in protein secondary structure prediction Protein secondary structure prediction is an important step towards understanding the relation between protein sequence and structure. However, most current prediction methods use features difficult for biologists to interpret. In this paper, we present a new method that applies information retrieval techniques to solve the problem:we extract a context sensitive biological vocabulary for protein sequences and apply text classification methods to predict protein secondary structure. Experimental results show that our method performs comparably to the state-of-art methods. Furthermore, the context sensitive vocabularies can serve as a useful tool to discover meaningful regular expression patterns for protein structures.
1009110	Formal multiple-bernoulli models for language modeling An abstract is not available.
1009111	User biased document language modelling Capitalizing on the intuitive underlying assumptions of Language Modelling for Ad-Hoc Retrieval we present a novel approach that is capable of injecting the user's context of the document collection into the retrieval process. The preliminary findings from the evaluation undertaken suggest that improved IR performance is possible under certain circumstances. This motivates further investigation to determine the extent and significance of this improved performance.
1009112	Information retrieval for language tutoring: an overview of the REAP project An abstract is not available.
1009113	A unified model of literal mining and link analysis for ranking web resources Web link analysis has been proved to provide significant enhancement to the precision of Web search in practice. The PageRank algorithm, which is used in Google Search Engine, plays an important role on improving the quality of its resuls by employing the explicit hyperlink structure among the Web pages. The prestige of Web pages defined by PageRank is purely derived from surfer random walk on the Web graph without textual content content consideration. However, in the practical sense, user surfing behavior is far from random jumping. In this paper, we present a unified model for a more accurate page rank. User's surfing is guided by a probabilistic model that is based on literal matching between connected pages. The result shows that our proposed ranking algorithms do perform better than the original PageRank.
1009114	Automatic recognition of reading levels from user queries An abstract is not available.
1009115	A joint framework for collaborative and content filtering This paper proposes a novel, unified, and systematic approach to combine collaborative and content-based filtering for ranking and user preference prediction. The framework incorporates all available information by coupling together multiple learning problems and using a suitable kernel or similarity function between user-item pairs. We propose and evaluate an on-line algorithm (JRank)that generalizes perceptron learning using this framework and shows significant improvement over other approaches.
1009116	Refining term weights of documents using term dependencies When processing raw documents in Information Retrieval (IR) System, a term-weighting scheme is used to calculate the importance of each term which occurs in a document. However, most term-weighting schemes assume that a term is independent of the other terms. Term dependency is an indispensable consequence of language use [1]. Therefore, this assumption can make the information of a document being lost. In this paper, we propose new approach to refine term weights of documents using term dependencies discovered from a set of documents. Then, we evaluate our method with two experiments based on the vector space model [2] and the language model [3].
1009117	Multiple sources of evidence for XML retrieval Document-centric XML collections contain text-rich documents, marked up with XML tags. The tags add lightweight semantics to the text. Querying such collections calls for a hybrid query language: the text-rich nature of the documents suggest a content-oriented (IR) approach, while the mark-up allows users to add structural constraints to their IR queries. We will show how evidence for relevancy from different sources helps to answer such hybrid queries. We evaluate our methods using the INEX 2003 test set, and show that structural hints in hybrid queries help to improve retrieval effectiveness.
1009118	Verifying a Chinese collection for text categorization This article describes the development of a free test collection for Chinese text categorization. A novel retrieval-based approach was developed to detect duplicates and label inconsistency in this corpus and in Reuters-21578 for comparison. The method was able to detect certain types of similar and/or duplicated documents that were overlooked by an alternative repetition-based method [1]. Experiments showed that effectiveness was not affected by the confusing documents.
1009119	Query-related data extraction of hidden web documents The larger amount of information on the Web is stored in document databases and is not indexed by general-purpose search engines (i.e., Google and Yahoo). Such information is dynamically generated through querying databases - which are referred to as Hidden Web databases. Documents returned in response to a user query are typically presented using template-generated Web pages. This paper proposes a novel approach that identifies Web page templates by analysing the textual contents and the adjacent tag structures of a document in order to extract query-related data. Preliminary results demonstrate that our approach effectively detects templates and retrieves data with high recall and precision.
1009120	The patent retrieval task in the fourth NTCIR workshop This paper describes the Patent Retrieval Task in the Fourth NTCIR Workshop, and the test collections produced in this task. We perform the invalidity search task, in which each participant group searches a patent collection for the patents that can invalidate the demand in an existing claim. We also perform the automatic patent map generation task, in which the patents associated with a specific topic are organized in a multi-dimensional matrix.
1009121	Measuring ineffectiveness An evaluation methodology that targets ineffective topics is needed to support research on obtaining more consistent retrieval across topics. Using average values of traditional evaluation measures is not an appropriate methodology because it emphasizes effective topics: poorly performing topics' scores are by definition small, and they are therefore difficult to distinguish from the noise inherent in retrieval evaluation. We examine two new measures that emphasize a system's worst topics. While these measures focus on different aspects of retrieval behavior than traditional measures, the measures are less stable than traditional measures and the margin of error associated with the new measures is large relative to the observed differences in scores.
1009122	Information retrieval using hierarchical dirichlet processes An information retrieval method is proposed using a hierarchical Dirichlet process as a prior on the parameters of a set of multinomial distributions. The resulting method naturally includes a number of features found in other popular methods. Specifically, tf.idf-like term weighting and document length normalisation are recovered. The new method is compared with Okapi BM-25 [3] and the Twenty-One model [1] on TREC data and is shown to give better performance.
1009123	Broken plural detection for arabic information retrieval Due to the high number of inflectional variations of Arabic words, empirical results suggest that stemming is essential for Arabic information retrieval. However, current light stemming algorithms do not extract the correct stem of irregular (so-called broken) plurals, which constitute ~10% of Arabic texts and ~41% of plurals. Although light stemming in particular has led to improvements in information retrieval [5, 6], the effects of broken plurals on the performance of information retrieval systems has not been examined.We propose a light stemmer that incorporates a broken plural recognition component, and evaluate it within the context of information retrieval. Our results show that identifying broken plurals and reducing them to their correct stems does result in a significant improvement in the performance of information retrieval systems.
1009124	A study of methods for normalizing user ratings in collaborative filtering The goal of collaborative filtering is to make recommendations for a test user by utilizing the rating information of users who share interests similar to the test user. Because ratings are determined not only by user interests but also the rating habits of users, it is important to normalize ratings of different users to the same scale. In this paper, we compare two different normalization strategies for user ratings, namely the Gaussian normalization method and the decoupling normalization method. Particularly, we incorporated these two rating normalization methods into two collaborative filtering algorithms, and evaluated their effectiveness on the EachMovie dataset. The experiment results have shown that the decoupling method for rating normalization is more effective than the Gaussian normalization method in improving the performance of collaborative filtering algorithms.
1009125	A review of relevance feedback experiments at the 2003 reliable information access (RIA) workshop. We review here the results of one of the experiments performed at the 2003 Reliable Information Access (RIA) Workshop, hosted by Mitre Corporation and the Northeast Regional Research Center (NRRC). The experiment concentrates on query expansion using relevance feedback and explores the behaviour of several information retrieval systems using variable numbers of relevant documents.
1009126	Supporting federated information sharing communities In this paper we describe the concept of Federated Information Sharing Communities (FISC), and associated architecture, which provide a way for organisations, distributed workgroups and individuals to build up a federated community based on their common interests over the World Wide Web. To support communities, we develop capabilities that go beyond the generic retrieval of documents to include the ability to retrieve people, their interests and inter-relationships. We focus on providing social awareness "in the large" to help users understand the members within a community and the relationships between them. Within the FISC framework, we provide viewpoint retrieval to enable a user to construct visual contextual views of the community from the perspective of any community member. To evaluate these ideas we develop test beds to compare individual component technologies such as user and group profile construction and similarity matching, and we develop prototypes to explore the broader architecture and usage issues.
1009127	The effect of document retrieval quality on factoid question answering performance An abstract is not available.
1009128	Exploiting hyperlink recommendation evidence in navigational web search An abstract is not available.
1009129	Context-based methods for text categorisation We propose several context-based methods for text categorization. One method, a small modification to the PPM compression-based model which is known to significantly degrade compression performance, counter-intuitively has the opposite effect on categorization performance. Another method, called C-measure, simply counts the presence of higher order character contexts, and outperforms all other approaches investigated.
1009130	eMailSift: mining-based approaches to email classification An abstract is not available.
1009131	Constructing a text corpus for inexact duplicate detection As online document collections continue to expand, both on the Web and in proprietary environments, the need for duplicate detection becomes more critical. The goal of this work is to facilitate (a) investigations into the phenomenon of near duplicates and (b) algorithmic approaches to minimizing its negative effect on search results. Harnessing the expertise of both client-users and professional searchers, we establish principled methods to generate a test collection for identifying and handling inexact duplicate documents.
1009132	Why current IR engines fail Observations from a unique investigation of failure analysis of Information Retrieval (IR) research engines are presented. The Reliable Information Access (RIA) Workshop invited seven leading IR research groups to supply both their systems and their experts to an effort to analyze why their systems fail on some topics and whether the failures are due to system flaws, approach flaws, or the topic itself. There were surprising results from this cross-system failure analysis. One is that despite systems retrieving very different documents, the major cause of failure for any particular topic was almost always the same across all systems. Another is that relationships between aspects of a topic are not especially important for state-of-the-art systems; the systems are failing at a much more basic level where the top-retrieved documents are not reflecting some aspect at all.
1009133	Automatic sense disambiguation for acronyms A machine learning methodology for the disambiguation of acronym senses is presented, which starts from an acronym sense dictionary. Training data is automatically extracted from downloaded documents identified from the results of search engine queries. Leave-one-out cross-validation on 9,963 documents with 47 acronym forms achieves accuracy 92.58% and F ß=1 =91.52%.
1009134	Filtering for personal web information agents An abstract is not available.
1008993	Challenges in using lifetime personal information stores Within five years, our personal computers with terabyte disk drives will be able to store everything we read, write, hear, and many of the images we see including video. Vannevar Bush outlined such a system in his famous 1945 Memex article [1]. For the last four years we have worked on MyLifeBits www.MyLifeBits.com http://www.MyLifeBits.com, a system to digitally store everything from one's life, including books, articles, personal financial records, memorabilia, email, written correspondence, photos(time, location taken), telephone calls, video, television programs, and web pages visited. We recently added content from personal devices that automatically record photos and audio.The project started with the capture of Bell's content [2], followed by an effort to explore the use of the SQL database for storage and retrieval. Work has continued along these lines to extend content capture from every useful source e.g. a meeting capture system. The second phase of the project includes the design of tools and links for annotation, collections, cluster analysis, facets for characterizing the content, creation of timelines and stories, and other inherent database related capabilities, e.g. the ability to pivot on an event or photo or person to retrieve linked information [3]. Ideally we would like to have a system that would read every document, extract meta-data(e.g. Dublin Core) and classify it using multiple ontologies, faceted classifications, or the relevant.While such a system has implications for future computing devices and their users, these systems will only exist if we can effectively utilize the vast personal stores. Although our system is exploratory, the Stuff I've Seen system [4] demonstrates the utility and necessity of easy search and access to one's own data. Other research efforts with similar goals relating to personal information include Haystack [5], LifeStreams [6], and the UK "Memories for Life" Grand Challenge.There are serious research issues beyond the problem of making the information useful through rapid and easy retrieval.The "Dear Appy" problem ("Dear Appy, My application, or platform, or media left me unreadable. Signed, Lost Data") is unsettling to archivists and computer professionals -and must be solved.Just navigating the stored life of individual would at first glance appear to take almost a lifetime to sift through. While we are making progress in the capture of less traditionally archived content(e.g. meetings, phone calls & video), automatic interpretation and index of voice are illusive. MyLifeBits is currently focused on retrieval including the hopefully automatic , addition of meta-data e.g. document type identification, high level knowledge. While such data is essential for the archivist, it is unclear how useful such meta-data is to a one's own information; without such higher level knowledge and concepts, the vast amount of raw bits may be completely unusable.The most cited problem of personal archives is the control of the content including personal security, together with joint ownership of content by other individuals and organizations. In many corporations, periodic expunging of documents is the standard. Similarly, the aspects of a person's life not available in public documents is owned by the organization and all documents may have to be tagged in such a way that it can be expunged, if necessary, when an individual is no longer part of the organization. The HPPA law in the US and even more stringent privacy laws in other counties have major implications for personal stores.
1008994	Chemoinformatics: an application domain for information retrieval techniques Chemoinformatics is the generic name for the techniques used to represent, store and process information about the two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) structures of chemical molecules [1, 2]. Chemoinformatics has attracted much recent prominence as a result of developments in the methods that are used to synthesize new molecules and then to test them for biological activity. These developments have resulted in a massive increase in the amounts of structural and biological information that is available to support discovery programmes in the pharmaceutical and agrochemical industries.Chemoinformatics may appear to be far removed from information retrieval (IR), and there are indeed many significant differences, most notably in the use of graph representations to encode chemical molecules, rather than the strings that are used to encode text; however, there are also many similarities between the two fields, and this paper will exemplify some of these relationships. The most obvious area of similarity is in the principal types of database search that are carried out, with both application domains making extensive use of exact match, partial match and best match searching procedures: in the IR context these are known-item searching, Boolean searching and ranked-output searching; in the chemical context, these are structure searching, substructure searching and similarity searching. In IR, there is a natural distinction between an initial ranked-output search and one in which relevance feedback can be employed, where the keywords in the query statement are assigned weights based on their differential occurrences in known-relevant and known-nonrelevant documents. In the chemoinformatics technique called substructural analysis, substructural fragments are assigned weights based on their occurrence in molecules that do possess, and molecules that do not possess, some desired biological activity [3]. The analogy between relevance and biological activity has also resulted in the development of measures to quantify the effectiveness of chemical searching procedures that are based on the standard IR concepts of recall and precision [4].Analogies such as these have provided the basis for some of the chemoinformatics research carried out in Sheffield. The starting point was the recognition that techniques applicable to documents represented by keywords might also be applicable to molecules represented by substructural fragments. This led directly to the introduction of similarity searching, something that is now a standard tool in chemoinformatics software systems; in particular, its use for virtual screening, i.e., the ranking of a database in order of decreasing probability of activity so as to maximize the cost-effectiveness of biological testing [5]. Measures of inter-molecular structural similarity also lie at the heart of systems for clustering chemical databases: just as IR has the Cluster Hypothesis (similar documents tend to be relevant to the same requests) as a basis for document clustering, so the Similar Property Principle (similar molecules tend to have similar properties) has led to clustering becoming a well-established tool for the organization of large chemical databases [6]. More recently, we have applied another IR technique, the use of data fusion to combine different rankings of a database, to chemoinformatics and again found that it is equally applicable in this new domain [7].The many similarities between IR and chemoinformatics that have already been identified suggest that chemoinformatics is a domain of which IR researchers should be aware when considering the applicability of new techniques that they have developed.
1008996	Evaluating high accuracy retrieval techniques Although information retrieval research has always been concerned with improving the effectiveness of search, in some applications, such as information analysis, a more specific requirement exists for high accuracy retrieval. This means that achieving high precision in the top document ranks is paramount. In this paper we present work aimed at achieving high accuracy in ad-hoc document retrieval by incorporating approaches from question answering(QA). We focus on getting the first relevant result as high as possible in the ranked list and argue that traditional precision and recall are not appropriate measures for evaluatin this task. We instead use the mean reciprocal rank(MRR) of the first relevant result. We evaluate three different methods for modifying queries to achieve high accuracy. The experiments done on TREC data provide support for the approach of using MRR and incorporating QA techniques for getting high accuracy in ad-hoc retrieval task.
1008997	Scaling IR-system evaluation using term relevance sets This paper describes an evaluation method based on Term Relevance Sets Trels that measures an IR system's quality by examining the content of the retrieved results rather than by looking for pre-specified relevant pages. Trels consist of a list of terms believed to be relevant for a particular query as well as a list of irrelevant terms. The proposed method does not involve any document relevance judgments, and as such is not adversely affected by changes to the underlying collection. Therefore, it can better scale to very large, dynamic collections such as the Web. Moreover, this method can evaluate a system's effectiveness on an updatable "live" collection, or on collections derived from different data sources. Our experiments show that the proposed method is very highly correlated with official TREC measures.
1008998	Using temporal profiles of queries for precision prediction A key missing component in information retrieval systems is self-diagnostic tests to establish whether the system can provide reasonable results for a given query on a document collection. If we can measure properties of a retrieved set of documents which allow us to predict average precision, we can automate the decision of whether to elicit relevance feedback, or modify the retrieval system in other ways. We use meta-data attached to documents in the form of time stamps to measure the distribution of documents retrieved in response to a query, over the time domain, to create a temporal profile for a query. We define some useful features over this temporal profile. We find that using these temporal features, together with the content of the documents retrieved, we can improve the prediction of average precision for a query.
1009000	Retrieval evaluation with incomplete information This paper examines whether the Cranfield evaluation methodology is robust to gross violations of the completeness assumption (i.e., the assumption that all relevant documents within a test collection have been identified and are present in the collection). We show that current evaluation measures are not robust to substantially incomplete relevance judgments. A new measure is introduced that is both highly correlated with existing measures when complete judgments are available and more robust to incomplete judgment sets. This finding suggests that substantially larger or dynamic test collections built using current pooling practices should be viable laboratory tools, despite the fact that the relevance information will be incomplete and imperfect.
1009001	Forming test collections with no system pooling Forming test collection relevance judgments from the pooled output of multiple retrieval systems has become the standard process for creating resources such as the TREC, CLEF, and NTCIR test collections. This paper presents a series of experiments examining three different ways of building test collections where no system pooling is used. First, a collection formation technique combining manual feedback and multiple systems is adapted to work with a single retrieval system. Second, an existing method based on pooling the output of multiple manual searches is re-examined: testing a wider range of searchers and retrieval systems than has been examined before. Third, a new approach is explored where the ranked output of a single automatic search on a single retrieval system is assessed for relevance: no pooling whatsoever. Using established techniques for evaluating the quality of relevance judgments, in all three cases, test collections are formed that are as good as TREC.
1009002	Building an information retrieval test collection for spontaneous conversational speech Test collections model use cases in ways that facilitate evaluation of information retrieval systems. This paper describes the use of search-guided relevance assessment to create a test collection for retrieval of spontaneous conversational speech. Approximately 10,000 thematically coherent segments were manually identified in 625 hours of oral history interviews with 246 individuals. Automatic speech recognition results, manually prepared summaries, controlled vocabulary indexing, and name authority control are available for every segment. Those features were leveraged by a team of four relevance assessors to identify topically relevant segments for 28 topics developed from actual user requests. Search-guided assessment yielded sufficient inter-annotator agreement to support formative evaluation during system development. Baseline results for ranked retrieval are presented to illustrate use of the collection.
1009004	A formal study of information retrieval heuristics Empirical studies of information retrieval methods show that good retrieval performance is closely related to the use of various retrieval heuristics, such as TF-IDF weighting. One basic research question is thus what exactly are these "necessary" heuristics that seem to cause good retrieval performance. In this paper, we present a formal study of retrieval heuristics. We formally define a set of basic desirable constraints that any reasonable retrieval function should satisfy, and check these constraints on a variety of representative retrieval functions. We find that none of these retrieval functions satisfies all the constraints unconditionally. Empirical results show that when a constraint is not satisfied, it often indicates non-optimality of the method, and when a constraint is satisfied only for a certain range of parameter values, its performance tends to be poor when the parameter is out of the range. In general, we find that the empirical performance of a retrieval formula is tightly related to how well it satisfies these constraints. Thus the proposed constraints provide a good explanation of many empirical observations and make it possible to evaluate any existing or new retrieval formula analytically .
1009005	Probabilistic model for contextual retrieval Contextual retrieval is a critical technique for facilitating many important applications such as mobile search, personalized search, PC troubleshooting, etc. Despite of its importance, there is no comprehensive retrieval model to describe the contextual retrieval process. We observed that incompatible context, noisy context and incomplete query are several important issues commonly existing in contextual retrieval applications. However, these issues have not been previously explored and discussed. In this paper, we propose probabilistic models to address these problems. Our study clearly shows that query log is the key to build effective contextual retrieval models. We also conduct a case study in the PC troubleshooting domain to testify the performance of the proposed models and experimental results show that the models can achieve very good retrieval precision.
1009006	Discriminative models for information retrieval Discriminative models have been preferred over generative models in many machine learning problems in the recent past owing to some of their attractive theoretical properties. In this paper, we explore the applicability of discriminative classifiers for IR. We have compared the performance of two popular discriminative models, namely the maximum entropy model and support vector machines with that of language modeling, the state-of-the-art generative model for IR. Our experiments on ad-hoc retrieval indicate that although maximum entropy is significantly worse than language models, support vector machines are on par with language models. We argue that the main reason to prefer SVMs over language models is their ability to learn arbitrary features automatically as demonstrated by our experiments on the home-page finding task of TREC-10.
1009008	The overlap problem in content-oriented XML retrieval evaluation Within the INitiative for the Evaluation of XML Retrieval(INEX) a number of metrics to evaluate the effectiveness of content-oriented XML retrieval approaches were developed. Although these metrics provide a solution towards addressing the problem of overlapping result elements, they do not consider the problem of overlapping reference components within the recall-base, thus leading to skewed effectiveness scores. We propose alternative metrics that aim to provide a solution to both overlap issues.
1009009	Length normalization in XML retrieval XML retrieval is a departure from standard document retrieval in which each individual XML element, ranging from italicized words or phrases to full blown articles, is a potentially retrievable unit. The distribution of XML element lengths is unlike what we usually observe in standard document collections, prompting us to revisit the issue of document length normalization. We perform a comparative analysis of arbitrary elements versus relevant elements, and show the importance of length as a parameter for XML retrieval. Within the language modeling framework, we investigate a range of techniques that deal with length either directly or indirectly. We observe a length bias introduced by the amount of smoothing, and show the importance of extreme length priors for XML retrieval. We also show that simply removing shorter elements from the index (by introducing a cut-off value) does not create an appropriate document length normalization. Even after increasing the minimal size of XML elements occurring in the index, the importance of an extreme length bias remains.
1009010	Configurable indexing and ranking for XML information retrieval Indexing and ranking are two key factors for efficient and effective XML information retrieval. Inappropriate indexing may result in false negatives and false positives, and improper ranking may lead to low precisions. In this paper, we propose a configurable XML information retrieval system, in which users can configure appropriate index types for XML tags and text contents. Based on users' index configurations, the system transforms XML structures into a compact tree representation, Ctree, and indexes XML text contents. To support XML ranking, we propose the concepts of "weighted term frequency" and "inverted element frequency," where the weight of a term depends on its frequency and location within an XML element as well as its popularity among similar elements in an XML dataset. We evaluate the effectiveness of our system through extensive experiments on the INEX 03 dataset and 30 content and structure (CAS) topics. The experimental results reveal that our system has significantly high precision at low recall regions and achieves the highest average precision (0.3309) as compared with 38 official INEX 03 submissions using the strict evaluation metric.
1009012	Locality preserving indexing for document representation Document representation and indexing is a key problem for document analysis and processing, such as clustering, classification and retrieval. Conventionally, Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) is considered effective in deriving such an indexing. LSI essentially detects the most representative features for document representation rather than the most discriminative features. Therefore, LSI might not be optimal in discriminating documents with different semantics. In this paper, a novel algorithm called Locality Preserving Indexing (LPI) is proposed for document indexing. Each document is represented by a vector with low dimensionality. In contrast to LSI which discovers the global structure of the document space, LPI discovers the local structure and obtains a compact document representation subspace that best detects the essential semantic structure. We compare the proposed LPI approach with LSI on two standard databases. Experimental results show that LPI provides better representation in the sense of semantic structure.
1009013	Polynomial filtering in latent semantic indexing for information retrieval Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) is a well established and effective framework for conceptual information retrieval. In traditional implementations of LSI the semantic structure of the collection is projected into the k -dimensional space derived from a rank- k approximation of the original term-by-document matrix. This paper discusses a new way to implement the LSI methodology, based on polynomial filtering. The new framework does not rely on any matrix decomposition and therefore its computational cost and storage requirements are low relative to traditional implementations of LSI. Additionally, it can be used as an effective information filtering technique when updating LSI models based on user feedback.
1009014	On scaling latent semantic indexing for large peer-to-peer systems The exponential growth of data demands scalable infrastructures capable of indexing and searching rich content such as text, music, and images. A promising direction is to combine information re-trieval with peer-to-peer technology for scalability, fault-tolerance, and low administration cost. One pioneering work along this di-rection is pSearch [32, 33]. pSearch places documents onto a peer-to- peer overlay network according to semantic vectors produced using Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI). The search cost for a query is reduced since documents related to the query are likely to be co-located on a small number of nodes. Unfortunately, because of its reliance on LSI, pSearch also inherits the limitations of LSI. (1) When the corpus is large and heterogeneous, LSI's retrieval quality is inferior to methods such as Okapi. (2) The Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) used in LSI is unscalable in terms of both memory consumption and computation time.This paper addresses the above limitations of LSI and makes the following contributions. (1) To reduce the cost of SVD, we reduce the size of its input matrix through document clustering and term selection. Our method retains the retrieval quality of LSI but is several orders of magnitude more efficient. (2) Through extensive experimentation, we found that proper normalization of semantic vectors for terms and documents improves recall by 76%. (3) To further improve retrieval quality, we use low-dimensional subvectors of semantic vectors to cluster documents in the overlay and then use Okapi to guide the search and document selection.
1009016	GaP: a factor model for discrete data We present a probabilistic model for a document corpus that combines many of the desirable features of previous models. The model is called "GaP" for Gamma-Poisson, the distributions of the first and last random variable. GaP is a factor model, that is it gives an approximate factorization of the document-term matrix into a product of matrices ? and X . These factors have strictly non-negative terms. GaP is a generative probabilistic model that assigns finite probabilities to documents in a corpus. It can be computed with an efficient and simple EM recurrence. For a suitable choice of parameters, the GaP factorization maximizes independence between the factors. So it can be used as an independent-component algorithm adapted to document data. The form of the GaP model is empirically as well as analytically motivated. It gives very accurate results as a probabilistic model (measured via perplexity) and as a retrieval model. The GaP model projects documents and terms into a low-dimensional space of "themes," and models texts as "passages" of terms on the same theme.
1009017	Belief revision for adaptive information retrieval Applying Belief Revision logic to model adaptive information retrieval is appealing since it provides a rigorous theoretical foundation to model partiality and uncertainty inherent in any information retrieval (IR) processes. In particular, a retrieval context can be formalised as a belief set and the formalised context is used to disambiguate vague user queries. Belief revision logic also provides a robust computational mechanism to revise an IR system's beliefs about the users' changing information needs. In addition, information flow is proposed as a text mining method to automatically acquire the initial IR contexts. The advantage of a belief-based IRsystem is that its IR behaviour is more predictable and explanatory. However, computational efficiency is often a concern when the belief revision formalisms are applied to large real-life applications. This paper describes our belief-based adaptive IR system which is underpinned by an efficient belief revision mechanism. Our initial experiments show that the belief-based symbolic IR model is more effective than a classical quantitative IR model. To our best knowledge, this is the first successful empirical evaluation of a logic-based IR model based on large IR benchmark collections.
1009018	Tuning before feedback: combining ranking discovery and blind feedback for robust retrieval Both ranking functions and user queries are very important factors affecting a search engine's performance. Prior research has looked at how to improve ad-hoc retrieval performance for existing queries while tuning the ranking function, or modify and expand user queries using a fixed ranking scheme using blind feedback. However, almost no research has looked at how to combine ranking function tuning and blind feedback together to improve ad-hoc retrieval performance. In this paper, we look at the performance improvement for ad-hoc retrieval from a more integrated point of view by combining the merits of both techniques. In particular, we argue that the ranking function should be tuned first, using user-provided queries, before applying the blind feedback technique. The intuition is that highly-tuned ranking offers more high quality documents at the top of the hit list, thus offers a stronger baseline for blind feedback. We verify this integrated model in a large scale heterogeneous collection and the experimental results show that combining ranking function tuning and blind feedback can improve search performance by almost 30% over the baseline Okapi system.
1009020	Translating unknown queries with web corpora for cross-language information retrieval It is crucial for cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) systems to deal with the translation of unknown queries due to that real queries might be short. The purpose of this paper is to investigate the feasibility of exploiting the Web as the corpus source to translate unknown queries for CLIR. We propose an online translation approach to determine effective translations for unknown query terms via mining of bilingual search-result pages obtained from Web search engines. This approach can alleviate the problem of the lack of large bilingual corpora, translate many unknown query terms, provide flexible query specifications, and extract semantically-close translations to benefit CLIR tasks -- especially for cross-language Web search.
1009021	Resource selection for domain-specific cross-lingual IR An under-explored question in cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) is to what degree the performance of CLIR methods depends on the availability of high-quality translation resources for particular domains. To address this issue, we evaluate several competitive CLIR methods - with different training corpora - on test documents in the medical domain. Our results show severe performance degradation when using a general-purpose training corpus or a commercial machine translation system (SYSTRAN), versus a domain-specific training corpus. A related unexplored question is whether we can improve CLIR performance by systematically analyzing training resources and optimally matching them to target collections. We start exploring this problem by suggesting a simple criterion for automatically matching training resources to target corpora. By using cosine similarity between training and target corpora as resource weights we obtained an average of 5.6% improvement over using all resources with no weights. The same metric yields 99.4% of the performance obtained when an oracle chooses the optimal resource every time.
1009022	Using the web for automated translation extraction in cross-language information retrieval There have been significant advances in Cross-Language Information Retrieval (CLIR) in recent years. One of the major remaining reasons that CLIR does not perform as well as monolingual retrieval is the presence of out of vocabulary (OOV) terms. Previous work has either relied on manual intervention or has only been partially successful in solving this problem. We use a method that extends earlier work in this area by augmenting this with statistical analysis, and corpus-based translation disambiguation to dynamically discover translations of OOV terms. The method can be applied to both Chinese-English and English-Chinese CLIR, correctly extracting translations of OOV terms from the Web automatically, and thus is a significant improvement on earlier work.
1009135	Evaluating content-based filters for image and video retrieval This paper investigates the level of metadata accuracy required for image filters to be valuable to users. Access to large digital image and video collections is hampered by ambiguous and incomplete metadata attributed to imagery. Though improvements are constantly made in the automatic derivation of semantic feature concepts such as indoor, outdoor, face, and cityscape, it is unclear how good these improvements should be and under what circumstances they are effective. This paper explores the relationship between metadata accuracy and effectiveness of retrieval using an amateur photo collection, documentary video, and news video. The accuracy of the feature classification is varied from performance typical of automated classifications today to ideal performance taken from manually generated truth data. Results establish an accuracy threshold at which semantic features can be useful, and empirically quantify the collection size when filtering first shows its effectiveness.
1009136	Semantic video classification by integrating unlabeled samples for classifier training Semantic video classification has become an active research topic to enable more effective video retrieval and knowledge discovery from large-scale video databases. However, most existing techniques for classifier training require a large number of hand-labeled samples to learn correctly. To address this problem, we have proposed a semi-supervised framework to achieve incremental classifier training by integrating a limited number of labeled samples with a large number of unlabeled samples. Specifically, this emi-supervised framework includes: (a) Modeling the semantic video concepts by using the finite mixture models to approximate the class distributions of the relevant salient objects; (b) Developing an adaptive EM algorithm to integrate the unlabeled samples to achieve parameter estimation and model selection simultaneously; The experimental results in a certain domain of medical videos are also provided.
1009137	Implicit queries (IQ) for contextualized search The Implicit Query (IQ) prototype is a system which automatically generates context-sensitive searches based on a user's current computing activities. In the demo, we show IQ running when users are reading or composing email. Queries are automatically generated by analyzing the email message, and results are presented in a small pane adjacent to the current window to provide peripheral awareness of related information.
1009138	An implicit system for predicting interests We demonstrate an adaptive search system that works proactively to help searchers find relevant information. The system observes searcher interaction, uses what it sees to model information needs and chooses additional query terms. The system watches for changes in the topic of the search and selects retrieval strategies that reflect the extent to which the topic is seen to change.
1009139	Geotemporal querying of multilingual documents This demonstration utilizes a geographic information system interface to display multilingual news documents in time and space by extracting place names from text and matching them to a multilingual multi-script gazetteer which identifies the latitude and longitude of the location.
1009140	ACES: a contextual engine for search An abstract is not available.
1009141	Armadillo: harvesting information for the semantic web An abstract is not available.
1009142	UKSearch: search with automatically acquired domain knowledge An abstract is not available.
1009143	Geographic information retrieval (GIR): searching where and what An abstract is not available.
1009145	Improving document representation by accumulating relevance feedback (abstract only): the relevance feedback accumulation algorithm This paper presents a document representation improvement technique named the Relevance Feedback Accumulation (RFA) algorithm. Using prior relevance feedback assessments and a data mining measure called support this algorithm improves document representations and generates higher quality indexes. At the same time, the algorithm is efficient and scalable, suited for retrieval systems managing large document collections. The results of the preliminary evaluation reveal that the RFA algorithm is able to reduce the index dimensionality while improving retrieval effectiveness.
1009146	Supporting federated information sharing communities (abstract only) Increasingly, the World Wide Web is being viewed as a means of creating web communities rather than simply as a means of publishing and delivering documents and services. In this research we develop the concept of Federated Information Sharing Communities (FISC), and associated architecture, that enables community-centred information systems to be constructed. Such systems provide a way for organisations, distributed workgroups and individuals to build up a federated community based on their common interests over the World Wide Web. To support communities, we develop capabilities that go beyond the generic retrieval of documents to include the ability to retrieve people, their interests and inter-relationships. We focus on providing social awareness "in the large" to help users understand the members within a community and the relationships between them: who is working on what topic, and who is working with whom. Within the FISC framework, we provide a viewpoint retrieval service to enable a user to construct visual contextual views of the community from the perspective of any community member. To evaluate these ideas we develop test beds to compare individual component technologies such as user and group profile construction and similarity matching, and we develop prototypes (Web Network and "CiteSeer Community") to explore the broader architecture and usage issues.
1009147	Toponym resolution in text (abstract only): which sheffield is it? Named entity tagging comprises the sub-tasks of identifying a text span and classifying it, but this view ignores the relationship between the entities and the world. Spatial and temporal entities ground events in space-time, and this relationship is vital for applications such as question answering and event tracking. There is much recent work regarding the temporal dimension (Setzer and Gaizauskas 2002, Mani and Wilson 2000), but no detailed study of the spatial dimension.I propose to investigate how spatial named entities (which are often referentially ambiguous) can be automatically resolved with respect to an extensional coordinate model (toponym resolution). To this end, various information sources including linguistic cue patterns, co-occurrence information, discourse/positional information, world knowledge (such as size and population) as well as minimality heuristics (Leidner et al. 2003) will be combined in a supervised machine learning regime.The major contributions of this research project will be a corpus of text manually annotated for spatial named entities with their model correlates as a training and evaluation resource, a novel method to spatially ground toponyms in text and a component-based evaluation based on this new reference corpus.
1009148	Sharing knowledge online (abstract only): a dream or reality? The Web provides a global platform for knowledge sharing. However, several shortcomings still arise from the absence of personalization and collaboration in Web searches. More effective retrieval techniques could be provided by means of transforming explicit knowledge into implicit knowledge. The approach presented in this paper is based on a peer-to-peer architecture and aims at complementing classical Web searches in terms of personalized ranking lists. These local rankings can be accumulated and evaluated in order to supplement the process of knowledge generation by building Virtual Knowledge Communities. Furthermore, the aggregation of ranking lists can be used to identify topics as well as communities of interest. Together with social aspects for community support, a framework for congenial Web search is defined.
1009149	Reliability and verification of natural language text on the world wide web (abstract only) The hypothesis that information on the Web can be verified automatically, with minimal user interaction, will be tested by building and evaluating an interactive system. In this paper, verification is defined as a reasonable determination of the truth or correctness of a statement by examination, research, or comparison with similar text. The system will contain modules for reliability ranking, query processing, document retrieval, and document clustering based on agreement. The query processing and document retrieval components will use standard IR techniques. The reliability module will estimate the likelihood that a statement on the Web can be trusted using standards developed by information scientists, as well as linguistic aspects of the page and the link structure of associated web pages. The clustering module will cluster relevant documents based on whether or not they agree or disagree with the statement to be verified. Relevant references are discussed.
1009150	An artificial intelligence approach to information retrieval (abstract only) Current approaches to information retrieval rely on the creativity of individuals to develop new algorithms. In this investigation the use of genetic algorithms (GA) and genetic programming (GP) to learn IR algorithms is examined.Document structure weighting is a technique whereby different parts of a document (title, abstract, etc.) contribute unevenly to the overall document weight during ranking. Near optimal weights can be learned with a GA. Doing so shows a statistically significant 5% relative improvement in MAP for vector space inner product and Croft's probabilistic ranking, but no improvement for BM25. Two applications of this approach are suggested: offline learning, and relevance feedback.In a second set of experiments, a new ranking function was learned using GP. This new function yields a statistically significant 11% relative improvement on unseen queries tested on the training documents. Portability tests to different collections (not used in training) demonstrate the performance of the new function exceeds vector space and probability, and slightly exceeds BM25. Learning weights for this new function is proposed.The application of genetic learning to stemming and thesaurus construction is discussed. Stemming rules such as those of the Porter algorithm are candidates for GP learning whereas synonym sets are candidates for GA learning.
1009151	Understanding combination of evidence using generative probabilistic models for information retrieval (abstract only) Structured documents, rich information needs, and detailed information about users are becoming more pervasive within everyday computing usage. Applications such as Question Answering, reading tutors, and XML retrieval demand more robust retrieval on richly annotated documents. In order to effectively serve these applications, the community will need a better understanding of the combination of evidence. In this work, I propose that the use of simple generative probabilistic models will be an effective framework for these problems. Statistical language models, which are a special case of generative probabilistic models, have been used extensively within recent Information Retrieval research. Their flexibility has been very effective in adapting to numerous tasks and problems. I propose to extend the statistical language modeling framework to handle rich information needs and documents with structural and linguistic annotations. Much of the prior work on combination of evidence has had few well-studied theoretical contributions, so I also propose to develop a sounder theoretical basis which gives more predictable results.
1009152	Discovering and representing the contextual and narrative structure of e-books to support reading and comprehension (abstract only) A person reading a book needs to build an understanding based on the available textual materials. As a result of a survey of users' reading behaviours and of existing e-Book user interfaces, we found that most of these interfaces provide poor support for the actual processes of reading and comprehension. In particular, there is generally minimal support for understanding the overall structure (or contextual structure) and the narrative structure of a book. We propose adapting topic tracking and detection techniques to discover the narrative threads within a book, and hence its narrative structure. The contextual and narrative structures will be presented to the user through purpose-designed visualisations, which will be integrated and linked within a newly developed e-Book browser. We have chosen to use the Bible as our test corpus, as it has a rich narrative structure, and relatively complex contextual structure. Evaluation of the interface, and its components, will be done through field studies involving actual readers of the Bible, to assess the effectiveness of the user interface in enhancing a user's experience.
1009153	Supporting multiple information-seeking strategies in a single system framework (abstract only) This research explores the relationship between information-seeking strategies (ISSs) and information retrieval (IR) system design. When people seek information they engage in a variety of ISSs in order to search for specific items, learn about the contents of the database, evaluate retrieved information, and so on.The theoretical foundations of the work are based on the information-seeking episode model developed by Belkin (1996), and the multi-facet classification scheme of information behaviors proposed by Cool & Belkin (2002).The goal of this research is to construct and evaluate an interactive retrieval system which uses different combinations of IR techniques to support different ISSs. Example IR techniques include comparison using exact and probabilistic matching algorithms; summarization of information objects using titles, snippets or abstracts; visualization techniques such as lists or classified results; and navigation techniques such as scrolling or following links. By designing a retrieval system with diverse strategies in mind, we can adaptively support multiple ISSs, permitting a user to move seamlessly from one strategy to another, choosing instantiations of each support technique tailored to the specific ISS.The research will be conducted in a series of four steps. (1) Develop an object-oriented framework for representing basic IR techniques. (2) Design, implement and evaluate systems which support individual ISSs such as browsing and searching. (3) Specify an interaction structure for guiding and controlling sequences of different supporting techniques.(4) Design, implement, and evaluate a dynamically adaptive system supporting multiple ISSs in comparison to a non-adaptive baseline system.
1076035	The Portinari project: IR helps art and culture In May 30, 1983, The New York Times published the article "Brazil Gathers Archive On Its Painter, Portinari". The author, Warren Hoge, narrates: "/The late Candido Portinari is considered here to be the greatest artist Brazil has ever produced, yet all but a few of his 4,000 paintings are out of public view. They have become dispersed in private collections in so many places that his biographer compared their fate to that of Brazil's 18th-century revolutionary hero Tiradentes, whose body was dismembered and strewn along a 300-mile turnpike. The inaccessibility of Portinari's work is particularly vexing to his enthusiasts because his own dedication to producing an epic view of Brazil for his countrymen was such that he continued painting even after doctors warned that exposure to paint was killing him. He died of lead poisoning at the age of 58. Now, in a pioneering effort for Latin America, a team of experts in Rio is busy assembling the far-flung pieces of Portinari's obra into an exhaustive computerized archive. "/We are trying to rescue what is authentically ours'/, said João Candido Portinari, the painter's 44-year-old son, who is the coordinator of the group of researchers who make their headquarters on the leafy campus of Rio's Pontifical Catholic University. A telecommunications engineer with a Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a former chairman of the university's mathematics department, Mr. Portinari has brought exacting technical standards to the task. Now four years into the project, the 14-member team has compiled photographic, technical. This presentation aims at describing the 26-year effort undertaken by the Portinari Project to locate, document, and record all prints, drawings and paintings created by the Brazilian artist Candido Portinari (1903-1962), as well as all documents. It is important to highlite the role of science and technology in this endeavour. It was fascinating to watch, over the years, how much, as the Portinari Project evolved, the advances of science and technology, and especially those related to IR, were able to address important challenges encountered in its development. In this presentation, a few examples of this process shall be described, such as the problem of identifying false paintings, the digital preservation of color images, the building of a complex multimedia knowledge database, etc. We also present the social work of art education developed in making all this material available /in loco/ to a wide audience in Brazil and abroad, including school children, especially children from poverty-stricken families. This social inclusion action stems from the fact that Portinari was deeply concerned to devoting his life, as an artist and also as a political person, to social and human values. In his speech /Art in the United Nations/ at the .Palais des Nations., Geneve, Switzerland, Von Lauestein Massarani observed that. */Portinari bequeathed to his native Brazil paintings of great poetical intensity. He grew up on the vast coffee plantations of Brodosqui in the state of Sao Paulo and it is this social setting which provided the inspiration for his work. All its human, cultural and religious aspects, captured by Portinari.s brush, reveal him as a .chronicler. of the concerns of twentieth-century Brazil. A rich plastic quality and variety of expressions are qualitites which give singular appeal to this deeply inspired work. His paintings are the successful achievement of his objective throughout his life: to arouse a feeling of the dignity of man, of fraternity and community spirit/*. *From these concerns, faithfully reflected in Portinari.s artistic legacy, we have been able to build an exceedingly powerful tool for developing a social acton that has already involved more than 500,000 children for all over Brazil, as shall be demonstrated in our talk. And finally we present one of the most important results of the project: "Candido Portinari - Catalogue /Raisonné/", published in September 2004, in 5 volumes, containing 4,991 works, with all their images and their technical, bibliographic and historical data. An example of the complexity of this undertaking is the work involved in /dating/ Portinari's oeuvre. Half of the works were undated and, /for each/ of these 2,500 works, it was necessary to cross it with 30,000 documents, to search if in a letter (6,000), in a periodical clipping (12,000), in a historical photograph (1,200), in an oral history recording (74 interviewed, 130-hour total recordings), etc., one could find information that would eventually lead to the date the work was created. The Portinari Project web site (http://www.portinari.org.br) presents all 4,991 paintings, drawing and prints, and all 30,000 entering a word contained in the work's description. The Catalogue /Raisonnß/ also comprises a detailed chrono-biography of the artist's life and times, compiled from the 30,000 documents that form the Portinari Project archives. To complete this 26-year task, the team visited almost all Brazilian states and more than 20 countries in the three Americas, Europe and the Middle Orient.
1076036	The future of media, blogs and innovation: new IR challenges? An axiom of every good investor is not to buy shares when the goodness of them is already into newspapers. Before, the information was circulating in some form, for example from mouth-to-mouth, closed circles, or newsletters. Nowadays the news can also occur in blogs that point to public or private communities that discuss topics that traditional media do not carry or even hide. Nowadays, standard communication media are trapped in a Cartesian or Platonic correspondence assumption. They want to tell us how things really are, how they have occurred, and how they will happen, disregarding a concrete world of problems where opportunities and threats live in real time for people. Searching and exploring the world of blogs can create an acceleration of innovation and a dissolution of the previous status quo. Here, the search unit is not a word, but actions, worries, opportunities, threats, etc. That is, people living and pursuing shared goals with others. Which new searching tools can help to find trends, innovations and ideas taking consciousness in the context described above? Can IR help to end with this illusion of pseudo-objectivity and manipulation of passive individuals.
1076037	Challenges in running a commercial search engine These are exciting times for Information Retrieval. Web search engines have brought IR to the masses. It now affects the lives of hundreds of millions of people, and growing, as Internet search companies launch ever more products based on techniques developed in These are exciting times for Information Retrieval. Web search engines have brought IR to the masses. It now affects the lives of hundreds of millions of people, and growing, as Internet search companies launch ever more products based on techniques developed in IR research.The real world poses unique challenges for search algorithms. They operate at unprecedented scales, and over a wide diversity of information. In addition, we have entered an unprecedented world of "Adversarial Information Retrieval". The lure of billions of dollars of commerce, guided by search engines, motivates all kinds of people to try all kinds of tricks to get their sites to the top of the search results.What techniques do people use to defeat IR algorithms? What are the evaluation challenges for a web search engine? How much impact has IR had on search engines? How does Google serve over 250 Million queries a day, often with sub-second response times? This talk will show that the world of algorithm and system design for commercial search engines can be described by two of Murphy's Laws: a) If anything can go wrong, it will, and b) If anything cannot go wrong, it will anyway.
1076039	Orthogonal locality preserving indexing We consider the problem of document indexing and representation. Recently, Locality Preserving Indexing (LPI) was proposed for learning a compact document subspace. Different from Latent Semantic Indexing which is optimal in the sense of global Euclidean structure, LPI is optimal in the sense of local manifold structure. However, LPI is extremely sensitive to the number of dimensions. This makes it difficult to estimate the intrinsic dimensionality, while inaccurately estimated dimensionality would drastically degrade its performance. One reason leading to this problem is that LPI is non-orthogonal. Non-orthogonality distorts the metric structure of the document space. In this paper, we propose a new algorithm called Orthogonal LPI. Orthogonal LPI iteratively computes the mutually orthogonal basis functions which respect the local geometrical structure. Moreover, our empirical study shows that OLPI can have more locality preserving power than LPI. We compare the new algorithm to LSI and LPI. Extensive experimental results show that Orthogonal LPI obtains better performance than both LSI and LPI. More crucially, it is insensitive to the number of dimensions, which makes it an efficient data preprocessing method for text clustering, classification, retrieval, etc.
1076040	Why spectral retrieval works We argue that the ability to identify pairs of related terms is at the heart of what makes spectral retrieval work in practice. Schemes such as latent semantic indexing (LSI) and its descendants have this ability in the sense that they can be viewed as computing a matrix of term-term relatedness scores which is then used to expand the given documents (not the queries). For almost all existing spectral retrieval schemes, this matrix of relatedness scores depends on a fixed low-dimensional subspace of the original term space. We instead vary the dimension and study for each term pair the resultin curve of relatedness scores. We find that it is actually the shape of this curve which is indicative for the term-pair relatedness, and not any of the individual relatedness scores on the curve. We derive two simple, parameterless algorithms that detect this shape and that consistently outperform previous methods on a number of test collections. Our curves also shed light on the effectiveness of three fundamental types of variations of the basic LSI scheme.
1076041	Better than the real thing?: iterative pseudo-query processing using cluster-based language models We present a novel approach to pseudo-feedback-based ad hoc retrieval that uses language models induced from both documents and clusters. First, we treat the pseudo-feedback documents produced in response to the original query as a set of pseudo-query that themselves can serve as input to the retrieval process. Observing that the documents returned in response to the pseudo-query can then act as pseudo-query for subsequent rounds, we arrive at a formulation of pseudo-query-based retrieval as an iterative process. Experiments show that several concrete instantiations of this idea, when applied in conjunction with techniques designed to heighten precision, yield performance results rivaling those of a number of previously-proposed algorithms, including the standard language-modeling approach. The use of cluster-based language models is a key contributing factor to our algorithms' success.
1076042	The maximum entropy method for analyzing retrieval measures We present a model, based on the maximum entropy method, for analyzing various measures of retrieval performance such as average precision, R-precision, and precision-at-cutoffs. Our methodology treats the value of such a measure as a constraint on the distribution of relevant documents in an unknown list, and the maximum entropy distribution can be determined subject to these constraints. For good measures of overall performance (such as average precision), the resulting maximum entropy distributions are highly correlated with actual distributions of relevant documents in lists as demonstrated through TREC data; for poor measures of overall performance, the correlation is weaker. As such, the maximum entropy method can be used to quantify the overall quality of a retrieval measure. Furthermore, for good measures of overall performance (such as average precision), we show that the corresponding maximum entropy distributions can be used to accurately infer precision-recall curves and the values of other measures of performance, and we demonstrate that the quality of these inferences far exceeds that predicted by simple retrieval measure correlation, as demonstrated through TREC data.
1076044	A study of factors affecting the utility of implicit relevance feedback Implicit relevance feedback (IRF) is the process by which a search system unobtrusively gathers evidence on searcher interests from their interaction with the system. IRF is a new method of gathering information on user interest and, if IRF is to be used in operational IR systems, it is important to establish when it performs well and when it performs poorly. In this paper we investigate how the use and effectiveness of IRF is affected by three factors: search task complexity, the search experience of the user and the stage in the search. Our findings suggest that all three of these factors contribute to the utility of IRF.
1076045	Context-sensitive information retrieval using implicit feedback A major limitation of most existing retrieval models and systems is that the retrieval decision is made based solely on the query and document collection; information about the actual user and search context is largely ignored. In this paper, we study how to exploit implicit feedback information, including previous queries and clickthrough information, to improve retrieval accuracy in an interactive information retrieval setting. We propose several context-sensitive retrieval algorithms based on statistical language models to combine the preceding queries and clicked document summaries with the current query for better ranking of documents. We use the TREC AP data to create a test collection with search context information, and quantitatively evaluate our models using this test set. Experiment results show that using implicit feedback, especially the clicked document summaries, can improve retrieval performance substantially.
1076046	User term feedback in interactive text-based image retrieval To alleviate the vocabulary problem, this paper investigates the role of user term feedback in interactive text-based image retrieval. Term feedback refers to the feedback from a user on specific terms regarding their relevance to a target image. Previous studies have indicated the effectiveness of term feedback in interactive text retrieval [14]. However, the term feedback has not shown to be effective in our experiments on text-based image retrieval. Our results indicate that, although term feedback has a positive effect by allowing users to identify more relevant terms, it also has a strong negative effect by providing more opportunities for users to specify irrelevant terms. To understand these different effects and their implications on the potential of term feedback, this paper further presents analysis of important factors that contribute to the utility of term feedback and discusses the outlook of term feedback in interactive text-based image retrieval.
1076047	Active feedback in ad hoc information retrieval Information retrieval is, in general, an iterative search process, in which the user often has several interactions with a retrieval system for an information need. The retrieval system can actively probe a user with questions to clarify the information need instead of just passively responding to user queries. A basic question is thus how a retrieval system should propose questions to the user so that it can obtain maximum benefits from the feedback on these questions. In this paper, we study how a retrieval system can perform active feedback, i.e., how to choose documents for relevance feedback so that the system can learn most from the feedback information. We present a general framework for such an active feedback problem, and derive several practical algorithms as special cases. Empirical evaluation of these algorithms shows that the performance of traditional relevance feedback (presenting the top K documents) is consistently worse than that of presenting documents with more diversity. With a diversity-based selection algorithm, we obtain fewer relevant documents, however, these fewer documents have more learning benefits.
1076049	Improving collection selection with overlap awareness in P2P search engines Collection selection has been a research issue for years. Typically, in related work, precomputed statistics are employed in order to estimate the expected result quality of each collection, and subsequently the collections are ranked accordingly. Our thesis is that this simple approach is insufficient for several applications in which the collections typically overlap. This is the case, for example, for the collections built by autonomous peers crawling the web. We argue for the extension of existing quality measures using estimators of mutual overlap among collections and present experiments in which this combination outperforms CORI, a popular approach based on quality estimation. We outline our prototype implementation of a P2P web search engine, coined MINERVA, that allows handling large amounts of data in a distributed and self-organizing manner. We conduct experiments which show that taking overlap into account during collection selection can drastically decrease the number of collections that have to be contacted in order to reach a satisfactory level of recall, which is a great step toward the feasibility of distributed web search.
1076050	Server selection methods in hybrid portal search The TREC.GOV collection makes a valuable web testbed for distributed information retrieval methods because it is naturally partitioned and includes 725 web-oriented queries with judged answers. It can usefully model aspects of government and large corporate portals. Analysis of the.gov data shows that a purely distributed approach would not be feasible for providing search on a.gov portal because of the large number (17,000+) of web sites and the high proportion that do not provide a search interface. An alternative hybrid approach, combining both distributed and centralized techniques, is proposed and server selection methods are evaluated within this framework using web-oriented evaluation methodology. A number of well-known algorithms are compared against representatives (highest anchor ranked page (HARP) and anchor weighted sum (AWSUM)) of a family of new selection methods which use link anchortext extracted from an auxiliary crawl to provide descriptions of sites which are not themselves crawled. Of the previously published methods, ReDDE substantially outperformed three variants of CORI and also outperformed a method based on Kullback-Leibler Divergence (extended) except on topic distillation. HARP and AWSUM performed best overall but were outperformed on the topic distillation task by extended KL Divergence.
1076051	Modeling search engine effectiveness for federated search Federated search links multiple search engines into a single, virtual search system. Most prior research of federated search focused on selecting search engines that have the most relevant contents, but ignored the retrieval effectiveness of individual search engines. This omission can cause serious problems when federating search engines of different qualities.This paper proposes a federated search technique that uses utility maximization to model the retrieval effectiveness of each search engine in a federated search environment. The new algorithm ranks the available resources by explicitly estimating the amount of relevant material that each resource can return , instead of the amount of relevant material that each resource contains . An extensive set of experiments demonstrates the effectiveness of the new algorithm.
1076052	A utility theoretic approach to determining optimal wait times in distributed information retrieval Distributed IR systems query a large number of IR servers, merge the retrieved results and display them to users. Since different servers handle collections of different sizes, have different processing and bandwidth capacities, there can be considerable heterogeneity in their response times. The broker in the distributed IR system thus has to make decisions regarding terminating searches based on perceived value of waiting -- retrieving more documents -- and the costs imposed on users by waiting for more responses. In this paper, we apply utility theory to formulate the broker's decision problem. The problem is a stochastic nonlinear program. We use Monte Carlo simulations to demonstrate how the optimal wait time may be determined in the context of a comparison shopping engine that queries multiple store websites for price and product information. We use data gathered from 30 stores for a set of 60 books. Our research demonstrates how a broker can leverage information about past retrievals regarding distributions of server response time and relevance scores to optimize its performance. Our main contribution is the formulation of the decision model for optimal wait time and proposal of a solution method. Our results suggest that the optimal wait time is highly sensitive to the manner in which users value from a set of retrieved results differs from the sum of user value from each result evaluated independently. We also find that the optimal wait time increases with the size of the distributed collections, but only if user utility from a set of results is nearly equal to the sum of utilities from each result.
1076054	Robustness of adaptive filtering methods in a cross-benchmark evaluation This paper reports a cross-benchmark evaluation of regularized logistic regression (LR) and incremental Rocchio for adaptive filtering. Using four corpora from the Topic Detection and Tracking (TDT) forum and the Text Retrieval Conferences (TREC) we evaluated these methods with non-stationary topics at various granularity levels, and measured performance with different utility settings. We found that LR performs strongly and robustly in optimizing T11SU (a TREC utility function) while Rocchio is better for optimizing Ctrk (the TDT tracking cost), a high-recall oriented objective function. Using systematic cross-corpus parameter optimization with both methods, we obtained the best results ever reported on TDT5, TREC10 and TREC11. Relevance feedback on a small portion (0.05~0.2%) of the TDT5 test documents yielded significant performance improvements, measuring up to a 54% reduction in Ctrk and a 20.9% increase in T11SU (with b=0.1), compared to the results of the top-performing system in TDT2004 without relevance feedback information.
1076055	A probabilistic model for retrospective news event detection Retrospective news event detection (RED) is defined as the discovery of previously unidentified events in historical news corpus. Although both the contents and time information of news articles are helpful to RED, most researches focus on the utilization of the contents of news articles. Few research works have been carried out on finding better usages of time information. In this paper, we do some explorations on both directions based on the following two characteristics of news articles. On the one hand, news articles are always aroused by events; on the other hand, similar articles reporting the same event often redundantly appear on many news sources. The former hints a generative model of news articles, and the latter provides data enriched environments to perform RED. With consideration of these characteristics, we propose a probabilistic model to incorporate both content and time information in a unified framework. This model gives new representations of both news articles and news events. Furthermore, based on this approach, we build an interactive RED system, HISCOVERY, which provides additional functions to present events, Photo Story and Chronicle .
1076056	Scalable collaborative filtering using cluster-based smoothing Memory-based approaches for collaborative filtering identify the similarity between two users by comparing their ratings on a set of items. In the past, the memory-based approach has been shown to suffer from two fundamental problems: data sparsity and difficulty in scalability. Alternatively, the model-based approach has been proposed to alleviate these problems, but this approach tends to limit the range of users. In this paper, we present a novel approach that combines the advantages of these two approaches by introducing a smoothing-based method. In our approach, clusters generated from the training data provide the basis for data smoothing and neighborhood selection. As a result, we provide higher accuracy as well as increased efficiency in recommendations. Empirical studies on two datasets (EachMovie and MovieLens) show that our new proposed approach consistently outperforms other state-of-art collaborative filtering algorithms.
1076058	OCFS: optimal orthogonal centroid feature selection for text categorization Text categorization is an important research area in many Information Retrieval (IR) applications. To save the storage space and computation time in text categorization, efficient and effective algorithms for reducing the data before analysis are highly desired. Traditional techniques for this purpose can generally be classified into feature extraction and feature selection . Because of efficiency, the latter is more suitable for text data such as web documents. However, many popular feature selection techniques such as Information Gain (IG) and? 2 -test (CHI) are all greedy in nature and thus may not be optimal according to some criterion. Moreover, the performance of these greedy methods may be deteriorated when the reserved data dimension is extremely low. In this paper, we propose an efficient optimal feature selection algorithm by optimizing the objective function of Orthogonal Centroid (OC) subspace learning algorithm in a discrete solution space, called Orthogonal Centroid Feature Selection (OCFS). Experiments on 20 Newsgroups (20NG), Reuters Corpus Volume 1 (RCV1) and Open Directory Project (ODP) data show that OCFS is consistently better than IG and CHI with smaller computation time especially when the reduced dimension is extremely small.
1076059	SimFusion: measuring similarity using unified relationship matrix In this paper we use a Unified Relationship Matrix ( URM ) to represent a set of heterogeneous data objects (e.g., web pages, queries) and their interrelationships (e.g., hyperlinks, user click-through sequences). We claim that iterative computations over the URM can help overcome the data sparseness problem and detect latent relationships among heterogeneous data objects, thus, can improve the quality of information applications that require com- bination of information from heterogeneous sources. To support our claim, we present a unified similarity-calculating algorithm, SimFusion . By iteratively computing over the URM, SimFusion can effectively integrate relationships from heterogeneous sources when measuring the similarity of two data objects. Experiments based on a web search engine query log and a web page collection demonstrate that SimFusion can improve similarity measurement of web objects over both traditional content based algorithms and the cutting edge SimRank algorithm.
1076060	An application of text categorization methods to gene ontology annotation This paper describes an application of IR and text categorization methods to a highly practical problem in biomedicine, specifically, Gene Ontology (GO) annotation. GO annotation is a major activity in most model organism database projects and annotates gene functions using a controlled vocabulary. As a first step toward automatic GO annotation, we aim to assign GO domain codes given a specific gene and an article in which the gene appears, which is one of the task challenges at the TREC 2004 Genomics Track. We approached the task with careful consideration of the specialized terminology and paid special attention to dealing with various forms of gene synonyms, so as to exhaustively locate the occurrences of the target gene. We extracted the words around the gene occurrences and used them to represent the gene for GO domain code annotation. As a classifier, we adopted a variant of k-Nearest Neighbor ( k NN) with supervised term weighting schemes to improve the performance, making our method among the top-performing systems in the TREC official evaluation. Moreover, it is demonstrated that our proposed framework is successfully applied to another task of the Genomics Track, showing comparable results to the best performing system.
1076062	Combining eye movements and collaborative filtering for proactive information retrieval We study a new task, proactive information retrieval by combining implicit relevance feedback and collaborative filtering. We have constructed a controlled experimental setting, a prototype application, in which the users try to find interesting scientific articles by browsing their titles. Implicit feedback is inferred from eye movement signals, with discriminative hidden Markov models estimated from existing data in which explicit relevance feedback is available. Collaborative filtering is carried out using the User Rating Profile model, a state-of-the-art probabilistic latent variable model, computed using Markov Chain Monte Carlo techniques. For new document titles the prediction accuracy with eye movements, collaborative filtering, and their combination was significantly better than by chance. The best prediction accuracy still leaves room for improvement but shows that proactive information retrieval and combination of many sources of relevance feedback is feasible.
1076063	Accurately interpreting clickthrough data as implicit feedback This paper examines the reliability of implicit feedback generated from clickthrough data in WWW search. Analyzing the users' decision process using eyetracking and comparing implicit feedback against manual relevance judgments, we conclude that clicks are informative but biased. While this makes the interpretation of clicks as absolute relevance judgments difficult, we show that relative preferences derived from clicks are reasonably accurate on average.
1076064	Information retrieval system evaluation: effort, sensitivity, and reliability The effectiveness of information retrieval systems is measured by comparing performance on a common set of queries and documents. Significance tests are often used to evaluate the reliability of such comparisons. Previous work has examined such tests, but produced results with limited application. Other work established an alternative benchmark for significance, but the resulting test was too stringent. In this paper, we revisit the question of how such tests should be used. We find that the t-test is highly reliable (more so than the sign or Wilcoxon test), and is far more reliable than simply showing a large percentage difference in effectiveness measures between IR systems. Our results show that past empirical work on significance tests over-estimated the error of such tests. We also re-consider comparisons between the reliability of precision at rank 10 and mean average precision, arguing that past comparisons did not consider the assessor effort required to compute such measures. This investigation shows that assessor effort would be better spent building test collections with more topics, each assessed in less detail.
1076066	Detecting phrase-level duplication on the world wide web Two years ago, we conducted a study on the evolution of web pages over time. In the course of that study, we discovered a large number of machine-generated "spam" web pages emanating from a handful of web servers in Germany. These spam web pages were dynamically assembled by stitching together grammatically well-formed German sentences drawn from a large collection of sentences. This discovery motivated us to develop techniques for finding other instances of such "slice and dice" generation of web pages, where pages are automatically generated by stitching together phrases drawn from a limited corpus. We applied these techniques to two data sets, a set of 151 million web pages collected in December 2002 and a set of 96 million web pages collected in June 2004. We found a number of other instances of large-scale phrase-level replication within the two data sets. This paper describes the algorithms we used to discover this type of replication, and highlights the results of our data mining.
1076067	Using ODP metadata to personalize search The Open Directory Project is clearly one of the largest collaborative efforts to manually annotate web pages. This effort involves over 65,000 editors and resulted in metadata specifying topic and importance for more than 4 million web pages. Still, given that this number is just about 0.05 percent of the Web pages indexed by Google, is this effort enough to make a difference? In this paper we discuss how these metadata can be exploited to achieve high quality personalized web search. First, we address this by introducing an additional criterion for web page ranking, namely the distance between a user profile defined using ODP topics and the sets of ODP topics covered by each URL returned in regular web search. We empirically show that this enhancement yields better results than current web search using Google. Then, in the second part of the paper, we investigate the boundaries of biasing PageRank on subtopics of the ODP in order to automatically extend these metadata to the whole web.
1076068	Exploiting the hierarchical structure for link analysis Link analysis algorithms have been extensively used in Web information retrieval. However, current link analysis algorithms generally work on a flat link graph, ignoring the hierarchal structure of the Web graph. They often suffer from two problems: the sparsity of link graph and biased ranking of newly-emerging pages. In this paper, we propose a novel ranking algorithm called Hierarchical Rank as a solution to these two problems, which considers both the hierarchical structure and the link structure of the Web. In this algorithm, Web pages are first aggregated based on their hierarchical structure at directory, host or domain level and link analysis is performed on the aggregated graph. Then, the importance of each node on the aggregated graph is distributed to individual pages belong to the node based on the hierarchical structure. This algorithm allows the importance of linked Web pages to be distributed in the Web page space even when the space is sparse and contains new pages. Experimental results on the .GOV collection of TREC 2003 and 2004 show that hierarchical ranking algorithm consistently outperforms other well-known ranking algorithms, including the PageRank, BlockRank and LayerRank. In addition, experimental results show that link aggregation at the host level is much better than link aggregation at either the domain or directory levels.
1076070	Web-page summarization using clickthrough data Most previous Web-page summarization methods treat a Web page as plain text. However, such methods fail to uncover the full knowledge associated with a Web page needed in building a high-quality summary, because many of these methods do not consider the hidden relationships in the Web. Uncovering the hidden knowledge is important in building good Web-page summarizers. In this paper, we extract the extra knowledge from the clickthrough data of a Web search engine to improve Web-page summarization. Wefirst analyze the feasibility in utilizing the clickthrough data to enhance Web-page summarization and then propose two adapted summarization methods that take advantage of the relationships discovered from the clickthrough data. For those pages that are not covered by the clickthrough data, we design a thematic lexicon approach to generate implicit knowledge for them. Our methods are evaluated on a dataset consisting of manually annotated pages as well as a large dataset that is crawled from the Open Directory Project website. The experimental results indicate that significant improvements can be achieved through our proposed summarizer as compared to the summarizers that do not use the clickthrough data.
1076071	Topic themes for multi-document summarization The problem of using topic representations for multi-document summarization (MDS) has received considerable attention recently. In this paper, we describe five different topic representations and introduce a novel representation of topics based on topic themes. We present eight different methods of generating MDS and evaluate each of these methods on a large set of topics used in past DUC workshops. Our evaluation results show a significant improvement in the quality of summaries based on topic themes over MDS methods that use other alternative topic representations.
1076072	Do summaries help? We describe a task-based evaluation to determine whether multi-document summaries measurably improve user performance whe using online news browsing systems for directed research. We evaluated the multi-document summaries generated by Newsblaster, a robust news browsing system that clusters online news articles and summarizes multiple articles on each event. Four groups of subjects were asked to perform the same time-restricted fact-gathering tasks, reading news under different conditions: no summaries at all, single sentence summaries drawn from one of the articles, Newsblaster multi-document summaries, and human summaries. Our results show that, in comparison to source documents only, the quality of reports assembled using Newsblaster summaries was significantly better and user satisfaction was higher with both Newsblaster and human summaries.
1076074	Optimization strategies for complex queries Previous research into the efficiency of text retrieval systems has dealt primarily with methods that consider inverted lists in sequence; these methods are known as term-at-a-time methods. However, the literature for optimizing document-at-a-time systems remains sparse.We present an improvement to the max_score optimization, which is the most efficient known document-at-a-time scoring method. Like max_score, our technique, called term bounded max_score, is guaranteed to return exactly the same scores and documents as an unoptimized evaluation, which is particularly useful for query model research. We simulated our technique to explore the problem space, then implemented it in Indri, our large scale language modeling search engine. Tests with the GOV2 corpus on title queries show our method to be 23% faster than max_score alone, and 61% faster than our document-at-a-time baseline. Our optimized query times are competitive with conventional term-at-a-time systems on this year's TREC Terabyte task.
1076075	Simplified similarity scoring using term ranks We propose a method for document ranking that combines a simple document-centric view of text, and fast evaluation strategies that have been developed in connection with the vector space model. The new method defines the importance of a term within a document qualitatively rather than quantitatively, and in doing so reduces the need for tuning parameters. In addition, the method supports very fast query processing, with most of the computation carried out on small integers, and dynamic pruning an effective option. Experiments on a wide range of TREC data show that the new method provides retrieval effectiveness as good as or better than the Okapi BM25 formulation, and variants of language models.
1076076	Efficiently decodable and searchable natural language adaptive compression We address the problem of adaptive compression of natural language text, focusing on the case where low bandwidth is available and the receiver has little processing power, as in mobile applications. Our technique achieves compression ratios around 32% and requires very little effort from the receiver. This tradeoff, not previously achieved with alternative techniques, is obtained by breaking the usual symmetry between sender and receiver dominant in statistical adaptive compression. Moreover, we show that our technique can be adapted to avoid decompression at all in cases where the receiver only wants to detect the presence of some keywords in the document. This is useful in scenarios such as selective dissemination of information, news clipping, alert systems, text categorization, and clustering. Thanks to the asymmetry we introduce, the receiver can search the compressed text much faster than the plain text. This was previously achieved only in semistatic compression scenarios.
1076077	Efficient and self-tuning incremental query expansion for top-k query processing We present a novel approach for efficient and self-tuning query expansion that is embedded into a top-k query processor with candidate pruning. Traditional query expansion methods select expansion terms whose thematic similarity to the original query terms is above some specified threshold, thus generating a disjunctive query with much higher dimensionality. This poses three major problems: 1) the need for hand-tuning the expansion threshold, 2) the potential topic dilution with overly aggressive expansion, and 3) the drastically increased execution cost of a high-dimensional query. The method developed in this paper addresses all three problems by dynamically and incrementally merging the inverted lists for the potential expansion terms with the lists for the original query terms. A priority queue is used for maintaining result candidates, the pruning of candidates is based on Fagin's family of top-k algorithms, and optionally probabilistic estimators of candidate scores can be used for additional pruning. Experiments on the TREC collections for the 2004 Robust and Terabyte tracks demonstrate the increased efficiency, effectiveness, and scalability of our approach.
1076079	Title extraction from bodies of HTML documents and its application to web page retrieval This paper is concerned with automatic extraction of titles from the bodies of HTML documents. Titles of HTML documents should be correctly defined in the title fields; however, in reality HTML titles are often bogus. It is desirable to conduct automatic extraction of titles from the bodies of HTML documents. This is an issue which does not seem to have been investigated previously. In this paper, we take a supervised machine learning approach to address the problem. We propose a specification on HTML titles. We utilize format information such as font size, position, and font weight as features in title extraction. Our method significantly outperforms the baseline method of using the lines in largest font size as title (20.9%-32.6% improvement in F1 score). As application, we consider web page retrieval. We use the TREC Web Track data for evaluation. We propose a new method for HTML documents retrieval using extracted titles. Experimental results indicate that the use of both extracted titles and title fields is almost always better than the use of title fields alone; the use of extracted titles is particularly helpful in the task of named page finding (23.1% -29.0% improvements).
1076080	Multi-label informed latent semantic indexing Latent semantic indexing (LSI) is a well-known unsupervised approach for dimensionality reduction in information retrieval. However if the output information (i.e. category labels) is available, it is often beneficial to derive the indexing not only based on the inputs but also on the target values in the training data set. This is of particular importance in applications with multiple labels , in which each document can belong to several categories simultaneously. In this paper we introduce the multi-label informed latent semantic indexing (MLSI) algorithm which preserves the information of inputs and meanwhile captures the correlations between the multiple outputs. The recovered "latent semantics" thus incorporate the human-annotated category information and can be used to greatly improve the prediction accuracy. Empirical study based on two data sets, Reuters-21578 and RCV1, demonstrates very encouraging results.
1076081	Text classification with kernels on the multinomial manifold Support Vector Machines (SVMs) have been very successful in text classification. However, the intrinsic geometric structure of text data has been ignored by standard kernels commonly used in SVMs. It is natural to assume that the documents are on the multinomial manifold, which is the simplex of multinomial models furnished with the Riemannian structure induced by the Fisher information metric. We prove that the Negative Geodesic Distance (NGD) on the multinomial manifold is conditionally positive definite (cpd), thus can be used as a kernel in SVMs. Experiments show the NGD kernel on the multinomial manifold to be effective for text classification, significantly outperforming standard kernels on the ambient Euclidean space.
1076082	Multi-labelled classification using maximum entropy method Many classification problems require classifiers to assign each single document into more than one category, which is called multi-labelled classification . The categories in such problems usually are neither conditionally independent from each other nor mutually exclusive, therefore it is not trivial to directly employ state-of-the-art classification algorithms without losing information of relation among categories. In this paper, we explore correlations among categories with maximum entropy method and derive a classification algorithm for multi-labelled documents. Our experiments show that this method significantly outperforms the combination of single label approach.
1076084	Relevance information: a loss of entropy but a gain for IDF? When investigating alternative estimates for term discriminativeness, we discovered that relevance information and idf are much closer related than formulated in classical literature. Therefore, we revisited the justification of idf as it follows from the binary independent retrieval (BIR) model. The main result is a formal framework uncovering the close relationship of a generalised idf and the BIR model. The framework makes explicit how to incorporate relevance information into any retrieval function that involves an idf -component.In addition to the idf -based formulation of the BIR model, we propose Poisson-based estimates as an alternative to the classical estimates, this being motivated by the superiority of Poisson-based estimates for the within-document term frequencies. The main experimental finding is that a Poisson-based idf is superior to the classical idf , where the superiority is particularly evident for long queries.
1076085	Linear discriminant model for information retrieval This paper presents a new discriminative model for information retrieval (IR), referred to as linear discriminant model (LDM), which provides a flexible framework to incorporate arbitrary features. LDM is different from most existing models in that it takes into account a variety of linguistic features that are derived from the component models of HMM that is widely used in language modeling approaches to IR. Therefore, LDM is a means of melding discriminative and generative models for IR. We present two algorithms of parameter learning for LDM. One is to optimize the average precision (AP) directly using an iterative procedure. The other is a perceptron-based algorithm that minimizes the number of discordant document-pairs in a rank list. The effectiveness of our approach has been evaluated on the task of ad hoc retrieval using six English and Chinese TREC test sets. Results show that (1) in most test sets, LDM significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art language modeling approaches and the classical probabilistic retrieval model; (2) it is more appropriate to train LDM using a measure of AP rather than likelihood if the IR system is graded on AP; and (3) linguistic features (e.g. phrases and dependences) are effective for IR if they are incorporated properly.
1076086	Integrating word relationships into language models In this paper, we propose a novel dependency language modeling approach for information retrieval. The approach extends the existing language modeling approach by relaxing the independence assumption. Our goal is to build a language model in which various word relationships can be integrated. In this work, we integrate two types of relationship extracted from WordNet and co-occurrence relationships respectively. The integrated model has been tested on several TREC collections. The results show that our model achieves substantial and significant improvements with respect to the models without these relationships. These results clearly show the benefit of integrating word relationships into language models for IR.
1076087	PageRank without hyperlinks: structural re-ranking using links induced by language models Inspired by the PageRank and HITS (hubs and authorities) algorithms for Web search, we propose a structural re-ranking approach to ad hoc information retrieval: we reorder the documents in an initially retrieved set by exploiting asymmetric relationships between them. Specifically, we consider generation links , which indicate that the language model induced from one document assigns high probability to the text of another; in doing so, we take care to prevent bias against long documents. We study a number of re-ranking criteria based on measures of centrality in the graphs formed by generation links, and show that integrating centrality into standard language-model-based retrieval is quite effective at improving precision at top ranks.
1076089	Controlling overlap in content-oriented XML retrieval The direct application of standard ranking techniques to retrieve individual elements from a collection of XML documents often produces a result set in which the top ranks are dominated by a large number of elements taken from a small number of highly relevant documents. This paper presents and evaluates an algorithm that re-ranks this result set, with the aim of minimizing redundant content while preserving the benefits of element retrieval, including the benefit of identifying topic-focused components contained within relevant documents. The test collection developed by the INitiative for the Evaluation of XML Retrieval (INEX) forms the basis for the evaluation.
1076090	Publish/subscribe functionality in IR environments using structured overlay networks We study the problem of offering publish/subscribe functionality on top of structured overlay networks using data models and languages from IR. We show how to achieve this by extending the distributed hash table Chord and present a detailed experimental evaluation of our proposals.
1076091	Learning to extract information from semi-structured text using a discriminative context free grammar In recent work, conditional Markov chain models (CMM) have been used to extract information from semi-structured text (one example is the Conditional Random Field [10]). Applications range from finding the author and title in research papers to finding the phone number and street address in a web page. The CMM framework combines a priori knowledge encoded as features with a set of labeled training data to learn an efficient extraction process. We will show that similar problems can be solved more effectively by learning a discriminative context free grammar from training data. The grammar has several distinct advantages: long range, even global, constraints can be used to disambiguate entity labels; training data is used more efficiently; and a set of new more powerful features can be introduced. The grammar based approach also results in semantic information (encoded in the form of a parse tree) which could be used for IR applications like question answering. The specific problem we consider is of extracting personal contact, or address, information from unstructured sources such as documents and emails. While linear-chain CMMs perform reasonably well on this task, we show that a statistical parsing approach results in a 50% reduction in error rate. This system also has the advantage of being interactive, similar to the system described in [9]. In cases where there are multiple errors, a single user correction can be propagated to correct multiple errors automatically. Using a discriminatively trained grammar, 93.71% of all tokens are labeled correctly (compared to 88.43% for a CMM) and 72.87% of records have all tokens labeled correctly (compared to 45.29% for the CMM).
1076093	Web-based acquisition of Japanese katakana variants This paper describes a method of detecting Japanese Katakana variants from a large corpus. Katakana words, which are mainly used as loanwords, cause problems with information retrieval and so on, because transliteration creates several variations in spelling and all of these can be orthographic. Previous works manually defined Katakana rewrite rules such as %Y ( be ) and %t%' ( ve ) being replaceable with each other, for generating variants and also defined the weight of each operation to edit one string into another to detect these variants. However, these previous researches have not been able to keep up with the ever-increasing number of loanwords and their variants. With our method proposed in this paper, the weight of each edit operation is mechanically assigned based on Web data. In experiments, it performed almost as well as one with manually determined weights. Thus, the advantages of our method are: 1) need no expertise in linguistics to determine weight of each operation, and 2) able to keep up with new Katakana loanwords only by collecting text data from Web and acquiring new weights of edit operations automatically. It also achieved 98.6% recall and 86.3% precision in the task of extracting Katakana variant pairs from 38 year's worth of corpora of Japanese newspaper articles.
1076094	On the collective classification of email speech acts We consider classification of email messages as to whether or not they contain certain "email acts", such as a request or a commitment. We show that exploiting the sequential correlation among email messages in the same thread can improve email-act classification. More specifically, we describe a new text-classification algorithm based on a dependency-network based collective classification method, in which the local classifiers are maximum entropy models based on words and certain relational features. We show that statistically significant improvements over a bag-of-words baseline classifier can be obtained for some, but not all, email-act classes. Performance improvements obtained by collective classification appears to be consistent across many email acts suggested by prior speech-act theory.
1076095	Using term informativeness for named entity detection Informal communication (e-mail, bulletin boards) poses a difficult learning environment because traditional grammatical and lexical information are noisy. Other information is necessary for tasks such as named entity detection. How topic-centric, or informative, a word is can be valuable information. It is well known that informative words are best modeled by "heavy-tailed" distributions, such as mixture models. However, informativeness scores do not take full advantage of this fact. We introduce a new informativeness score that directly utilizes mixture model likelihood to identify informative words. We use the task of extracting restaurant names from bulletin board posts as a way to determine effectiveness. We find that our "mixture score" is weakly effective alone and highly effective when combined with Inverse Document Frequency. We compare against other informativeness criteria and find that only Residual IDF is competitive against our combined IDF/Mixture score.
1076097	Automatic music video summarization based on audio-visual-text analysis and alignment In this paper, we propose a novel approach for automatic music video summarization based on audio-visual-text analysis and alignment. The music video is separated into the music and video tracks. For the music track, the chorus is detected based on music structure analysis. For the video track, we first segment the shots and classify the shots into close-up face shots and non-face shots, then we extract the lyrics and detect the most repeated lyrics from the shots. The music video summary is generated based on the alignment of boundaries of the detected chorus, shot class and the most repeated lyrics from the music video. The experiments on chorus detection, shot classification, and lyrics detection using 20 English music videos are described. Subjective user studies have been conducted to evaluate the quality and effectiveness of summary. The comparisons with the summaries based on our previous method and the manual method indicate that the results of summarization using the proposed method are better at meeting users' expectations.
1076098	A phonotactic-semantic paradigm for automatic spoken document classification We demonstrate a phonotactic-semantic paradigm for spoken document categorization. In this framework, we define a set of acoustic words instead of lexical words to represent acoustic activities in spoken languages. The strategy for acoustic vocabulary selection is studied by comparing different feature selection methods. With an appropriate acoustic vocabulary, a voice tokenizer converts a spoken document into a text-like document of acoustic words. Thus, a spoken document can be represented by a count vector, named a bag-of-sounds vector, which characterizes a spoken document's semantic domain. We study two phonotactic-semantic classifiers, the support vector machine classifier and the latent semantic analysis classifier, and their properties. The phonotactic-semantic framework constitutes a new paradigm in spoken document classification, as demonstrated by its success in the spoken language identification task. It achieves 18.2% error reduction over state-of-the-art benchmark performance on the 1996 NIST Language Recognition Evaluation database.
1076099	Boosted decision trees for word recognition in handwritten document retrieval Recognition and retrieval of historical handwritten material is an unsolved problem. We propose a novel approach to recognizing and retrieving handwritten manuscripts, based upon word image classification as a key step. Decision trees with normalized pixels as features form the basis of a highly accurate AdaBoost classifier, trained on a corpus of word images that have been resized and sampled at a pyramid of resolutions. To stem problems from the highly skewed distribution of class frequencies, word classes with very few training samples are augmented with stochastically altered versions of the originals. This increases recognition performance substantially. On a standard corpus of 20 pages of handwritten material from the George Washington collection the recognition performance shows a substantial improvement in performance over previous published results (75% vs 65%). Following word recognition, retrieval is done using a language model over the recognized words. Retrieval performance also shows substantially improved results over previously published results on this database. Recognition/retrieval results on a more challenging database of 100 pages from the George Washington collection are also presented.
1076101	Generic soft pattern models for definitional question answering This paper explores probabilistic lexico-syntactic pattern matching, also known as soft pattern matching . While previous methods in soft pattern matching are ad hoc in computing the degree of match, we propose two formal matching models: one based on bigrams and the other on the Profile Hidden Markov Model (PHMM). Both models provide a theoretically sound method to model pattern matching as a probabilistic process that generates token sequences. We demonstrate the effectiveness of these models on definition sentence retrieval for definitional question answering. We show that both models significantly outperform state-of-the-art manually constructed patterns. A critical difference between the two models is that the PHMM technique handles language variations more effectively but requires more training data to converge. We believe that both models can be extended to other areas where lexico-syntactic pattern matching can be applied.
1076102	Evaluation of resources for question answering evaluation Controlled and reproducible laboratory experiments, enabled by reusable test collections, represent a well-established methodology in modern information retrieval research. In order to confidently draw conclusions about the performance of different retrieval methods using test collections, their reliability and trustworthiness must first be established. Although such studies have been performed for ad hoc test collections, currently available resources for evaluating question answering systems have not been similarly analyzed. This study evaluates the quality of answer patterns and lists of relevant documents currently employed in automatic question answering evaluation, and concludes that they are not suitable for post-hoc experimentation. These resources, created from runs submitted by TREC QA track participants, do not produce fair and reliable assessments of systems that did not participate in the original evaluations. Potential solutions for addressing this evaluation gap and their shortcomings are discussed.
1076103	Question answering passage retrieval using dependency relations State-of-the-art question answering (QA) systems employ term-density ranking to retrieve answer passages. Such methods often retrieve incorrect passages as relationships among question terms are not considered. Previous studies attempted to address this problem by matching dependency relations between questions and answers. They used strict matching, which fails when semantically equivalent relationships are phrased differently. We propose fuzzy relation matching based on statistical models. We present two methods for learning relation mapping scores from past QA pairs: one based on mutual information and the other on expectation maximization. Experimental results show that our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art density-based passage retrieval methods by up to 78% in mean reciprocal rank. Relation matching also brings about a 50% improvement in a system enhanced by query expansion.
1076105	A study of relevance propagation for web search Different from traditional information retrieval, both content and structure are critical to the success of Web information retrieval. In recent years, many relevance propagation techniques have been proposed to propagate content information between web pages through web structure to improve the performance of web search. In this paper, we first propose a generic relevance propagation framework, and then provide a comparison study on the effectiveness and efficiency of various representative propagation models that can be derived from this generic framework. We come to many conclusions that are useful for selecting a propagation model in real-world search applications, including 1) sitemap-based propagation models outperform hyperlink-based models in sense of both effectiveness and efficiency, and 2) sitemap-based term propagation is easier to be integrated into real-world search engines because of its parallel offline implementation and acceptable complexity. Some other more detailed study results are also reported in the paper.
1076106	Relevance weighting for query independent evidence A query independent feature, relating perhaps to document content, linkage or usage, can be transformed into a static, per-document relevance weight for use in ranking. The challenge is to find a good function to transform feature values into relevance scores. This paper presents FLOE, a simple density analysis method for modelling the shape of the transformation required, based on training data and without assuming independence between feature and baseline. For a new query independent feature, it addresses the questions: is it required for ranking, what sort of transformation is appropriate and, after adding it, how successful was the chosen transformation? Based on this we apply sigmoid transformations to PageRank, indegree, URL Length and ClickDistance, tested in combination with a BM25 baseline.
1076107	Detecting dominant locations from search queries Accurately and effectively detecting the locations where search queries are truly about has huge potential impact on increasing search relevance. In this paper, we define a search query's dominant location (QDL) and propose a solution to correctly detect it. QDL is geographical location(s) associated with a query in collective human knowledge, i.e., one or few prominent locations agreed by majority of people who know the answer to the query. QDL is a subjective and collective attribute of search queries and we are able to detect QDLs from both queries containing geographical location names and queries not containing them. The key challenges to QDL detection include false positive suppression (not all contained location names in queries mean geographical locations), and detecting implied locations by the context of the query. In our solution, a query is recursively broken into atomic tokens according to its most popular web usage for reducing false positives. If we do not find a dominant location in this step, we mine the top search results and/or query logs (with different approaches discussed in this paper) to discover implicit query locations. Our large-scale experiments on recent MSN Search queries show that our query location detection solution has consistent high accuracy for all query frequency ranges.
1076109	When will information retrieval be good enough? We describe a user study that examined the relationship between the quality of an Information Retrieval system and the effectiveness of its users in performing a task. The task involves finding answer facets of questions pertaining to a collection of newswire documents over a six month period. We artificially created sets of ranked lists at increasing levels of quality by blending the output of a state-of-the-art retrieval system with truth data created by annotators. Subjects performed the task by using these ranked lists to guide their labeling of answer passages in the retrieved articles. We found that as system accuracy improves, subject time on task and error rate decrease, and the rate of finding new correct answers increases. There is a large intermediary region in which the utility difference is not significant; our results suggest that there is some threshold of accuracy for this task beyond which user utility improves rapidly, but more experiments are needed to examine the area around that threshold closely.
1076110	Modeling task-genre relationships for IR in the workplace Context influences the search process, but to date research has not definitively identified which aspects of context are the most influential for information retrieval, and thus are worthy of integration in today's retrieval systems. In this research, we isolated for examination two aspects of context: task and document genre and examined the relationship between them within a software engineering work domain. In this domain, the nature of the task has an impact on decisions of relevance and usefulness, and the document collection contains a distinctive set of genre. Our data set was a document repository created and used by our target population. The document surrogates were meta-tagged by purpose and document type. Correspondence analysis of this categorical data identified some specific relationships between genres and tasks, as well as four broad dimensions of variability underlying these relationships. These results have the potential to inform the design of a contextual retrieval system by refining search results for this domain.
1076111	Personalizing search via automated analysis of interests and activities We formulate and study search algorithms that consider a user's prior interactions with a wide variety of content to personalize that user's current Web search. Rather than relying on the unrealistic assumption that people will precisely specify their intent when searching, we pursue techniques that leverage implicit information about the user's interests. This information is used to re-rank Web search results within a relevance feedback framework. We explore rich models of user interests, built from both search-related information, such as previously issued queries and previously visited Web pages, and other information about the user such as documents and email the user has read and created. Our research suggests that rich representations of the user and the corpus are important for personalization, but that it is possible to approximate these representations and provide efficient client-side algorithms for personalizing search. We show that such personalization algorithms can significantly improve on current Web search.
1076112	The loquacious user: a document-independent source of terms for query expansion In this paper we investigate the effectiveness of a document-independent technique for eliciting feedback from users about their information problems. We propose that such a technique can be used to elicit terms from users for use in query expansion and as a follow-up when ambiguous queries are initially posed by users. We design a feedback form to obtain additional information from users, administer the form to users after initial querying, and create a series of experimental runs based on the information that we obtained from the form. Results demonstrate that the form was successful at eliciting more information from users and that this additional information significantly improved retrieval performance. Our results further demonstrate a strong relationship between query length and performance.
1076114	A study of the dirichlet priors for term frequency normalisation In Information Retrieval (IR), the Dirichlet Priors have been applied to the smoothing technique of the language modeling approach. In this paper, we apply the Dirichlet Priors to the term frequency normalisation of the classical BM25 probabilistic model and the Divergence from Randomness PL2 model. The contributions of this paper are twofold. First, through extensive experiments on four TREC collections, we show that the newly generated models, to which the Dirichlet Priors normalisation is applied, provide robust and effective performance. Second, we propose a novel theoretically-driven approach to the automatic parameter tuning of the Dirichlet Priors normalisation. Experiments show that this tuning approach optimises the retrieval performance of the newly generated Dirichlet Priors-based weighting models.
1076115	A Markov random field model for term dependencies This paper develops a general, formal framework for modeling term dependencies via Markov random fields. The model allows for arbitrary text features to be incorporated as evidence. In particular, we make use of features based on occurrences of single terms, ordered phrases, and unordered phrases. We explore full independence, sequential dependence, and full dependence variants of the model. A novel approach is developed to train the model that directly maximizes the mean average precision rather than maximizing the likelihood of the training data. Ad hoc retrieval experiments are presented on several newswire and web collections, including the GOV2 collection used at the TREC 2004 Terabyte Track. The results show significant improvements are possible by modeling dependencies, especially on the larger web collections.
1076116	An exploration of axiomatic approaches to information retrieval Existing retrieval models generally do not offer any guarantee for optimal retrieval performance. Indeed, it is even difficult, if not impossible, to predict a model's empirical performance analytically . This limitation is at least partly caused by the way existing retrieval models are developed where relevance is only coarsely modeled at the level of documents and queries as opposed to a finer granularity level of terms. In this paper, we present a new axiomatic approach to developing retrieval models based on direct modeling of relevance with formalized retrieval constraints defined at the level of terms. The basic idea of this axiomatic approach is to search in a space of candidate retrieval functions for one that can satisfy a set of reasonable retrieval constraints. To constrain the search space, we propose to define a retrieval function inductively and decompose a retrieval function into three component functions. Inspired by the analysis of the existing retrieval functions with the inductive definition, we derive several new retrieval functions using the axiomatic retrieval framework. Experiment results show that the derived new retrieval functions are more robust and less sensitive to parameter settings than the existing retrieval functions with comparable optimal performance.
1076117	Gravitation-based model for information retrieval This paper proposes GBM (gravitation-based model), a physical model for information retrieval inspired by Newton's theory of gravitation. A mapping is built in this model from concepts of information retrieval (documents, queries, relevance, etc) to those of physics (mass, distance, radius, attractive force, etc). This model actually provides a new perspective on IR problems. A family of effective term weighting functions can be derived from it, including the well-known BM25 formula. This model has some advantages over most existing ones: First, because it is directly based on basic physical laws, the derived formulas and algorithms can have their explicit physical interpretation. Second, the ranking formulas derived from this model satisfy more intuitive heuristics than most of existing ones, thus have the potential to behave empirically better and to be used safely on various settings. Finally, a new approach for structured document retrieval derived from this model is more reasonable and behaves better than existing ones.
1076119	Impedance coupling in content-targeted advertising The current boom of the Web is associated with the revenues originated from on-line advertising. While search-based advertising is dominant, the association of ads with a Web page (during user navigation) is becoming increasingly important. In this work, we study the problem of associating ads with a Web page, referred to as content-targeted advertising, from a computer science perspective. We assume that we have access to the text of the Web page, the keywords declared by an advertiser, and a text associated with the advertiser's business. Using no other information and operating in fully automatic fashion, we propose ten strategies for solving the problem and evaluate their effectiveness. Our methods indicate that a matching strategy that takes into account the semantics of the problem (referred to as AAK for "ads and keywords") can yield gains in average precision figures of 60% compared to a trivial vector-based strategy. Further, a more sophisticated impedance coupling strategy, which expands the text of the Web page to reduce vocabulary impedance with regard to an advertisement, can yield extra gains in average precision of 50%. These are first results. They suggest that great accuracy in content-targeted advertising can be attained with appropriate algorithms.
1076120	Improving web search results using affinity graph In this paper, we propose a novel ranking scheme named Affinity Ranking (AR) to re-rank search results by optimizing two metrics: (1) diversity -- which indicates the variance of topics in a group of documents; (2) information richness -- which measures the coverage of a single document to its topic. Both of the two metrics are calculated from a directed link graph named Affinity Graph (AG). AG models the structure of a group of documents based on the asymmetric content similarities between each pair of documents. Experimental results in Yahoo! Directory, ODP Data, and Newsgroup data demonstrate that our proposed ranking algorithm significantly improves the search performance. Specifically, the algorithm achieves 31% improvement in diversity and 12% improvement in information richness relatively within the top 10 search results.
1076121	Learning to estimate query difficulty: including applications to missing content detection and distributed information retrieval In this article we present novel learning methods for estimating the quality of results returned by a search engine in response to a query. Estimation is based on the agreement between the top results of the full query and the top results of its sub-queries. We demonstrate the usefulness of quality estimation for several applications, among them improvement of retrieval, detecting queries for which no relevant content exists in the document collection, and distributed information retrieval. Experiments on TREC data demonstrate the robustness and the effectiveness of our learning algorithms.
1076123	Iterative translation disambiguation for cross-language information retrieval Finding a proper distribution of translation probabilities is one of the most important factors impacting the effectiveness of a cross-language information retrieval system. In this paper we present a new approach that computes translation probabilities for a given query by using only a bilingual dictionary and a monolingual corpus in the target language. The algorithm combines term association measures with an iterative machine learning approach based on expectation maximization. Our approach considers only pairs of translation candidates and is therefore less sensitive to data-sparseness issues than approaches using higher n-grams. The learned translation probabilities are used as query term weights and integrated into a vector-space retrieval system. Results for English-German cross-lingual retrieval show substantial improvements over a baseline using dictionary lookup without term weighting.
1076124	Bootstrapping dictionaries for cross-language information retrieval The bottleneck for dictionary-based cross-language information retrieval is the lack of comprehensive dictionaries, in particular for many different languages. We here introduce a methodology by which multilingual dictionaries (for Spanish and Swedish) emerge automatically from simple seed lexicons. These seed lexicons are automatically generated, by cognate mapping, from (previously manually constructed) Portuguese and German as well as English sources. Lexical and semantic hypotheses are then validated and new ones iteratively generated by making use of co-occurrence patterns of hypothesized translation synonyms in parallel corpora. We evaluate these newly derived dictionaries on a large medical document collection within a cross-language retrieval setting.
1076125	A maximum coherence model for dictionary-based cross-language information retrieval One key to cross-language information retrieval is how to efficiently resolve the translation ambiguity of queries given their short length. This problem is even more challenging when only bilingual dictionaries are available, which is the focus of this paper. In the previous research of cross-language information retrieval using bilingual dictionaries, the word co-occurrence statistics is used to determine the most likely translations of queries. In this paper, we propose a novel statistical model, named ``maximum coherence model'', which estimates the translation probabilities of query words that are consistent with the word co-occurrence statistics. Unlike the previous work, where a binary decision is made for the selection of translations, the new model maintains the uncertainty in translating query words when their sense ambiguity is difficult to resolve. Furthermore, this new model is able to estimate translations of multiple query words simultaneously. This is in contrast to many previous approaches where translations of individual query words are determined independently. Empirical studies with TREC datasets have shown that the maximum coherence model achieves a relative 10% - 40% improvement in cross-language information retrieval, comparing to other approaches that also use word co-occurrence statistics for sense disambiguation.
1076127	Hidden Markov models for automatic annotation and content-based retrieval of images and video This paper introduces a novel method for automatic annotation of images with keywords from a generic vocabulary of concepts or objects for the purpose of content-based image retrieval. An image, represented as sequence of feature-vectors characterizing low-level visual features such as color, texture or oriented-edges, is modeled as having been stochastically generated by a hidden Markov model, whose states represent concepts. The parameters of the model are estimated from a set of manually annotated (training) images. Each image in a large test collection is then automatically annotated with the a posteriori probability of concepts present in it. This annotation supports content-based search of the image-collection via keywords. Various aspects of model parameterization, parameter estimation, and image annotation are discussed. Empirical retrieval results are presented on two image-collections | COREL and key-frames from TRECVID. Comparisons are made with two other recently developed techniques on the same datasets.
1076128	Exploiting ontologies for automatic image annotation Automatic image annotation is the task of automatically assigning words to an image that describe the content of the image. Machine learning approaches have been explored to model the association between words and images from an annotated set of images and generate annotations for a test image. The paper proposes methods to use a hierarchy defined on the annotation words derived from a text ontology to improve automatic image annotation and retrieval. Specifically, the hierarchy is used in the context of generating a visual vocabulary for representing images and as a framework for the proposed hierarchical classification approach for automatic image annotation. The effect of using the hierarchy in generating the visual vocabulary is demonstrated by improvements in the annotation performance of translation models. In addition to performance improvements, hierarchical classification approaches yield well to constructing multimedia ontologies.
1076129	A database centric view of semantic image annotation and retrieval We introduce a new model for semantic annotation and retrieval from image databases. The new model is based on a probabilistic formulation that poses annotation and retrieval as classification problems, and produces solutions that are optimal in the minimum probability of error sense. It is also database centric, by establishing a one-to-one mapping between semantic classes and the groups of database images that share the associated semantic labels. In this work we show that, under the database centric probabilistic model, optimal annotation and retrieval can be implemented with algorithms that are conceptually simple, computationally efficient, and do not require prior semantic segmentation of training images. Due to its simplicity, the annotation and retrieval architecture is also amenable to sophisticated parameter tuning, a property that is exploited to investigate the role of feature selection in the design of optimal annotation and retrieval systems. Finally, we demonstrate the benefits of simply establishing a one-to-one mapping between keywords and the states of the semantic classification problem over the more complex, and currently popular, joint modeling of keyword and visual feature distributions. The database centric probabilistic retrieval model is compared to existing semantic labeling and retrieval methods, and shown to achieve higher accuracy than the previously best published results, at a fraction of their computational cost.
1076131	Analysis of factoid questions for effective relation extraction We present an analysis of the structured relationships observed in a randomly sampled set of question-like queries submitted to a search engine for a popular online encyclopedic document collection. Our study shows that a relatively small number of binary relationships account for most of the queries in the sample. This empirically validates an approach of analyzing query logs to identify the relationships most relevant to user needs and populating corresponding fact tables from the collection for factoid question answering. Our analysis shows that such an approach can lead to substantial coverage of user questions.
1076132	A testbed for people searching strategies in the WWW This paper describes the creation of a testbed to evaluate people searching strategies on the World-Wide-Web. This task involves resolving person names' ambiguity and locating relevant information characterising every individual under the same name.
1076133	Measure-based metasearch We propose a simple method for converting many standard measures of retrieval performance into metasearch algorithms. Our focus is both on the analysis of retrieval measures themselves and on the development of new metasearch algorithms. Given the conversion method proposed, our experimental results using TREC data indicate that system-oriented measures of overall retrieval performance (such as average precision) yield good metasearch algorithms whose performance equals or exceeds that of benchmark techniques such as CombMNZ and Condorcet.
1076134	A geometric interpretation of r-precision and its correlation with average precision We consider two of the most commonly cited measures of retrieval performance: average precision and R-precision. It is well known that average precision and R-precision are highly correlated and similarly robust measures of performance, though the reasons for this are not entirely clear. In this paper, we give a geometric argument which shows that under a very reasonable set of assumptions, average precision and R-precision both approximate the area under the precision-recall curve, thus explaining their high correlation. We further demonstrate through the use of TREC data that the similarity or difference between average precision and R-precision is largely governed by the adherence to, or violation of, these reasonable assumptions.
1076135	Probabilistic hyperspace analogue to language Song and Bruza [6] introduce a framework for Information Retrieval(IR) based on Gardenfor's three tiered cognitive model; Conceptual Spaces[4]. They instantiate a conceptual space using Hyperspace Analogue to Language (HAL[3] to generate higher order concepts which are later used for ad-hoc retrieval. In this poster, we propose an alternative implementation of the conceptual space by using a probabilistic HAL space (pHAL). To evaluate whether converting to such an implementation is beneficial we have performed an initial investigation comparing the concept combination of HAL against pHAL for the task of query expansion. Our experiments indicate that pHAL outperforms the original HAL method and that better query term selection methods can improve performance on both HAL and pHAL.
1076136	Basic issues on the processing of web queries In this paper we study three basic and key issues related to Web query processing: load balance, broker behavior, and performance by individual index servers. Our study, while preliminary, does reveal interesting tradeoffs: (1) load unbalance at low query arrival rates can be controlled with a simple measure of randomizing the distribution of documents among the index servers, (2) the broker is not a bottleneck, and (3) disk utilization is higher than CPU utilization.
1076137	An interface to search human movements based on geographic and chronological metadata Historians and scholars can better understand historic events by studying the geographic and chronological activity of individuals who witnessed them. A lack of adequate tools to help users study these activities can hinder the process of learning and discovery. In this paper we present an interface to address this problem that contains three components: a map, a timeline, and a text representation of a survivor's movements. These components simultaneously provide query input (where users can specify their needs) and dynamic results display (where users can immediately see the effect of their decisions). The results of a pilot study show that users reacted positively to the interface.
1076138	Automatic web query classification using labeled and unlabeled training data Accurate topical categorization of user queries allows for increased effectiveness, efficiency, and revenue potential in general-purpose web search systems. Such categorization becomes critical if the system is to return results not just from a general web collection but from topic-specific databases as well. Maintaining sufficient categorization recall is very difficult as web queries are typically short, yielding few features per query. We examine three approaches to topical categorization of general web queries: matching against a list of manually labeled queries, supervised learning of classifiers, and mining of selectional preference rules from large unlabeled query logs. Each approach has its advantages in tackling the web query classification recall problem, and combining the three techniques allows us to classify a substantially larger proportion of queries than any of the individual techniques. We examine the performance of each approach on a real web query stream and show that our combined method accurately classifies 46% of queries, outperforming the recall of the best single approach by nearly 20%, with a 7% improvement in overall effectiveness.
1076139	Surrogate scoring for improved metasearch precision We describe a method for improving the precision of metasearch results based upon scoring the visual features of documents' surrogate representations. These surrogate scores are used during fusion in place of the original scores or ranks provided by the underlying search engines. Visual features are extracted from typical search result surrogate information, such as title, snippet, URL, and rank. This approach specifically avoids the use of search engine-specific scores and collection statistics that are required by most traditional fusion strategies. This restriction correctly reflects the use of metasearch in practice, in which knowledge of the underlying search engines' strategies cannot be assumed. We evaluate our approach using a precision-oriented test collection of manually-constructed binary relevance judgments for the top ten results from ten web search engines over 896 queries. We show that our visual fusion approach significantly outperforms the rCombMNZ fusion algorithm by 5.71%, with 99% confidence, and the best individual web search engine by 10.9%, with 99% confidence.
1076140	Detecting action-items in e-mail An abstract is not available.
1076141	Characterization of a simple case of the reassignment of document identifiers as a pattern sequencing problem In this poster, we analyze recent work in the document identifiers reassignment problem. After that, we present a formalization of a simple case of the problem as a PSP (Pattern Sequencing Problem). This may facilitate future work as it opens a new research line to solve the general problem.
1076142	Testing algorithms is like testing students In this paper, we apply methods from educational testing to measure the reliability of an IR collection.
1076143	Evaluating the impact of selection noise in community-based web search The I-SPY meta-search engine uses a technique called collaborative Web search to leverage the past search behaviour (queries and selections) of a community of users in order to promote search results that are relevant to the community. In this paper we describe recent studies to clarify the benefits of this approach in situations when the behaviour of users cannot be relied upon in terms of their ability to consistently select relevant results during search sessions.
1076144	Expectation of f-measures: tractable exact computation and some empirical observations of its properties We derive a tractable and exact computation for the expectation of F -measures. We also demonstrate the non-convexity of this expectation, and investigate errors of approximating the expectation under different settings.
1076145	Search engines and how students think they work To investigate the nature of people's understandings for how search engines work, we collected data from 232 undergraduate and graduate students. Students were asked to "draw a labeled sketch of how search engines work." A reference model was constructed and each sketch was analyzed and compared against it for completeness. The paper presents preliminary results and discusses the implications for educational assessment and curriculum design on the one hand, and information system design on the other.
1076146	On evaluation of adaptive topic tracking systems Summative evaluation methods for supervised adaptive topic tracking systems convolve the effect of system decisions on present utility with the effect on future utility. This paper describes a new formative evaluation approach that focuses on future utility for use in the design stage of adaptive systems. Topic model quality is assessed at a predefined set of points using a fixed document set to enhance comparability. Experiments using a vector-space topic tracking system illustrate the utility of this approach to formative evaluation.
1076147	Top subset retrieval on large collections using sorted indices In this poster we describe alternative inverted index structures that reduce the time required to process queries, produce a higher query throughput and still return high quality results to the end user. We give results based upon the TREC Terabyte dataset showing improvements that these indices give in terms of effectiveness and efficiency.
1076148	Relation between PLSA and NMF and implications Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF, [5]) and Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis (PLSA, [4]) have been successfully applied to a number of text analysis tasks such as document clustering. Despite their different inspirations, both methods are instances of multinomial PCA [1]. We further explore this relationship and first show that PLSA solves the problem of NMF with KL divergence, and then explore the implications of this relationship.
1076149	The impact of evaluation on multilingual text retrieval We summarize the impact of the first five years of activity of the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum (CLEF) on multilingual text retrieval system performance and show how the CLEF evaluation campaigns have contributed to advances in the state-of-the-art.
1076150	Using Oracle® for natural language document retrieval an automatic query reformulation approach In corporate applications, vast amounts of data are often stored in database systems such as Oracle. Apart from structured information this can include text documents which cannot easily be retrieved using traditional SQL queries.Oracle includes means to deal with full text document retrieval (called Oracle Text) that offer special query operators for searches inside text fields. We have explored the effect of these different operators for queries derived from natural language queries. This article compares the retrieval performances achieved with different automatic reformulations from natural language to Oracle SQL queries.
1076151	Customizing information access according to domain and task knowledge: the ontoExplo system In this paper we present a system that allows a user to explore or mine a document collection. This system is based on domain and task knowledge modelled in the form of ontologies and allows direct access both to information as it is stored and to information that is built from it. The system has been developed in Java.
1076152	Evaluating semantic indexing techniques through cross-language fingerprinting Users in search of on-line document sources are usually looking for content, not words. Hence, IR researchers generally agree that search techniques should be geared toward the meaning underlying documents rather than toward the text itself. The most visible examples of such techniques are Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA), and the Hyperspace Analog to Language (HAL). If these techniques really uncover semantic dependencies, then they should be applicable across languages. We investigated this using electronic versions of three kinds of translated material: a novel, a popular treatise about cosmology, and a data base of technical specifications. We used the analogy of fingerprinting used in forensics to establish if individuals are related. Genetic fingerprinting uses enzymes to split the DNA and then compare the resulting band patterns. Likewise, in our research we use queries to split a document into fragments. If a search technique really isolates fragments related to the query, then a document and its translation should have similar band patterns. In this paper we (1) present the fingerprinting technique, (2) introduce the material used, and (3) report preliminary results of an evaluation for two semantic indexing techniques.
1076153	Live visual relevance feedback for query formulation Users browsing the Internet seem relatively satisfied with the performance of search engines. An optimistic explanation would be the high quality of search engines. A more pessimistic one would be that people just adapt easily to any new technology. A third explanation is people's ignorance about recall: as they simply don't know what relevant documents are missed, they can hardly be expected to worry about them. And so they easily conceive the result as the best they can get. To allow the user to better assess the quality of the search results, an algorithm was developed that computes a visual representation of the document space in the neighborhood of the user's query.The paper (1) outlines the algorithm, (2) shows how users can explore the neighborhood of a query, and (3) demonstrates how users can guess more judiciously whether they need to further elaborate their query to improve retrieval results.
1076154	A dual index model for contextual information retrieval In this paper, we propose a dual index model for contextual IR. For each query, we search against both document level and passage level indexes, and use the corresponding merge function to update the weights for both documents and paragraphs by combining the results from both indexes according to the granularity information in metadata. Experiments on 2004 TREC data show that a significant improvement can be made by using the dual index model.
1076155	Predicting query difficulty on the web by learning visual clues We describe a method for predicting query difficulty in a precision-oriented web search task. Our approach uses visual features from retrieved surrogate document representations (titles, snippets, etc.) to predict retrieval effectiveness for a query. By training a supervised machine learning algorithm with manually evaluated queries, visual clues indicative of relevance are discovered. We show that this approach has a moderate correlation of 0.57 with precision at 10 scores from manual relevance judgments of the top ten documents retrieved by ten web search engines over 896 queries. Our findings indicate that difficulty predictors which have been successful in recall-oriented ad-hoc search, such as clarity metrics, are not nearly as correlated with engine performance in precision-oriented tasks such as this, yielding a maximum correlation of 0.3. Additionally, relying only on visual clues avoids the need for collection statistics that are required by these prior approaches. This enables our approach to be employed in environments where these statistics are unavailable or costly to retrieve, such as metasearch.
1076156	Finding semantically similar questions based on their answers A large number of question and answer pairs can be collected from question and answer boards and FAQ pages on the Web. This paper proposes an automatic method of finding the questions that have the same meaning. The method can detect semantically similar questions that have little word overlap because it calculates question-question similarities by using the corresponding answers as well as the questions. We develop two different similarity measures based on language modeling and compare them with the traditional similarity measures. Experimental results show that semantically similar questions pairs can be effectively found with the proposed similarity measures.
1076157	Study of cross lingual information retrieval using on-line translation systems Typical cross language retrieval requires special linguistic resources, such as bilingual dictionaries and parallel corpus. In this study, we focus on the cross lingual retrieval problem that only uses online translation systems. We compare two approaches: a translation-based approach that directly translates queries into the language of documents and then applies traditional information retrieval techniques; and a model-based approach that first learns a statistical translation model from the translations acquired from an online translation system and then applies the learned statistical model to cross lingual information retrieval. Our empirical study with ImageCLEF has shown the model-based approach performs significantly better than the translation-based approach.
1076158	3D viewpoint-based photo search and information browsing We propose a new photo search method that uses three-dimensional (3D) viewpoints as queries. 3D viewpoint-based image retrieval is especially useful for searching collections of archaeological photographs,which contain many different images of the same object. Our method is designed to enable users to retrieve images that contain the same object but show a different view, and to browse groups of images taken from a similar viewpoint. We also propose using 3D scenes to query by example, which means that users do not have the problem of trying to formulate appropriate queries. This combination gives users an easy way of accessing not only photographs but also archived information.
1076159	Examination and enhancement of a ring-structured graphical search interface based on usability testing We evaluated the interactive retrieval functionality of the Concentric Ring View according to a series of usability studies. This is a ring structure-based graphical user interface, like a planisphere, for image retrieval with multi-faceted metadata. Attribute values for each facet are arranged on a ring, and retrieved images are displayed inside using search keys derived from the attribute values on the bottom part of the rings. By rotating the rings, users can browse retrieved images while adjusting search keys. The first usability test conducted with thirty six participants confirmed that: (i) novice users, even junior high school students, could use this interface; (ii) users could find images better than anticipated; and (iii) the interface was good at choosing the first relevant image, but users could not refine retrieval because they were unable to reuse retrieved results. To solve this problem, we added two functionalities, personal history for reuse and relevance feedback. With these improvements, we named the new version of the interface Concentric Ring View F+ . A second usability test with seven participants confirmed the effectiveness of this newer interface.
1076160	Short comings of latent models in supervised settings The Aspect Model [1, 2] and the Latent Dirichlet Allocation Model [3, 4] are latent generative models proposed with the objective of modeling discrete data such as text. Though it is not explicitly published (to the best of our knowledge), it is reasonably well known in there search community that the Aspect Model does not perform very well in supervised settings and also that latent models are frequently not identifiable, i.e. their optimal parameters are not unique.In this paper, we make a much stronger claim about the pitfalls of commonly-used latent models. By constructing a small, synthetic, but by no means unrealistic corpus, we show that latent models have inherent limitations that prevent them from recovering semantically meaningful parameters from data generated from a reasonable generative distribution. In fact, our experiments with supervised classification using the Aspect Model, showed that its performance was rather poor, even worse than Naive Bayes, leading us to the synthetic study.We also analyze the scenario of using tempered EM and show that it would not plug the above shortcomings. Our analysis suggests that there is also some scope for improvement in the Latent Dirichlet Allocation Model(LDA) [3, 4]. We then use our insight into the shortcomings of these models, to come up with a promising variant of the LDA, that does not suffer from the aforesaid drawbacks. This could potentially lead to much better performance and model fit, in the supervised scenario.
1076161	Major topic detection and its application to opinion summarization An abstract is not available.
1076162	Using query term order for result summarisation We report on two experiments performed to test the importance of Term Order in automatic summarisation. Experiment one was undertaken as part of DUC 2004 to which three systems were submitted, each with a different summarisation approach. The system that used document Term Order outperformed those that did not use Term Order in the ROUGE evaluation. Experiment two made use of human evaluations of search engine results, comparing our Query Term Order summaries with a simulation of current Google search engine result summaries in terms of summary quality. Our QTO system's summaries aided users' relevance judgements to a significantly greater extent than Google's.
1076163	Profile-based event tracking In this research, we focus on tracking topics that originate and evolve from a specific event. Intuitively, a few key elements of a target event, such as date, location, and persons involved, would be enough for making a decision on whether a test story is on-topic. Consequently, a profile-based event tracking method is proposed. We attempt to build an event profile from the given on-topic stories by robust information retrieval technologies. A feature selection metric and a recognized event clause are utilized to determine most (if not all) key semantic elements of the target event. Preliminary experiments on the TDT2 mandarin corpus show that this profile-based event tracking method is promising.
1076164	Analysis of recursive feature elimination methods An abstract is not available.
1076165	Assessing the term independence assumption in blind relevance feedback When applying blind relevance feedback for ad hoc document retrieval, is it possible to identify, a priori, the set of query terms that will most improve retrieval performance? Can this complex problem be reduced into the simpler one of making independent decisions about the performance effects of each query term? Our experiments suggest that, for the selection of terms for blind relevance feedback, the term independence assumption may be empirically justified.
1076166	Revisiting the effect of topic set size on retrieval error An abstract is not available.
1076167	Information sharing through rational links and viewpoint retrieval In this paper we present the concept of Federated Information Sharing Communities (FISC), which leverages organisational and social relationships with document content to provide community-centred information sharing and communication environments. Prominence is given to capabilities that go beyond the generic retrieval of documents to include the ability to retrieve people, their interests and inter-relationships. We focus on providing social awareness "in the large" to help users understand the members within community and the relationships between them. Within the FISC framework, we provide viewpoint retrieval to enable a user to construct member-specific view(s) of the community, based on their various topic interests. As proof of concept, we present the first FISC prototype based on the twenty-five year SIGIR collection and examples of operational results.
1076168	Mining multimedia salient concepts for incremental information extraction We propose a novel algorithm for extracting information by mining the feature space clusters and then assigning salient concepts to them. Bayesian techniques for extracting concepts from multimedia usually suffer either from lack of data or from too complex concepts to be represented by a single statistical model. An incremental information extraction approach, working at different levels of abstraction, would be able to handle concepts of varying complexities. We present the results of our research on the initial part of an incremental approach, the extraction of the most salient concepts from multimedia information.
1076169	Translating pieces of words Translation for cross-language information retrieval need not be word-based. We show that character n-grams in one language can be 'translated' into character n-grams of another language. We demonstrate that such translations produce retrieval results on par with, and often exceeding, those of word-based and stem-based translation.
1076170	Cross-language text classification An abstract is not available.
1076171	A temporally adaptive content-based relevance ranking algorithm In information retrieval relevance ranking of the results is one of the most important single tasks there are. There are many diffierent ranking algorithms based on the content of the documents or on some external properties e.g. link structure of html documents.We present a temporally adaptive content-based relevance ranking algorithm that explicitly takes into account the temporal behavior of the underlying statistical properties of the documents in the form of a statistical topic model. more we state that our algorithm can be used on top of any ranking algorithm.
1076172	Automated evaluation of search engine performance via implicit user feedback Measuring the information retrieval effectiveness of Web search engines can be expensive if human relevance judgments are required to evaluate search results. Using implicit user feedback for search engine evaluation provides a cost and time effective manner of addressing this problem. Web search engines can use human evaluation of search results without the expense of human evaluators. An additional advantage of this approach is the availability of real time data regarding system performance. Wecapture user relevance judgments actions such as print, save and bookmark, sending these actions and the corresponding document identifiers to a central server via a client application. We use this implicit feedback to calculate performance metrics, such as precision. We can calculate an overall system performance metric based on a collection of weighted metrics.
1076173	Dependency relation matching for answer selection An abstract is not available.
1076174	Using dragpushing to refine centroid text classifiers We present a novel algorithm, DragPushing, for automatic text classification. Using a training data set, the algorithm first calculates the prototype vectors, or centroids, for each of the available document classes. Using misclassified examples, it then iteratively refines these centroids; by dragging the centroid of a correct class towards a misclassified example and in the same time pushing the centroid of an incorrect class away from the misclassified example. The algorithm is simple to implement and is computationally very efficient. Evaluation experiments conducted on two benchmark collections show that its classification accuracy is comparable to that of more complex methods, such as support vector machines (SVM).
1076175	Scalable hierarchical topic detection: exploring a sample based approach Hierarchical topic detection is a new task in the TDT 2004 evaluation program, which aims to organize an unstructured news collection in a directed acyclic graph (DAG) structure, reflecting the topics discussed. We present a scalable architecture for HTD and compare several alternative choices for agglomerative clustering and DAG optimization in order to minimize the HTD cost metric.
1076176	Noun sense induction using web search results This paper presents an algorithm for unsupervised noun sense induction, based on clustering of Web search results. The algorithm does not utilize labeled training instances or any other external knowledge source. Preliminary results on a small dataset show that this technique provides two advantages over other techniques in the literature: it detects real-world senses not found in dictionaries or other lexical resources, and it does not require that the number of word senses be specified in advance.
1076177	Self-organizing distributed collaborative filtering We propose a fully decentralized collaborative filtering approach that is self-organizing and operates in a distributed way. The relevances between downloading files (items) are stored locally at these items in so called item-based buddy tables and are updated each time that the items are downloaded. We then propose to use the language model to build recommendations for the different users based on the buddy tables of those items a user has downloaded previously. We have tested and compared our distributed collaborative filtering approach to centralized collaborative filtering and showed that it has similar performance. It is therefore a promising technique to facilitate recommendations in peer-to-peer networks.
1076178	Dirichlet PageRank PageRank has been known to be a successful algorithm in ranking web sources. In order to avoid the rank sink problem, PageRank assumes that a surfer, being in a page, jumps to a random page with a certain probability. In the standard PageRank algorithm, the jumping probabilities are assumed to be the same for all the pages, regardless of the page properties. This is not the case in the real world, since presumably a surfer would more likely follow the out-links of a high-quality hub page than follow the links of a low-quality one. In this poster, we propose a novel algorithm "Dirichlet PageRank" to address this problem by adapting exible jumping probabilities based on the number of out-links in a page. Empirical results on TREC data show that our method outperforms the standard PageRank algorithm.
1076179	A retrospective study of probabilistic context-based retrieval We propose a novel probabilistic retrieval model which weights terms according to their contexts in documents. The term weighting function of our model is similar to the language model and the binary independence model. The retrospective experiments (i.e., relevance information is present) illustrate the potential of our probabilistic context-based retrieval where the precision at the top 30 documents is about 43% for TREC-6 data and 52% for TREC-7 data.
1076180	Indexing emails and email threads for retrieval Electronic mail poses a number of unusual challenges for the design of information retrieval systems and test collections, including informal expression, conversational structure, variable document granularity (e.g., messages, threads, or longer-term interactions), a naturally occuring integration between free text and structural metadata, and incompletely characterized user needs. This paper reports on initial experiments with a large collection of public mailing lists from the World Wide Web consortium that will be used for the TREC 2005 Enterprise Search Track. Automatic subject-line threading and removal of duplicated text were found to have little effect in a small pilot study. Those observations motivated development of a question typology and more detailed analysis of collection characteristics; preliminary results for both are reported.
1076181	Intelligent fusion of structural and citation-based evidence for text classification This paper shows how different measures of similarity derived from the citation information and the structural content (e.g., title, abstract) of the collection can be fused to improve classification effectiveness. To discover the best fusion framework, we apply Genetic Programming (GP) techniques. Our experiments with the ACM Computing Classification Scheme, using documents from the ACM Digital Library, indicate that GP can discover similarity functions superior to those based solely on a single type of evidence. Effectiveness of the similarity functions discovered through simple majority voting is better than that of content-based as well as combination-based Support Vector Machine classifiers. Experiments also were conducted to compare the performance between GP techniques and other fusion techniques such as Genetic Algorithms (GA) and linear fusion. Empirical results show that GP was able to discover better similarity functions than other fusion techniques.
1076182	Mining translations of OOV terms from the web through cross-lingual query expansion Translating out-of-vocabulary (OOV) terms is a great challenge for the Cross-lingual Information Retrieval and Data-driven Machine Translation systems. Several approaches have been proposed to mine translations for OOV terms from the web, especially from pages containing mixed languages. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to automatically translate OOV terms on the fly through cross-lingual query expansion. The proposed approach does not require any web crawling and has achieved an inclusion rate of 95% and overall translation accuracy of 90%, outperforming state-of-the-art OOV translation techniques.
1076183	On redundancy of training corpus for text categorization: a perspective of geometry An abstract is not available.
1076185	An industrial-strength content-based music recommendation system We present a metadata free system for the interaction with massive collections of music, the MusicSurfer. MusicSurfer automatically extracts descriptions related to instrumentation, rhythm and harmony from music audio signals. Together with efficient similarity metrics, the descriptions allow navigation of multimillion track music collections in a flexible and efficient way without the need of metadata or human ratings.
1076186	SPIN: searching personal information networks An abstract is not available.
1076187	A CLIR interface to a web search engine An abstract is not available.
1076188	Music-to-knowledge (M2K): a prototyping and evaluation environment for music information retrieval research An abstract is not available.
1076189	A wireless natural language search engine Web search using stationary (desktop) computers has become a pervasive activity. The mobile user in need of information, however, faces several problems in his or her quest to satisfy an information need. Mobile devices have small displays, and mobile user interfaces are often less then usable, because they impose the desktop Web search paradigm on the mobile user. We present a wireless search engine based on natural language queries transmitted via popular Small Message Service (SMS) text messages. Besides traditional keyword based queries, the system can accept questions or phrases and returns responses that contain likely answers (Figure 1) instead of traditional lists of hyperlinks. The additional precision gained from performing a linguistic analysis of the query helps extracting answers from Web pages directly, which requires no navigation. The system is implemented using a NLIR system residing on a server, which can translate questions or phrases into search engine queries or queries to SOAP Web services, where a gateway mediates between the mobile network and the Internet (Figure 2). Whereas on the desktop keyboard-based search still prevails, we find that in a mobile context question answering techniques can help overcome the output constraints.
1076190	The recap system for identifying information flow An abstract is not available.
1076191	Hierarchical text summarization for WAP-enabled mobile devices We present WAP MEAD, a WAP-enabled text summarization system. It incorporates a state-of-the art text summarizer enhanced to produce hierarchical summaries that are appropriate for various types of mobile devices, including cellular phones.
1076192	Manjal: a text mining system for MEDLINE An abstract is not available.
1076193	UCAIR: a personalized search toolbar An abstract is not available.
1076194	A web mining research platform We demonstrate the Alexa Web Mining Platform, a data mining and web service publication platform designed to enable analysis of Alexa's massive web data store. The system provides researchers and developers high speed access to our web crawl, crawl metadata, long term storage, and data publication utilities. We demonstrate the system's capabilities and user interface.
1076195	Multi-faceted information retrieval system for large scale email archives An abstract is not available.
1148171	Quantum haystacks This acceptance talk is a curious mixture of personal history and developing ideas in the context of the growing field of IR covering several decades. I want to concentrate on models and theories, interpreted loosely, and try and give an insight into where I have got to in my thinking, where the ideas came from, and where I believe we are going.In the last few years I have been working on the development of what might be coined as a design language for IR. It takes its inspiration from Quantum Mechanics, but by analogy only. The mathematical objects represent documents; these objects might be vectors (or density operators) in an n-dimensional vector space (usually a Hilbert space). A request for information, or a query, is taken as an observable and is represented as a linear operator on the space. Linear operators can be expressed as matrices. Such an operator, Hermitian, has a set of eigenvectors forming a basis for the space; which we interpret as a point of view or perspective from which to understand the space. Thus any document-vector can be located with respect to the basis, and we can calculate an inner product between such a vector and any basis vector, which may be interpreted as a probability of relevance. The probability of observing any given eigenvector is now given by the square of that inner product assuming all vectors are normalised. Hence we connect the probability of observation to the geometry of the space. Furthermore, the subspaces of the space make up a lattice structure which is equivalent to a logic. This makes up the entire mathematical structure, and the language for handling this structure is linear algebra: vectors, matrices, projections, inner-products, neatly captured by the Dirac notation used in quantum mechanics. Our probability is slightly different from classical probability, the same for logic; we end up with quantum logic and quantum probability.A commitment to this kind of mathematical structure, with which to model objects and processes in IR, depends on two critical assumptions. The distances in the space between objects are a source of important relationships with respect to relevance and aboutness. The observation of a property such as relevance or aboutness is user dependent in the sense that a potential interaction is specified by a user through an operator which when measured achieves outcomes with a probability determined by the geometry of the space. .The geometry of this mathematical structure and the probability defined on it are closely connected by the following theorem due to Gleason (1957). One may summarise this theorem by saying that the probability of a subspace is given by a simple algorithm derived from a projection onto the subspace and a special kind of operator, namely a statistical operator, or density matrix. And conversely, that given a probability measure on the subspaces then we can encode that measure uniquely through such an algorithm. This is a very powerful theorem and its consequences remain to be explored.So how did I get to this point and form of abstraction? Most of my research work can be divided into contributions to the following areas: Clustering Evaluation Probabilistic Models Logic Models Geometry .In all these areas I have attempted to search for underlying mathematical structures that would lead to computations. These topics have in common that they depend on the construction of measures on a space which in some sense determines the usefulness or effectiveness of the structure. For clustering one considers mapping from metric spaces to ultrametic spaces and measure the closeness of fit. In the case of evaluation, one starts with a relational conjoint structure and imposes some constraints given by what is to be measured, one then constructs a numerical representation of this structure leading to such measures as F (or E). For probabilistic models the main difficulty is concerned with deciding on an appropriate event space on which to define the 'right' probability measures. For me the most significant example in this context was the attempt to construct a Logical Uncertainty Principle which formulated a measure of uncertainty on incomplete logical constructs. This attempt left unspecified the exact form of the measure. In the Geometry of IR I finally managed to formulate that measure as a projection-valued measure.This way of thinking did not appear out of nowhere. It was heavily influenced by the work of Fairthorne(1961) whose work on Brouwerian Logic (an Intuitionistic Logic) was picked up by Salton in his early book on IR. At an earlier stage MacKay (1950) wrote a paper that opened with, 'This paper relates to the borderline linking experimental and theoretical physics with mathematical logic, and covers at several points ground which is common to the theory of communication.' He goes on to define an 'information-operator' which is very similar in scope and intent to the Hermitian operator above. Maron, who collaborated with MacKay, stated in his 1965 paper, 'Therefore, it can be argued that index descriptions should not be viewed as properties of documents: They function to relate documents and users.' One can see that the development of these early ideas was continued to the construction of the Geometry of IR.What does it leave to be done? An attempt should be made to use this design language to build an IR system. On the theoretical front it is worth considering whether it would be better to start with a transition probability space rather than a Hilbert space as Von Neumann did in 1937 (translated in 1981). The assumption that closed linear subspaces will be the elements of our logic can be challenged, as perhaps a construction with different elements is possible. It is not obvious what the best form of conditional probability might be in these spaces. Agreeing on a form of conditionalisation is intimately tied up with how to model contextuality. There is some evidence to suggest that contextuality plays a role in modelling the conjuncton of concepts (Widdows, 2004). Such contexts have been modelled in quantum theory almost from the beginning, for example, Gleason's theorem precludes noncontextual hidden variable theories.
1148172	Social networks, incentives, and search The role of network structure has grown in significance over the past ten years in the field of information retrieval, stimulated to a great extent by the importance of link analysis in the development of Web search techniques [4]. This body of work has focused primarily on the network that is most clearly visible on the Web: the network of hyperlinks connecting documents to documents. But the Web has always contained a second network, less explicit but equally important, and this is the social network on its users, with latent person-to-person links encoding a variety of relationships including friendship, information exchange, and influence. Developments over the past few years --- including the emergence of social networking systems and rich social media, as well as the availability of large-scale e-mail and instant messenging datasets --- have highlighted the crucial role played by on-line social networks, and at the same time have made them much easier to uncover and analyze. There is now a considerable opportunity to exploit the information content inherent in these networks, and this prospect raises a number of interesting research challenge.Within this context, we focus on some recent efforts to formalize the problem of searching a social network. The goal is to capture the issues underlying a variety of related scenarios: a member of a social networking system such as MySpace seeks a piece of information that may be held by a friend of a friend [27, 28]; an employee in a large company searches his or her network of colleagues for expertise in a particular subject [9]; a node in a decentralized peer-to-peer file-sharing system queries for a file that is likely to be a small number of hops away [2, 6, 16, 17]; or a user in a distributed IR or federated search setting traverses a network of distributed resources connected by links that may not just be informational but also economic or contractual [3, 5, 7, 8, 13, 18, 21]. In their most basic forms, these scenarios have some essential features in common: a node in a network, without global knowledge, must find a short path to a desired "target" node (or to one of several possible target nodes).To frame the underlying problem, we go back to one of the most well-known pieces of empirical social network analysis --- Stanley Milgram's research into the small-world phenomenon, also known as the "six degrees of separation" [19, 24, 25]. The form of Milgram's experiments, in which randomly chosen starters had to forward a letter to a designated target individual, established not just that short chains connecting far-flung pairs of people are abundant in large social networks, but also that the individuals in these networks, operating with purely local information about their own friends and acquaintances, are able to actually find these chains [10]. The Milgram experiments thus constituted perhaps the earliest indication that large-scale social networks are structured to support this type of decentralized search. Within a family of random-graph models proposed by Watts and Strogatz [26], we have shown that the ability of a network to support this type of decentralized search depends in subtle ways on how its "long-range" connections are correlated with the underlying spatial or organizational structure in which it is embedded [10, 11]. Recent studies using data on communication within organizations [1] and the friendships within large on-line communities [15] have established the striking fact that real social networks closely match some of the structural features predicted by these mathematical models.If one looks further at the on-line settings that provide the initial motivation for these issues, there is clearly interest from many directions in their long-term economic implications --- essentially, the consequences that follow from viewing distributed information retrieval applications, peer-to-peer systems, or social-networking sites as providing marketplaces for information and services. How does the problem of decentralized search in a network change when the participants are not simply agents following a fixed algorithm, but strategic actors who make decisions in their own self-interest, and may demand compensation for taking part in a protocol? Such considerations bring us into the realm of algorithmic game theory, an active area of current research that uses game-theoretic notions to quantify the performance of systems in which the participants follow their own self-interest [20, 23] In a simple model for decentralized search in the presence of incentives, we find that performance depends crucially on both the rarity of the information and the richness of the network topology [12] --- if the network is too structurally impoverished, an enormous investment may be required to produce a path from a query to an answer.
1148173	Information retrieval at Boeing: plans and successes An abstract is not available.
1148175	Learning user interaction models for predicting web search result preferences Evaluating user preferences of web search results is crucial for search engine development, deployment, and maintenance. We present a real-world study of modeling the behavior of web search users to predict web search result preferences. Accurate modeling and interpretation of user behavior has important applications to ranking, click spam detection, web search personalization, and other tasks. Our key insight to improving robustness of interpreting implicit feedback is to model query-dependent deviations from the expected "noisy" user behavior. We show that our model of clickthrough interpretation improves prediction accuracy over state-of-the-art clickthrough methods. We generalize our approach to model user behavior beyond clickthrough, which results in higher preference prediction accuracy than models based on clickthrough information alone. We report results of a large-scale experimental evaluation that show substantial improvements over published implicit feedback interpretation methods.
1148176	User performance versus precision measures for simple search tasks Several recent studies have demonstrated that the type of improvements in information retrieval system effectiveness reported in forums such as SIGIR and TREC do not translate into a benefit for users. Two of the studies used an instance recall task, and a third used a question answering task, so perhaps it is unsurprising that the precision based measures of IR system effectiveness on one-shot query evaluation do not correlate with user performance on these tasks. In this study, we evaluate two different information retrieval tasks on TREC Web-track data: a precision-based user task, measured by the length of time that users need to find a single document that is relevant to a TREC topic; and, a simple recall-based task, represented by the total number of relevant documents that users can identify within five minutes. Users employ search engines with controlled mean average precision (MAP) of between 55% and 95%. Our results show that there is no significant relationship between system effectiveness measured by MAP and the precision-based task. A significant, but weak relationship is present for the precision at one document returned metric. A weak relationship is present between MAP and the simple recall-based task.
1148177	Improving web search ranking by incorporating user behavior information We show that incorporating user behavior data can significantly improve ordering of top results in real web search setting. We examine alternatives for incorporating feedback into the ranking process and explore the contributions of user feedback compared to other common web search features. We report results of a large scale evaluation over 3,000 queries and 12 million user interactions with a popular web search engine. We show that incorporating implicit feedback can augment other features, improving the accuracy of a competitive web search ranking algorithms by as much as 31% relative to the original performance.
1148179	Contextual search and name disambiguation in email using graphs Similarity measures for text have historically been an important tool for solving information retrieval problems. In many interesting settings, however, documents are often closely connected to other documents, as well as other non-textual objects: for instance, email messages are connected to other messages via header information. In this paper we consider extended similarity metrics for documents and other objects embedded in graphs, facilitated via a lazy graph walk. We provide a detailed instantiation of this framework for email data, where content, social networks and a timeline are integrated in a structural graph. The suggested framework is evaluated for two email-related problems: disambiguating names in email documents, and threading. We show that reranking schemes based on the graph-walk similarity measures often outperform baseline methods, and that further improvements can be obtained by use of appropriate learning methods.
1148180	Thread detection in dynamic text message streams Text message stream is a newly emerging type of Web data which is produced in enormous quantities with the popularity of Instant Messaging and Internet Relay Chat. It is beneficial for detecting the threads contained in the text stream for various applications, including information retrieval, expert recognition and even crime prevention. Despite its importance, not much research has been conducted so far on this problem due to the characteristics of the data in which the messages are usually very short and incomplete. In this paper, we present a stringent definition of the thread detection task and our preliminary solution to it. We propose three variations of a single-pass clustering algorithm for exploiting the temporal information in the streams. An algorithm based on linguistic features is also put forward to exploit the discourse structure information. We conducted several experiments to compare our approaches with some existing algorithms on a real dataset. The results show that all three variations of the single-pass algorithm outperform the basic single-pass algorithm. Our proposed algorithm based on linguistic features improves the performance relatively by 69.5% and 9.7% when compared with the basic single-pass algorithm and the best variation algorithm in terms of F1 respectively.
1148181	Formal models for expert finding in enterprise corpora Searching an organization's document repositories for experts provides a cost effective solution for the task of expert finding. We present two general strategies to expert searching given a document collection which are formalized using generative probabilistic models. The first of these directly models an expert's knowledge based on the documents that they are associated with, whilst the second locates documents on topic, and then finds the associated expert. Forming reliable associations is crucial to the performance of expert finding systems. Consequently, in our evaluation we compare the different approaches, exploring a variety of associations along with other operational parameters (such as topicality). Using the TREC Enterprise corpora, we show that the second strategy consistently outperforms the first. A comparison against other unsupervised techniques, reveals that our second model delivers excellent performance.
1148183	Spoken document retrieval from call-center conversations We are interested in retrieving information from conversational speech corpora, such as call-center data. This data comprises spontaneous speech conversations with low recording quality, which makes automatic speech recognition (ASR) a highly difficult task. For typical call-center data, even state-of-the-art large vocabulary continuous speech recognition systems produce a transcript with word error rate of 30% or higher. In addition to the output transcript, advanced systems provide word confusion networks (WCNs), a compact representation of word lattices associating each word hypothesis with its posterior probability. Our work exploits the information provided by WCNs in order to improve retrieval performance. In this paper, we show that the mean average precision (MAP) is improved using WCNs compared to the raw word transcripts. Finally, we analyze the effect of increasing ASR word error rate on search effectiveness. We show that MAP is still reasonable even under extremely high error rate.
1148184	Towards efficient automated singer identification in large music databases Automated singer identification is important in organising, browsing and retrieving data in large music databases. In this paper, we propose a novel scheme, called H ybrid S inger I dentifier (HSI), for automated singer recognition. HSI can effectively use multiple low-level features extracted from both vocal and non-vocal music segments to enhance the identification process with a hybrid architecture and build profiles of individual singer characteristics based on statistical mixture models. Extensive experimental results conducted on a large music database demonstrate the superiority of our method over state-of-the-art approaches.
1148185	Music structure based vector space retrieval This paper proposes a novel framework for music content indexing and retrieval. The music structure information, i.e., timing, harmony and music region content, is represented by the layers of the music structure pyramid. We begin by extracting this layered structure information. We analyze the rhythm of the music and then segment the signal proportional to the inter-beat intervals. Thus, the timing information is incorporated in the segmentation process, which we call Beat Space Segmentation . To describe Harmony Events , we propose a two-layer hierarchical approach to model the music chords. We also model the progression of instrumental and vocal content as Acoustic Events . After information extraction, we propose a vector space modeling approach which uses these events as the indexing terms. In query-by-example music retrieval, a query is represented by a vector of the statistics of the n -gram events. We then propose two effective retrieval models, a hard-indexing scheme and a soft-indexing scheme. Experiments show that the vector space modeling is effective in representing the layered music information, achieving 82.5% top-5 retrieval accuracy using 15-sec music clips as the queries. The soft-indexing outperforms hard-indexing in general.
1148187	AggregateRank: bringing order to web sites Since the website is one of the most important organizational structures of the Web, how to effectively rank websites has been essential to many Web applications, such as Web search and crawling. In order to get the ranks of websites, researchers used to describe the inter-connectivity among websites with a so-called HostGraph in which the nodes denote websites and the edges denote linkages between websites (if and only if there are hyperlinks from the pages in one website to the pages in the other, there will be an edge between these two websites), and then adopted the random walk model in the HostGraph. However, as pointed in this paper, the random walk over such a HostGraph is not reasonable because it is not in accordance with the browsing behavior of web surfers. Therefore, the derivate rank cannot represent the true probability of visiting the corresponding website.In this work, we mathematically proved that the probability of visiting a website by the random web surfer should be equal to the sum of the PageRank values of the pages inside that website. Nevertheless, since the number of web pages is much larger than that of websites, it is not feasible to base the calculation of the ranks of websites on the calculation of PageRank. To tackle this problem, we proposed a novel method named AggregateRank rooted in the theory of stochastic complement, which cannot only approximate the sum of PageRank accurately, but also have a lower computational complexity than PageRank. Both theoretical analysis and experimental evaluation show that AggregateRank is a better method for ranking websites than previous methods.
1148188	Respect my authority!: HITS without hyperlinks, utilizing cluster-based language models We present an approach to improving the precision of an initial document ranking wherein we utilize cluster information within a graph-based framework. The main idea is to perform reranking based on centrality within bipartite graphs of documents (on one side) and clusters (on the other side), on the premise that these are mutually reinforcing entities. Links between entities are created via consideration of language models induced from them.We find that our cluster-document graphs give rise to much better retrieval performance than previously proposed document-only graphs do. For example, authority-based reranking of documents via a HITS-style cluster-based approach outperforms a previously-proposed PageRank-inspired algorithm applied to solely-document graphs. Moreover, we also show that computing authority scores for clusters constitutes an effective method for identifying clusters containing a large percentage of relevant documents.
1148189	Topical link analysis for web search Traditional web link-based ranking schemes use a single score to measure a page's authority without concern of the community from which that authority is derived. As a result, a resource that is highly popular for one topic may dominate the results of another topic in which it is less authoritative. To address this problem, we suggest calculating a score vector for each page to distinguish the contribution from different topics, using a random walk model that probabilistically combines page topic distribution and link structure. We show how to incorporate the topical model within both PageRank and HITS without affecting the overall property and still render insight into topic-level transition. Experiments on multiple datasets indicate that our technique outperforms other ranking approaches that incorporate textual analysis.
1148191	The role of knowledge in conceptual retrieval: a study in the domain of clinical medicine Despite its intuitive appeal, the hypothesis that retrieval at the level of "concepts" should outperform purely term-based approaches remains unverified empirically. In addition, the use of "knowledge" has not consistently resulted in performance gains. After identifying possible reasons for previous negative results, we present a novel framework for "conceptual retrieval" that articulates the types of knowledge that are important for information seeking. We instantiate this general framework in the domain of clinical medicine based on the principles of evidence-based medicine (EBM). Experiments show that an EBM-based scoring algorithm dramatically outperforms a state-of-the-art baseline that employs only term statistics. Ablation studies further yield a better understanding of the performance contributions of different components. Finally, we discuss how other domains can benefit from knowledge-based approaches.
1148192	A parallel derivation of probabilistic information retrieval models This paper investigates in a stringent athematical formalism the parallel derivation of three grand probabilistic retrieval models: binary independent retrieval (BIR), Poisson model (PM), and language modelling (LM).The investigation has been motivated by a number of questions. Firstly, though sharing the same origin, namely the probability of relevance, the models differ with respect to event spaces. How can this be captured in a consistent notation, and can we relate the event spaces? Secondly, BIR and PM are closely related, but how does LM fit in? Thirdly, how are tf-idf and probabilistic models related? .The parallel investigation of the models leads to a number of formalised results: BIR and PM assume the collection to be a set of non-relevant documents, whereas LM assumes the collection to be a set of terms from relevant documents. PM can be viewed as a bridge connecting BIR and LM. A BIR-LM equivalence explains BIR as a special LM case. PM explains tf-idf, and both, BIR and LM probabilities express tf-idf in a dual way. .
1148193	Semantic term matching in axiomatic approaches to information retrieval A common limitation of many retrieval models, including the recently proposed axiomatic approaches, is that retrieval scores are solely based on exact (i.e., syntactic) matching of terms in the queries and documents, without allowing distinct but semantically related terms to match each other and contribute to the retrieval score. In this paper, we show that semantic term matching can be naturally incorporated into the axiomatic retrieval model through defining the primitive weighting function based on a semantic similarity function of terms. We define several desirable retrieval constraints for semantic term matching and use such constraints to extend the axiomatic model to directly support semantic term matching based on the mutual information of terms computed on some document set. We show that such extension can be efficiently implemented as query expansion. Experiment results on several representative data sets show that, with mutual information computed over the documents in either the target collection for retrieval or an external collection such as the Web, our semantic expansion consistently and substantially improves retrieval accuracy over the baseline axiomatic retrieval model. As a pseudo feedback method, our method also outperforms a state-of-the-art language modeling feedback method.
1148195	On-line spam filter fusion We show that a set of independently developed spam filters may be combined in simple ways to provide substantially better filtering than any of the individual filters. The results of fifty-three spam filters evaluated at the TREC 2005 Spam Track were combined post-hoc so as to simulate the parallel on-line operation of the filters. The combined results were evaluated using the TREC methodology, yielding more than a factor of two improvement over the best filter. The simplest method -- averaging the binary classifications returned by the individual filters -- yields a remarkably good result. A new method -- averaging log-odds estimates based on the scores returned by the individual filters -- yields a somewhat better result, and provides input to SVM- and logistic-regression-based stacking methods. The stacking methods appear to provide further improvement, but only for very large corpora. Of the stacking methods, logistic regression yields the better result. Finally, we show that it is possible to select a priori small subsets of the filters that, when combined, still outperform the best individual filter by a substantial margin.
1148196	Building bridges for web query classification Web query classification (QC) aims to classify Web users' queries, which are often short and ambiguous, into a set of target categories. QC has many applications including page ranking in Web search, targeted advertisement in response to queries, and personalization. In this paper, we present a novel approach for QC that outperforms the winning solution of the ACM KDDCUP 2005 competition, whose objective is to classify 800,000 real user queries. In our approach, we first build a bridging classifier on an intermediate taxonomy in an offline mode. This classifier is then used in an online mode to map user queries to the target categories via the above intermediate taxonomy. A major innovation is that by leveraging the similarity distribution over the intermediate taxonomy, we do not need to retrain a new classifier for each new set of target categories, and therefore the bridging classifier needs to be trained only once. In addition, we introduce category selection as a new method for narrowing down the scope of the intermediate taxonomy based on which we classify the queries. Category selection can improve both efficiency and effectiveness of the online classification. By combining our algorithm with the winning solution of KDDCUP 2005, we made an improvement by 9.7% and 3.8% in terms of precision and F1 respectively compared with the best results of KDDCUP 2005.
1148197	ProbFuse: a probabilistic approach to data fusion Data fusion is the combination of the results of independent searches on a document collection into one single output result set. It has been shown in the past that this can greatly improve retrieval effectiveness over that of the individual results.This paper presents probFuse , a probabilistic approach to data fusion. ProbFuse assumes that the performance of the individual input systems on a number of training queries is indicative of their future performance. The fused result set is based on probabilities of relevance calculated during this training process. Retrieval experiments using data from the TREC ad hoc collection demonstrate that probFuse achieves results superior to that of the popular CombMNZ fusion algorithm.
1148199	Using web-graph distance for relevance feedback in web search We study the effect of user supplied relevance feedback in improving web search results. Rather than using query refinement or document similarity measures to rerank results, we show that the web-graph distance between two documents is a robust measure of their relative relevancy. We demonstrate how the use of this metric can improve the rankings of result URLs, even when the user only rates one document in the dataset. Our research suggests that such interactive systems can significantly improve search results.
1148200	Improving the estimation of relevance models using large external corpora Information retrieval algorithms leverage various collection statistics to improve performance. Because these statistics are often computed on a relatively small evaluation corpus, we believe using larger, non-evaluation corpora should improve performance. Specifically, we advocate incorporating external corpora based on language modeling. We refer to this process as external expansion . When compared to traditional pseudo-relevance feedback techniques, external expansion is more stable across topics and up to 10% more effective in terms of mean average precision. Our results show that using a high quality corpus that is comparable to the evaluation corpus can be as, if not more, effective than using the web. Our results also show that external expansion outperforms simulated relevance feedback. In addition, we propose a method for predicting the extent to which external expansion will improve retrieval performance. Our new measure demonstrates positive correlation with improvements in mean average precision.
1148201	Regularized estimation of mixture models for robust pseudo-relevance feedback Pseudo-relevance feedback has proven to be an effective strategy for improving retrieval accuracy in all retrieval models. However the performance of existing pseudo feedback methods is often affected significantly by some parameters, such as the number of feedback documents to use and the relative weight of original query terms; these parameters generally have to be set by trial-and-error without any guidance. In this paper, we present a more robust method for pseudo feedback based on statistical language models. Our main idea is to integrate the original query with feedback documents in a single probabilistic mixture model and regularize the estimation of the language model parameters in the model so that the information in the feedback documents can be gradually added to the original query. Unlike most existing feedback methods, our new method has no parameter to tune. Experiment results on two representative data sets show that the new method is significantly more robust than a state-of-the-art baseline language modeling approach for feedback with comparable or better retrieval accuracy.
1148203	Context-sensitive semantic smoothing for the language modeling approach to genomic IR Semantic smoothing, which incorporates synonym and sense information into the language models, is effective and potentially significant to improve retrieval performance. The implemented semantic smoothing models, such as the translation model which statistically maps document terms to query terms, and a number of works that have followed have shown good experimental results. However, these models are unable to incorporate contextual information. Thus, the resulting translation might be mixed and fairly general. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel context-sensitive semantic smoothing method that decomposes a document or a query into a set of weighted context-sensitive topic signatures and then translate those topic signatures into query terms. In detail, we solve this problem through (1) choosing concept pairs as topic signatures and adopting an ontology-based approach to extract concept pairs; (2) estimating the translation model for each topic signature using the EM algorithm; and (3) expanding document and query models based on topic signature translations. The new smoothing method is evaluated on TREC 2004/05 Genomics Track collections and significant improvements are obtained. The MAP (mean average precision) achieves a 33.6% maximal gain over the simple language model, as well as a 7.8% gain over the language model with context-insensitive semantic smoothing.
1148204	LDA-based document models for ad-hoc retrieval Search algorithms incorporating some form of topic model have a long history in information retrieval. For example, cluster-based retrieval has been studied since the 60s and has recently produced good results in the language model framework. An approach to building topic models based on a formal generative model of documents, Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), is heavily cited in the machine learning literature, but its feasibility and effectiveness in information retrieval is mostly unknown. In this paper, we study how to efficiently use LDA to improve ad-hoc retrieval. We propose an LDA-based document model within the language modeling framework, and evaluate it on several TREC collections. Gibbs sampling is employed to conduct approximate inference in LDA and the computational complexity is analyzed. We show that improvements over retrieval using cluster-based models can be obtained with reasonable efficiency.
1148205	Adapting ranking SVM to document retrieval The paper is concerned with applying learning to rank to document retrieval. Ranking SVM is a typical method of learning to rank. We point out that there are two factors one must consider when applying Ranking SVM, in general a "learning to rank" method, to document retrieval. First, correctly ranking documents on the top of the result list is crucial for an Information Retrieval system. One must conduct training in a way that such ranked results are accurate. Second, the number of relevant documents can vary from query to query. One must avoid training a model biased toward queries with a large number of relevant documents. Previously, when existing methods that include Ranking SVM were applied to document retrieval, none of the two factors was taken into consideration. We show it is possible to make modifications in conventional Ranking SVM, so it can be better used for document retrieval. Specifically, we modify the "Hinge Loss" function in Ranking SVM to deal with the problems described above. We employ two methods to conduct optimization on the loss function: gradient descent and quadratic programming. Experimental results show that our method, referred to as Ranking SVM for IR, can outperform the conventional Ranking SVM and other existing methods for document retrieval on two datasets.
1148207	A study of statistical models for query translation: finding a good unit of translation This paper presents a study of three statistical query translation models that use different units of translation. We begin with a review of a word-based translation model that uses co-occurrence statistics for resolving translation ambiguities. The translation selection problem is then formulated under the framework of graphic model resorting to which the modeling assumptions and limitations of the co-occurrence model are discussed, and the research of finding better translation units is motivated. Then, two other models that use larger, linguistically motivated translation units (i.e., noun phrase and dependency triple) are presented. For each model, the modeling and training methods are described in detail. All query translation models are evaluated using TREC collections. Results show that larger translation units lead to more specific models that usually achieve better translation and cross-language information retrieval results.
1148208	Combining bidirectional translation and synonymy for cross-language information retrieval This paper introduces a general framework for the use of translation probabilities in cross-language information retrieval based on the notion that information retrieval fundamentally requires matching what the searcher means with what the author of a document meant. That perspective yields a computational formulation that provides a natural way of combining what have been known as query and document translation. Two well-recognized techniques are shown to be a special case of this model under restrictive assumptions. Cross-language search results are reported that are statistically indistinguishable from strong monolingual baselines for both French and Chinese documents.
1148210	Probabilistic model for definitional question answering This paper proposes a probabilistic model for definitional question answering (QA) that reflects the characteristics of the definitional question. The intention of the definitional question is to request the definition about the question target. Therefore, an answer for the definitional question should contain the content relevant to the topic of the target, and have a representation form of the definition style. Modeling the problem of definitional QA from both the topic and definition viewpoints, the proposed probabilistic model converts the task of answering the definitional questions into that of estimating the three language models: topic language model, definition language model, and general language model. The proposed model systematically combines several evidences in a probabilistic framework. Experimental results show that a definitional QA system based on the proposed probabilistic model is comparable to state-of-the-art systems.
1148211	Answering complex questions with random walk models We present a novel framework for answering complex questions that relies on question decomposition. Complex questions are decomposed by a procedure that operates on a Markov chain, by following a random walk on a bipartite graph of relations established between concepts related to the topic of a complex question and subquestions derived from topic-relevant passages that manifest these relations. Decomposed questions discovered during this random walk are then submitted to a state-of-the-art Question Answering (Q/A) system in order to retrieve a set of passages that can later be merged into a comprehensive answer by a Multi-Document Summarization (MDS) system. In our evaluations, we show that access to the decompositions generated using this method can significantly enhance the relevance and comprehensiveness of summary-length answers to complex questions.
1148212	A framework to predict the quality of answers with non-textual features New types of document collections are being developed by various web services. The service providers keep track of non-textual features such as click counts. In this paper, we present a framework to use non-textual features to predict the quality of documents. We also show our quality measure can be successfully incorporated into the language modeling-based retrieval model. We test our approach on a collection of question and answer pairs gathered from a community based question answering service where people ask and answer questions. Experimental results using our quality measure show a significant improvement over our baseline.
1148214	Latent semantic analysis for multiple-type interrelated data objects Co-occurrence data is quite common in many real applications. Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) has been successfully used to identify semantic relations in such data. However, LSA can only handle a single co-occurrence relationship between two types of objects. In practical applications, there are many cases where multiple types of objects exist and any pair of these objects could have a pairwise co-occurrence relation. All these co-occurrence relations can be exploited to alleviate data sparseness or to represent objects more meaningfully. In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm, M-LSA , which conducts latent semantic analysis by incorporating all pairwise co-occurrences among multiple types of objects. Based on the mutual reinforcement principle, M-LSA identifies the most salient concepts among the co-occurrence data and represents all the objects in a unified semantic space. M-LSA is general and we show that several variants of LSA are special cases of our algorithm. Experiment results show that M-LSA outperforms LSA on multiple applications, including collaborative filtering, text clustering, and text categorization.
1148215	Identifying comparative sentences in text documents This paper studies the problem of identifying comparative sentences in text documents. The problem is related to but quite different from sentiment/opinion sentence identification or classification. Sentiment classification studies the problem of classifying a document or a sentence based on the subjective opinion of the author. An important application area of sentiment/opinion identification is business intelligence as a product manufacturer always wants to know consumers' opinions on its products. Comparisons on the other hand can be subjective or objective. Furthermore, a comparison is not concerned with an object in isolation. Instead, it compares the object with others. An example opinion sentence is "the sound quality of CD player X is poor" . An example comparative sentence is "the sound quality of CD player X is not as good as that of CD player Y" . Clearly, these two sentences give different information. Their language constructs are quite different too. Identifying comparative sentences is also useful in practice because direct comparisons are perhaps one of the most convincing ways of evaluation, which may even be more important than opinions on each individual object. This paper proposes to study the comparative sentence identification problem. It first categorizes comparative sentences into different types, and then presents a novel integrated pattern discovery and supervised learning approach to identifying comparative sentences from text documents. Experiment results using three types of documents, news articles, consumer reviews of products, and Internet forum postings, show a precision of 79% and recall of 81%. More detailed results are given in the paper.
1148216	Tackling concept drift by temporal inductive transfer Machine learning is the mainstay for text classification. However, even the most successful techniques are defeated by many real-world applications that have a strong time-varying component. To advance research on this challenging but important problem, we promote a natural, experimental framework-the Daily Classification Task-which can be applied to large time-based datasets, such as Reuters RCV1.In this paper we dissect concept drift into three main subtypes. We demonstrate via a novel visualization that the recurrent themes subtype is present in RCV1. This understanding led us to develop a new learning model that transfers induced knowledge through time to benefit future classifier learning tasks. The method avoids two main problems with existing work in inductive transfer: scalability and the risk of negative transfer. In empirical tests, it consistently showed more than 10 points F-measure improvement for each of four Reuters categories tested.
1148218	Evaluation in (XML) information retrieval: expected precision-recall with user modelling (EPRUM) Standard Information Retrieval (IR) metrics assume a simple model where documents are understood as independent units. Such an assumption is not adapted to new paradigms like XML or Web IR where retrievable informations are parts of documents or sets of related documents. Moreover, classical hypotheses assumes that the user ignores the structural or logical context of document elements and hence the possibility of navigation between units. EPRUM is a generalisation of Precision-Recall (PR) that aims at allowing the user to navigate or browse in the corpus structure. Like the Cumulated Gain metrics, it is able to handle continuous valued relevance. We apply and compare EPRUM in the context of XML Retrieval -- a very active field for evaluation metrics. We also explain how EPRUM can be used in other IR paradigms.
1148219	Minimal test collections for retrieval evaluation Accurate estimation of information retrieval evaluation metrics such as average precision require large sets of relevance judgments. Building sets large enough for evaluation of real-world implementations is at best inefficient, at worst infeasible. In this work we link evaluation with test collection construction to gain an understanding of the minimal judging effort that must be done to have high confidence in the outcome of an evaluation. A new way of looking at average precision leads to a natural algorithm for selecting documents to judge and allows us to estimate the degree of confidence by defining a distribution over possible document judgments. A study with annotators shows that this method can be used by a small group of researchers to rank a set of systems in under three hours with 95% confidence. Information retrieval metrics such as average precision require large sets of relevance judgments to be accurately estimated. Building these sets is infeasible and often inefficient for many real-world retrieval implementations. We present a new way of looking at average precision that allows us to estimate the confidence in an evaluation based on the size of the test collection. We use this to build an algorithm for selecting the best documents to judge to have maximum confidence in an evaluation with a minimal number of relevance judgments. A study with annotators shows how the algorithm can be used by a small group of researchers to quickly rank a set of systems with 95% confidence.
1148220	Dynamic test collections: measuring search effectiveness on the live web Existing methods for measuring the quality of search algorithms use a static collection of documents. A set of queries and a mapping from the queries to the relevant documents allow the experimenter to see how well different search engines or engine configurations retrieve the correct answers. This methodology assumes that the document set and thus the set of relevant documents are unchanging. In this paper, we abandon the static collection requirement. We begin with a recent TREC collection created from a web crawl and analyze how the documents in that collection have changed over time. We determine how decay of the document collection affects TREC systems, and present the results of an experiment using the decayed collection to measure a live web search system. We employ novel measures of search effectiveness that are robust despite incomplete relevance information. Lastly, we propose a methodology of "collection maintenance" which supports measuring search performance both for a single system and between systems run at different points in time.
1148222	Finding near-duplicate web pages: a large-scale evaluation of algorithms Broder et al.'s [3] shingling algorithm and Charikar's [4] random projection based approach are considered "state-of-the-art" algorithms for finding near-duplicate web pages. Both algorithms were either developed at or used by popular web search engines. We compare the two algorithms on a very large scale, namely on a set of 1.6B distinct web pages. The results show that neither of the algorithms works well for finding near-duplicate pairs on the same site , while both achieve high precision for near-duplicate pairs on different sites . Since Charikar's algorithm finds more near-duplicate pairs on different sites, it achieves a better precision overall, namely 0.50 versus 0.38 for Broder et al.'s algorithm. We present a combined algorithm which achieves precision 0.79 with 79% of the recall of the other algorithms.
1148223	Structure-driven crawler generation by example Many Web IR and Digital Library applications require a crawling process to collect pages with the ultimate goal of taking advantage of useful information available on Web sites. For some of these applications the criteria to determine when a page is to be present in a collection are related to the page content. However, there are situations in which the inner structure of the pages provides a better criteria to guide the crawling process than their content. In this paper, we present a structure-driven approach for generating Web crawlers that requires a minimum effort from users. The idea is to take as input a sample page and an entry point to a Web site and generate a structure-driven crawler based on navigation patterns , sequences of patterns for the links a crawler has to follow to reach the pages structurally similar to the sample page. In the experiments we have carried out, structure-driven crawlers generated by our new approach were able to collect all pages that match the samples given, including those pages added after their generation.
1148224	Building implicit links from content for forum search The objective of Web forums is to create a shared space for open communications and discussions of specific topics and issues. The tremendous information behind forum sites is not fully-utilized yet. Most links between forum pages are automatically created, which means the link-based ranking algorithm cannot be applied efficiently. In this paper, we proposed a novel ranking algorithm which tries to introduce the content information into link-based methods as implicit links. The basic idea is derived from the more focused random surfer: the surfer may more likely jump to a page which is similar to what he is reading currently. In this manner, we are allowed to introduce the content similarities into the link graph as a personalization bias. Our method, named Fine-grained Rank (FGRank), can be efficiently computed based on an automatically generated topic hierarchy. Not like the topic-sensitive PageRank, our method only need to compute single PageRank score for each page. Another contribution of this paper is to present a very efficient algorithm for automatically generating topic hierarchy and map each page in a large-scale collection onto the computed hierarchy. The experimental results show that the proposed method can improve retrieval performance, and reveal that content-based link graph is also important compared with the hyper-link graph.
1148225	Generalizing PageRank: damping functions for link-based ranking algorithms This paper introduces a family of link-based ranking algorithms that propagate page importance through links. In these algorithms there is a damping function that decreases with distance, so a direct link implies more endorsement than a link through a long path. PageRank is the most widely known ranking function of this family.The main objective of this paper is to determine whether this family of ranking techniques has some interest per se , and how different choices for the damping function impact on rank quality and on convergence speed. Even though our results suggest that PageRank can be approximated with other simpler forms of rankings that may be computed more efficiently, our focus is of more speculative nature, in that it aims at separating the kernel of PageRank, that is, link-based importance propagation, from the way propagation decays over paths.We focus on three damping functions, having linear, exponential, and hyperbolic decay on the lengths of the paths. The exponential decay corresponds to PageRank, and the other functions are new. Our presentation includes algorithms, analysis, comparisons and experiments that study their behavior under different parameters in real Web graph data.Among other results, we show how to calculate a linear approximation that induces a page ordering that is almost identical to PageRank's using a fixed small number of iterations; comparisons were performed using Kendall's ? on large domain datasets.
1148227	Capturing collection size for distributed non-cooperative retrieval Modern distributed information retrieval techniques require accurate knowledge of collection size. In non-cooperative environments, where detailed collection statistics are not available, the size of the underlying collections must be estimated. While several approaches for the estimation of collection size have been proposed, their accuracy has not been thoroughly evaluated. An empirical analysis of past estimation approaches across a variety of collections demonstrates that their prediction accuracy is low. Motivated by ecological techniques for the estimation of animal populations, we propose two new approaches for the estimation of collection size. We show that our approaches are significantly more accurate that previous methods, and are more efficient in use of resources required to perform the estimation.
1148228	Probabilistic latent query analysis for combining multiple retrieval sources Combining the output from multiple retrieval sources over the same document collection is of great importance to a number of retrieval tasks such as multimedia retrieval, web retrieval and meta-search. To merge retrieval sources adaptively according to query topics, we propose a series of new approaches called probabilistic latent query analysis (pLQA), which can associate non-identical combination weights with latent classes underlying the query space. Compared with previous query independent and query-class based combination methods, the proposed approaches have the advantage of being able to discover latent query classes automatically without using prior human knowledge, to assign one query to a mixture of query classes, and to determine the number of query classes under a model selection principle. Experimental results on two retrieval tasks, i.e., multimedia retrieval and meta-search, demonstrate that the proposed methods can uncover sensible latent classes from training data, and can achieve considerable performance gains.
1148229	User modeling for full-text federated search in peer-to-peer networks User modeling for information retrieval has mostly been studied to improve the effectiveness of information access in centralized repositories. In this paper we explore user modeling in the context of full-text federated search in peer-to-peer networks. Our approach models a user's persistent, long-term interests based on past queries, and uses the model to improve search efficiency for future queries that represent interests similar to past queries. Our approach also enables queries representing a user's transient, ad-hoc interests to be automatically recognized so that search for these queries can rely on a relatively large search radius to avoid sacrificing effectiveness for efficiency. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach can significantly improve the efficiency of full-text federated search without degrading its accuracy. Furthermore, the proposed approach does not require a large amount of training data, and is robust to a range of parameter values.
1148230	Distributed query sampling: a quality-conscious approach We present an adaptive distributed query-sampling framework that is quality-conscious for extracting high-quality text database samples. The framework divides the query-based sampling process into an initial seed sampling phase and a quality-aware iterative sampling phase. In the second phase the sampling process is dynamically scheduled based on estimated database size and quality parameters derived during the previous sampling process. The unique characteristic of our adaptive query-based sampling framework is its self-learning and self-configuring ability based on the overall quality of all text databases under consideration. We introduce three quality-conscious sampling schemes for estimating database quality, and our initial results show that the proposed framework supports higher-quality document sampling than existing approaches.
1148232	Load balancing for term-distributed parallel retrieval Large-scale web and text retrieval systems deal with amounts of data that greatly exceed the capacity of any single machine. To handle the necessary data volumes and query throughput rates, parallel systems are used, in which the document and index data are split across tightly-clustered distributed computing systems. The index data can be distributed either by document or by term. In this paper we examine methods for load balancing in term-distributed parallel architectures, and propose a suite of techniques for reducing net querying costs. In combination, the techniques we describe allow a 30% improvement in query throughput when tested on an eight-node parallel computer system.
1148233	Hybrid index maintenance for growing text collections We present a new family of hybrid index maintenance strategies to be used in on-line index construction for monotonically growing text collections. These new strategies improve upon recent results for hybrid index maintenance in dynamic text retrieval systems. Like previous techniques, our new method distinguishes between short and long posting lists: While short lists are maintained using a merge strategy, long lists are kept separate and are updated in-place. This way, costly relocations of long posting lists are avoided.We discuss the shortcomings of previous hybrid methods and give an experimental evaluation of the new technique, showing that its index maintenance performance is superior to that of the earlier methods, especially when the amount of main memory available to the indexing system is small. We also present a complexity analysis which proves that, under a Zipfian term distribution, the asymptotical number of disk accesses performed by the best hybrid maintenance strategy is linear in the size of the text collection, implying the asymptotical optimality of the proposed strategy.
1148234	Type less, find more: fast autocompletion search with a succinct index We consider the following full-text search autocompletion feature. Imagine a user of a search engine typing a query. Then with every letter being typed, we would like an instant display of completions of the last query word which would lead to good hits. At the same time, the best hits for any of these completions should be displayed. Known indexing data structures that apply to this problem either incur large processing times for a substantial class of queries, or they use a lot of space. We present a new indexing data structure that uses no more space than a state-of-the-art compressed inverted index, but with 10 times faster query processing times. Even on the large TREC Terabyte collection, which comprises over 25 million documents, we achieve, on a single machine and with the index on disk, average response times of one tenth of a second. We have built a full-fledged, interactive search engine that realizes the proposed autocompletion feature combined with support for proximity search, semi-structured (XML) text, subword and phrase completion, and semantic tags.
1148235	Pruned query evaluation using pre-computed impacts Exhaustive evaluation of ranked queries can be expensive, particularly when only a small subset of the overall ranking is required, or when queries contain common terms. This concern gives rise to techniques for dynamic query pruning, that is, methods for eliminating redundant parts of the usual exhaustive evaluation, yet still generating a demonstrably "good enough" set of answers to the query. In this work we propose new pruning methods that make use of impact-sorted indexes. Compared to exhaustive evaluation, the new methods reduce the amount of computation performed, reduce the amount of memory required for accumulators, reduce the amount of data transferred from disk, and at the same time allow performance guarantees in terms of precision and mean average precision. These strong claims are backed by experiments using the TREC Terabyte collection and queries.
1148237	Mining dependency relations for query expansion in passage retrieval Classical query expansion techniques such as the local context analysis (LCA) make use of term co-occurrence statistics to incorporate additional contextual terms for enhancing passage retrieval. However, relevant contextual terms do not always co-occur frequently with the query terms and vice versa. Hence the use of such methods often brings in noise, which leads to reduced precision. Previous studies have demonstrated the importance of relationship analysis for natural language queries in passage retrieval. However, they found that without query expansion, the performance is not satisfactory for short queries. In this paper, we present two novel query expansion techniques that make use of dependency relation analysis to extract contextual terms and relations from external corpuses. The techniques are used to enhance the performance of density based and relation based passage retrieval frameworks respectively. We compare the performance of the resulting systems with LCA in a density based passage retrieval system (DBS) and a relation based system without any query expansion (RBS) using the factoid questions from the TREC-12 QA task. The results show that in terms of MRR scores, our relation based term expansion method with DBS outperforms the LCA by 9.81%, while our relation expansion method outperforms RBS by 17.49%.
1148238	What makes a query difficult? This work tries to answer the question of what makes a query difficult. It addresses a novel model that captures the main components of a topic and the relationship between those components and topic difficulty. The three components of a topic are the textual expression describing the information need (the query or queries), the set of documents relevant to the topic (the Qrels), and the entire collection of documents. We show experimentally that topic difficulty strongly depends on the distances between these components. In the absence of knowledge about one of the model components, the model is still useful by approximating the missing component based on the other components. We demonstrate the applicability of the difficulty model for several uses such as predicting query difficulty, predicting the number of topic aspects expected to be covered by the search results, and analyzing the findability of a specific domain.
1148239	On ranking the effectiveness of searches There is a growing interest in estimating the effectiveness of search. Two approaches are typically considered: examining the search queries and examining the retrieved document sets. In this paper, we take the latter approach. We use four measures to characterize the retrieved document sets and estimate the quality of search. These measures are (i) the clustering tendency as measured by the Cox-Lewis statistic, (ii) the sensitivity to document perturbation, (iii) the sensitivity to query perturbation and (iv) the local intrinsic dimensionality. We present experimental results for the task of ranking 200 queries according to the search effectiveness over the TREC (discs 4 and 5) dataset. Our ranking of queries is compared with the ranking based on the average precision using the Kendall t statistic. The best individual estimator is the sensitivity to document perturbation and yields Kendall t of 0.521. When combined with the clustering tendency based on the Cox-Lewis statistic and the query perturbation measure, it results in Kendall t of 0.562 which to our knowledge is the highest correlation with the average precision reported to date.
1148241	Document clustering with prior knowledge Document clustering is an important tool for text analysis and is used in many different applications. We propose to incorporate prior knowledge of cluster membership for document cluster analysis and develop a novel semi-supervised document clustering model. The method models a set of documents with weighted graph in which each document is represented as a vertex, and each edge connecting a pair of vertices is weighted with the similarity value of the two corresponding documents. The prior knowledge indicates pairs of documents that known to belong to the same cluster. Then, the prior knowledge is transformed into a set of constraints. The document clustering task is accomplished by finding the best cuts of the graph under the constraints. We apply the model to the Normalized Cut method to demonstrate the idea and concept. Our experimental evaluations show that the proposed document clustering model reveals remarkable performance improvements with very limited training samples, and hence is a very effective semi-supervised classification tool.
1148242	Text clustering with extended user feedback Text clustering is most commonly treated as a fully automated task without user feedback. However, a variety of researchers have explored mixed-initiative clustering methods which allow a user to interact with and advise the clustering algorithm. This mixed-initiative approach is especially attractive for text clustering tasks where the user is trying to organize a corpus of documents into clusters for some particular purpose (e.g., clustering their email into folders that reflect various activities in which they are involved). This paper introduces a new approach to mixed-initiative clustering that handles several natural types of user feedback. We first introduce a new probabilistic generative model for text clustering (the SpeClustering model) and show that it outperforms the commonly used mixture of multinomials clustering model, even when used in fully autonomous mode with no user input. We then describe how to incorporate four distinct types of user feedback into the clustering algorithm, and provide experimental evidence showing substantial improvements in text clustering when this user feedback is incorporated.
1148243	Near-duplicate detection by instance-level constrained clustering For the task of near-duplicated document detection, both traditional fingerprinting techniques used in database community and bag-of-word comparison approaches used in information retrieval community are not sufficiently accurate. This is due to the fact that the characteristics of near-duplicated documents are different from that of both "almost-identical" documents in the data cleaning task and "relevant" documents in the search task. This paper presents an instance-level constrained clustering approach for near-duplicate detection. The framework incorporates information such as document attributes and content structure into the clustering process to form near-duplicate clusters. Gathered from several collections of public comments sent to U.S. government agencies on proposed new regulations, the experimental results demonstrate that our approach outperforms other near-duplicate detection algorithms and as about as effective as human assessors.
1148245	Less is more: probabilistic models for retrieving fewer relevant documents Traditionally, information retrieval systems aim to maximize the number of relevant documents returned to a user within some window of the top. For that goal, the probability ranking principle, which ranks documents in decreasing order of probability of relevance, is provably optimal. However, there are many scenarios in which that ranking does not optimize for the users information need. One example is when the user would be satisfied with some limited number of relevant documents, rather than needing all relevant documents. We show that in such a scenario, an attempt to return many relevant documents can actually reduce the chances of finding any relevant documents. We consider a number of information retrieval metrics from the literature, including the rank of the first relevant result, the %no metric that penalizes a system only for retrieving no relevant results near the top, and the diversity of retrieved results when queries have multiple interpretations. We observe that given a probabilistic model of relevance, it is appropriate to rank so as to directly optimize these metrics in expectation. While doing so may be computationally intractable, we show that a simple greedy optimization algorithm that approximately optimizes the given objectives produces rankings for TREC queries that outperform the standard approach based on the probability ranking principle.
1148246	High accuracy retrieval with multiple nested ranker High precision at the top ranks has become a new focus of research in information retrieval. This paper presents the multiple nested ranker approach that improves the accuracy at the top ranks by iteratively re-ranking the top scoring documents. At each iteration, this approach uses the RankNet learning algorithm to re-rank a subset of the results. This splits the problem into smaller and easier tasks and generates a new distribution of the results to be learned by the algorithm. We evaluate this approach using different settings on a data set labeled with several degrees of relevance. We use the normalized discounted cumulative gain (NDCG) to measure the performance because it depends not only on the position but also on the relevance score of the document in the ranked list. Our experiments show that making the learning algorithm concentrate on the top scoring results improves precision at the top ten documents in terms of the NDCG score.
1148247	Semantic search via XML fragments: a high-precision approach to IR In some IR applications, it is desirable to adopt a high precision search strategy to return a small set of documents that are highly focused and relevant to the user's information need. With these applications in mind, we investigate semantic search using the XML Fragments query language on text corpora automatically pre-processed to encode semantic information useful for retrieval. We identify three XML Fragment operations that can be applied to a query to conceptualize , restrict , or relate terms in the query. We demonstrate how these operations can be used to address four different query-time semantic needs: to specify target information type , to disambiguate keywords , to specify search term context , or to relate select terms in the query. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our semantic search technology through a series of experiments using the two applications in which we embed this technology and show that it yields significant improvement in precision in the search results.
1148249	Elicitation of term relevance feedback: an investigation of term source and context Term relevance feedback has had a long history in information retrieval. However, research on interactive term relevance feedback has yielded mixed results. In this paper, we investigate several aspects related to the elicitation of term relevance feedback: the display of document surrogates, the technique for identifying or selecting terms, and sources of expansion terms. We conduct a between subjects experiment (n=61) of three term relevance feedback interfaces using the 2005 TREC HARD collection, and evaluate each interface with respect to query length and retrieval performance. Results demonstrate that queries created with each experimental interface significantly outperformed corresponding baseline queries, even though there were no differences in performance between interface conditions. Results also demonstrate that pseudo-relevance feedback runs outperformed both baseline and experimental runs as assessed by recall-oriented measures, but that user-generated terms improved precision.
1148250	Find-similar: similarity browsing as a search tool Search systems have for some time provided users with the ability to request documents similar to a given document. Interfaces provide this feature via a link or button for each document in the search results. We call this feature find-similar or similarity browsing . We examined find-similar as a search tool, like relevance feedback, for improving retrieval performance. Our investigation focused on find-similar's document-to-document similarity, the reexamination of documents during a search, and the user's browsing pattern. Find-similar with a query-biased similarity, avoiding the reexamination of documents, and a breadth-like browsing pattern achieved a 23% increase in the arithmetic mean average precision and a 66% increase in the geometric mean average precision over our baseline retrieval. This performance matched that of a more traditionally styled iterative relevance feedback technique.
1148251	Exploring the limits of single-iteration clarification dialogs Single-iteration clarification dialogs, as implemented in the TREC HARD track, represent an attempt to introduce interaction into ad hoc retrieval, while preserving the many benefits of large-scale evaluations. Although previous experiments have not conclusively demonstrated performance gains resulting from such interactions, it is unclear whether these findings speak to the nature of clarification dialogs, or simply the limitations of current systems. To probe the limits of such interactions, we employed a human intermediary to formulate clarification questions and exploit user responses. In addition to establishing a plausible upper bound on performance, we were also able to induce an "ontology of clarifications" to characterize human behavior. This ontology, in turn, serves as the input to a regression model that attempts to determine which types of clarification questions are most helpful. Our work can serve to inform the design of interactive systems that initiate user dialogs.
1148253	Large scale semi-supervised linear SVMs Large scale learning is often realistic only in a semi-supervised setting where a small set of labeled examples is available together with a large collection of unlabeled data. In many information retrieval and data mining applications, linear classifiers are strongly preferred because of their ease of implementation, interpretability and empirical performance. In this work, we present a family of semi-supervised linear support vector classifiers that are designed to handle partially-labeled sparse datasets with possibly very large number of examples and features. At their core, our algorithms employ recently developed modified finite Newton techniques. Our contributions in this paper are as follows: (a) We provide an implementation of Transductive SVM (TSVM) that is significantly more efficient and scalable than currently used dual techniques, for linear classification problems involving large, sparse datasets. (b) We propose a variant of TSVM that involves multiple switching of labels. Experimental results show that this variant provides an order of magnitude further improvement in training efficiency. (c) We present a new algorithm for semi-supervised learning based on a Deterministic Annealing (DA) approach. This algorithm alleviates the problem of local minimum in the TSVM optimization procedure while also being computationally attractive. We conduct an empirical study on several document classification tasks which confirms the value of our methods in large scale semi-supervised settings.
1148254	Graph-based text classification: learn from your neighbors Automatic classification of data items, based on training samples, can be boosted by considering the neighborhood of data items in a graph structure (e.g., neighboring documents in a hyperlink environment or co-authors and their publications for bibliographic data entries). This paper presents a new method for graph-based classification, with particular emphasis on hyperlinked text documents but broader applicability. Our approach is based on iterative relaxation labeling and can be combined with either Bayesian or SVM classifiers on the feature spaces of the given data items. The graph neighborhood is taken into consideration to exploit locality patterns while at the same time avoiding overfitting. In contrast to prior work along these lines, our approach employs a number of novel techniques: dynamically inferring the link/class pattern in the graph in the run of the iterative relaxation labeling, judicious pruning of edges from the neighborhood graph based on node dissimilarities and node degrees, weighting the influence of edges based on a distance metric between the classification labels of interest and weighting edges by content similarity measures. Our techniques considerably improve the robustness and accuracy of the classification outcome, as shown in systematic experimental comparisons with previously published methods on three different real-world datasets.
1148255	Constructing informative prior distributions from domain knowledge in text classification Supervised learning approaches to text classification are in practice often required to work with small and unsystematically collected training sets. The alternative to supervised learning is usually viewed to be building classifiers by hand, using a domain expert's understanding of which features of the text are related to the class of interest. This is expensive, requires a degree of sophistication about linguistics and classification, and makes it difficult to use combinations of weak predictors. We propose instead combining domain knowledge with training examples in a Bayesian framework. Domain knowledge is used to specify a prior distribution for the parameters of a logistic regression model, and labeled training data is used to produce a posterior distribution, whose mode we take as the final classifier. We show on three text categorization data sets that this approach can rescue what would otherwise be disastrously bad training situations, producing much more effective classifiers.
1148257	Unifying user-based and item-based collaborative filtering approaches by similarity fusion Memory-based methods for collaborative filtering predict new ratings by averaging (weighted) ratings between, respectively, pairs of similar users or items. In practice, a large number of ratings from similar users or similar items are not available, due to the sparsity inherent to rating data. Consequently, prediction quality can be poor. This paper re-formulates the memory-based collaborative filtering problem in a generative probabilistic framework, treating individual user-item ratings as predictors of missing ratings. The final rating is estimated by fusing predictions from three sources: predictions based on ratings of the same item by other users, predictions based on different item ratings made by the same user, and, third, ratings predicted based on data from other but similar users rating other but similar items. Existing user-based and item-based approaches correspond to the two simple cases of our framework. The complete model is however more robust to data sparsity, because the different types of ratings are used in concert, while additional ratings from similar users towards similar items are employed as a background model to smooth the predictions. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed methods are indeed more robust against data sparsity and give better recommendations.
1148258	Personalized recommendation driven by information flow We propose that the information access behavior of a group of people can be modeled as an information flow issue, in which people intentionally or unintentionally influence and inspire each other, thus creating an interest in retrieving or getting a specific kind of information or product. Information flow models how information is propagated in a social network. It can be a real social network where interactions between people reside; it can be, moreover, a virtual social network in that people only influence each other unintentionally, for instance, through collaborative filtering. We leverage users' access patterns to model information flow and generate effective personalized recommendations. First, an early adoption based information flow (EABIF) network describes the influential relationships between people. Second, based on the fact that adoption is typically category specific, we propose a topic-sensitive EABIF (TEABIF) network, in which access patterns are clustered with respect to the categories. Once an item has been accessed by early adopters, personalized recommendations are achieved by estimating whom the information will be propagated to with high probabilities. In our experiments with an online document recommendation system, the results demonstrate that the EABIF and the TEABIF can respectively achieve an improved (precision, recall) of (91.0%, 87.1%) and (108.5%, 112.8%) compared to traditional collaborative filtering, given an early adopter exists.
1148259	Analysis of a low-dimensional linear model under recommendation attacks Collaborative filtering techniques have become popular in the past decade as an effective way to help people deal with information overload. Recent research has identified significant vulnerabilities in collaborative filtering techniques. Shilling attacks, in which attackers introduce biased ratings to influence recommendation systems, have been shown to be effective against memory-based collaborative filtering algorithms. We examine the effectiveness of two popular shilling attacks (the random attack and the average attack) on a model-based algorithm that uses Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) to learn a low-dimensional linear model. Our results show that the SVD-based algorithm is much more resistant to shilling attacks than memory-based algorithms. Furthermore, we develop an attack detection method directly built on the SVD-based algorithm and show that this method detects random shilling attacks with high detection rates and very low false alarm rates.
1148261	Evaluating evaluation metrics based on the bootstrap This paper describes how the Bootstrap approach to statistics can be applied to the evaluation of IR effectiveness metrics. First, we argue that Bootstrap Hypothesis Tests deserve more attention from the IR community, as they are based on fewer assumptions than traditional statistical significance tests. We then describe straightforward methods for comparing the sensitivity of IR metrics based on Bootstrap Hypothesis Tests. Unlike the heuristics-based "swap" method proposed by Voorhees and Buckley, our method estimates the performance difference required to achieve a given significance level directly from Bootstrap Hypothesis Test results. In addition, we describe a simple way of examining the accuracy of rank correlation between two metrics based on the Bootstrap Estimate of Standard Error. We demonstrate the usefulness of our methods using test collections and runs from the NTCIR CLIR track for comparing seven IR metrics, including those that can handle graded relevance and those based on the Geometric Mean.
1148262	Statistical precision of information retrieval evaluation We introduce and validate bootstrap techniques to compute confidence intervals that quantify the effect of test-collection variability on average precision (AP) and mean average precision (MAP) IR effectiveness measures. We consider the test collection in IR evaluation to be a representative of a population of materially similar collections, whose documents are drawn from an infinite pool with similar characteristics. Our model accurately predicts the degree of concordance between system results on randomly selected halves of the TREC-6 ad hoc corpus. We advance a framework for statistical evaluation that uses the same general framework to model other sources of chance variation as a source of input for meta-analysis techniques.
1148263	A statistical method for system evaluation using incomplete judgments We consider the problem of large-scale retrieval evaluation, and we propose a statistical method for evaluating retrieval systems using incomplete judgments. Unlike existing techniques that (1) rely on effectively complete, and thus prohibitively expensive, relevance judgment sets, (2) produce biased estimates of standard performance measures, or (3) produce estimates of non-standard measures thought to be correlated with these standard measures, our proposed statistical technique produces unbiased estimates of the standard measures themselves.Our proposed technique is based on random sampling. While our estimates are unbiased by statistical design, their variance is dependent on the sampling distribution employed; as such, we derive a sampling distribution likely to yield low variance estimates. We test our proposed technique using benchmark TREC data, demonstrating that a sampling pool derived from a set of runs can be used to efficiently and effectively evaluate those runs. We further show that these sampling pools generalize well to unseen runs. Our experiments indicate that highly accurate estimates of standard performance measures can be obtained using a number of relevance judgments as small as 4% of the typical TREC-style judgment pool.
1148265	Learning to advertise Content-targeted advertising, the task of automatically associating ads to a Web page, constitutes a key Web monetization strategy nowadays. Further, it introduces new challenging technical problems and raises interesting questions. For instance, how to design ranking functions able to satisfy conflicting goals such as selecting advertisements (ads) that are relevant to the users and suitable and profitable to the publishers and advertisers? In this paper we propose a new framework for associating ads with web pages based on Genetic Programming (GP). Our GP method aims at learning functions that select the most appropriate ads, given the contents of a Web page. These ranking functions are designed to optimize overall precision and minimize the number of misplacements. By using a real ad collection and web pages from a newspaper, we obtained a gain over a state-of-the-art baseline method of 61.7% in average precision. Further, by evolving individuals to provide good ranking estimations, GP was able to discover ranking functions that are very effective in placing ads in web pages while avoiding irrelevant ones.
1148266	Getting work done on the web: supporting transactional queries Many searches on the web have a transactional intent. We argue that pages satisfying transactional needs can be distinguished from the more common pages that have some information and links, but cannot be used to execute a transaction. Based on this hypothesis, we provide a recipe for constructing a transaction annotator. By constructing an annotator with one corpus and then demonstrating its classification performance on another,we establish its robustness. Finally, we show experimentally that a search procedure that exploits such pre-annotation greatly outperforms traditional search for retrieving transactional pages.
1148267	You are what you say: privacy risks of public mentions In today's data-rich networked world, people express many aspects of their lives online. It is common to segregate different aspects in different places: you might write opinionated rants about movies in your blog under a pseudonym while participating in a forum or web site for scholarly discussion of medical ethics under your real name. However, it may be possible to link these separate identities, because the movies, journal articles, or authors you mention are from a sparse relation space whose properties (e.g., many items related to by only a few users) allow re-identification . This re-identification violates people's intentions to separate aspects of their life and can have negative consequences; it also may allow other privacy violations, such as obtaining a stronger identifier like name and address.This paper examines this general problem in a specific setting: re-identification of users from a public web movie forum in a private movie ratings dataset. We present three major results. First, we develop algorithms that can re-identify a large proportion of public users in a sparse relation space. Second, we evaluate whether private dataset owners can protect user privacy by hiding data; we show that this requires extensive and undesirable changes to the dataset, making it impractical. Third, we evaluate two methods for users in a public forum to protect their own privacy, suppression and misdirection. Suppression doesn't work here either. However, we show that a simple misdirection strategy works well: mention a few popular items that you haven't rated.
1148269	A compositional context sensitive multi-document summarizer: exploring the factors that influence summarization The usual approach for automatic summarization is sentence extraction, where key sentences from the input documents are selected based on a suite of features. While word frequency often is used as a feature in summarization, its impact on system performance has not been isolated. In this paper, we study the contribution to summarization of three factors related to frequency: content word frequency, composition functions for estimating sentence importance from word frequency, and adjustment of frequency weights based on context. We carry out our analysis using datasets from the Document Understanding Conferences, studying not only the impact of these features on automatic summarizers, but also their role in human summarization. Our research shows that a frequency based summarizer can achieve performance comparable to that of state-of-the-art systems, but only with a good composition function; context sensitivity improves performance and significantly reduces repetition.
1148270	Information graphics: an untapped resource for digital libraries Information graphics are non-pictorial graphics such as bar charts and line graphs that depict attributes of entities and relations among entities. Most information graphics appearing in popular media have a communicative goal or intended message; consequently, information graphics constitute a form of language. This paper argues that information graphics are a valuable knowledge resource that should be retrievable from a digital library and that such graphics should be taken into account when summarizing a multimodal document for subsequent indexing and retrieval. But to accomplish this, the information graphic must be understood and its message recognized. The paper presents our Bayesian system for recognizing the primary message of one kind of information graphic (simple bar charts) and discusses the potential role of an information graphic's message in indexing graphics and summarizing multimodal documents.
1148271	News to go: hierarchical text summarization for mobile devices We present an evaluation of a novel hierarchical text summarization method that allows users to view summaries of Web documents from small, mobile devices. Unlike previous approaches, ours does not require the documents to be in HTML since it infers a hierarchical structure automatically. Currently, the method is used to summarize news articles sent to a Web mail account in plain text format. Subjects used a Web-enabled mobile phone emulator to access the account's inbox and view the summarized news articles. They then used the summaries to complete several information-seeking tasks, which involved answering factual questions about the stories. In comparing the hierarchical text summary setting to that in which subjects were given the full text articles, there was no significant difference in task accuracy or the time taken to complete the task. However, in the hierarchical summarization setting, the number of bytes transferred per user request is less than half that of the full text case. Finally, in comparing the new method to three other summarization methods, subjects achieved significantly better accuracy on the tasks when using hierarchical summaries.
1148273	Clustering of search results using temporal attributes Clustering of search results is an important feature in many of today's information retrieval applications. The notion of hit list clustering appears in Web search engines and enterprise search engines as a mechanism that allows users to further explore the coverage of a query. However, there has been little work on exposing temporal attributes for constructing and presentation of clusters. These attributes appear in documents as part of the textual content, e.g., as a date and time token or as a temporal reference in a sentence. In this paper, we outline a model and describe a prototype that shows the main ideas.
1148274	A complex document information processing prototype We developed a prototype for integrated retrieval and aggregation of diverse information contained in scanned paper documents. Such complex document information processing combines several forms of image processing together with textual/linguistic processing to enable effective analysis of complex document collections, a necessity for a wide range of applications. This is the first system to attempt integrated retrieval from complex documents; we report its current capabilities.
1148275	Inferring document relevance via average precision We consider the problem of evaluating retrieval systems using a limited number of relevance judgments. Recent work has demonstrated that one can accurately estimate average precision via a judged pool corresponding to a relatively small random sample of documents. In this work, we demonstrate that given values or estimates of average precision, one can accurately infer the relevances of unjudged documents. Combined, we thus show how one can efficiently and accurately infer a large judged pool from a relatively small number of judged documents, thus permitting accurate and efficient retrieval evaluation on a large scale.
1148276	Automatic construction of known-item finding test beds An abstract is not available.
1148277	Adaptive query-based sampling for distributed IR An abstract is not available.
1148278	PENG: integrated search of distributed news archives An abstract is not available.
1148279	Examining assessor attributes at HARD 2005 An abstract is not available.
1148280	User expectations from XML element retrieval The primary aim of XML element retrieval is to return to users XML elements, rather than whole documents. This poster describes a small study, in which we elicited users' expectations, i.e. their anticipated experience, when interacting with an XML retrieval system, as compared to a traditional 'flat' document retrieval system.
1148281	Theoretical benchmarks of XML retrieval This poster investigates the use of theoretical benchmarks to describe the matching functions of XML retrieval systems and the properties of specificity and exhaustivity in XML retrieval. Theoretical benchmarks concern the formal representation of qualitative properties of IR models. To this end, Situation Theory framework for the meta-evaluation of XML retrieval is presented.
1148282	Question classification with log-linear models Question classification has become a crucial step in modern question answering systems. Previous work has demonstrated the effectiveness of statistical machine learning approaches to this problem. This paper presents a new approach to building a question classifier using log-linear models. Evidence from a rich and diverse set of syntactic and semantic features is evaluated, as well as approaches which exploit the hierarchical structure of the question classes.
1148283	Community-based snippet-indexes for pseudo-anonymous personalization in web search We describe and evaluate an approach to personalizing Web search that involves post-processing the results returned by some underlying search engine so that they re .ect the interests of a community of like-minded searchers.To do this we leverage the search experiences of the community by mining the title and snippet texts of results that have been selected by community members in response to their queries. Our approach seeks to build a community-based snippet index that re .ects the evolving interests of a group of searchers. This index is then sed to re-rank the results returned by the underlying search engine by boosting the ranking of key results that have been freq ently selected for similar q eries by community members in the past.
1148284	Bias and the limits of pooling Modern retrieval test collections are built through a process called pooling in which only a sample of the entire document set is judged for each topic. The idea behind pooling is to find enough relevant documents such that when unjudged documents are assumed to be nonrelevant the resulting judgment set is sufficiently complete and unbiased. As document sets grow larger, a constant-size pool represents an increasingly small percentage of the document set, and at some point the assumption of approximately complete judgments must become invalid.This paper demonstrates that the AQUAINT 2005 test collection exhibits bias caused by pools that were too shallow for the document set size despite having many diverse runs contribute to the pools. The existing judgment set favors relevant documents that contain topic title words even though relevant documents containing few topic title words are known to exist in the document set. The paper concludes with suggested modifications to traditional pooling and evaluation methodology that may allow very large reusable test collections to be built.
1148285	Term proximity scoring for ad-hoc retrieval on very large text collections We propose an integration of term proximity scoring into Okapi BM25. The relative retrieval effectiveness of our retrieval method, compared to pure BM25, varies from collection to collection.We present an experimental evaluation of our method and show that the gains achieved over BM25 as the size of the underlying text collection increases. We also show that for stemmed queries the impact of term proximity scoring is larger than for unstemmed queries.
1148286	An exploratory web log study of multitasking The Web search multitasking study based on automatic task session detection procedure is described. The results of the study: 1) multitasking is very rare, 2) it usually covers only 2 task sessions, 3) it is frequently formed into a temporal inclusion of an interrupting task session into the interrupted session, 4) the quantitative characteristics of multitasking greatly differ from the characteristics of sequential execution of one and several tasks. A searcher minimizes task switching costs: he avoids multitasking and while multitasking he uses cheapest manner of task switching.
1148287	Tensor space model for document analysis Vector Space Model (VSM) has been at the core of information retrieval for the past decades. VSM considers the documents as vectors in high dimensional space.In such a vector space, techniques like Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI), Support Vector Machines (SVM), Naive Bayes, etc., can be then applied for indexing and classification. However, in some cases, the dimensionality of the document space might be extremely large, which makes these techniques infeasible due to the curse of dimensionality . In this paper, we propose a novel Tensor Space Model for document analysis. We represent documents as the second order tensors, or matrices. Correspondingly, a novel indexing algorithm called Tensor Latent Semantic Indexing (TensorLSI) is developed in the tensor space. Our theoretical analysis shows that TensorLSI is much more computationally efficient than the conventional Latent Semantic Indexing, which makes it applicable for extremely large scale data set. Several experimental results on standard document data sets demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of our algorithm.
1148288	First large-scale information retrieval experiments on turkish texts We present the results of the first large-scale Turkish information retrieval experiments performed on a TREC-like test collection. The test bed, which has been created for this study, contains 95.5 million words, 408,305 documents, 72 ad hoc queries and has a size of about 800MB. All documents come from the Turkish newspaper Milliyet . We implement and apply simple to sophisticated stemmers and various query-document matching functions and show that truncating words at a prefix length of 5 creates an effective retrieval environment in Turkish. However, a lemmatizer-based stemmer provides significantly better effectiveness over a variety of matching functions.
1148289	Learning a ranking from pairwise preferences We introduce a novel approach to combining rankings from multiple retrieval systems. We use a logistic regression model or an SVM to learn a ranking from pairwise document preferences. Our approach requires no training data or relevance scores, and outperforms a popular voting algorithm.
1148290	Automated performance assessment in interactive QA In interactive question answering (QA), users and systems take turns to ask questions and provide answers. In such an interactive setting, user questions largely depend on the answers provided by the system. One question is whether user follow-up questions can provide feedback for the system to automatically assess its performance (e.g., assess whether a correct answer is delivered). This self-awareness can make QA systems more intelligent for information seeking, for example, by adapting better strategies to cope with problematic situations. Therefore, this paper describes our initial investigation in addressing this problem. Our results indicate that interaction context can provide useful cues for automated performance assessment in interactive QA.
1148291	Stylistic text segmentation This paper focuses on a method for the stylistic segmentation of text documents. Our technique involves mapping the change in a feature throughout a text. We use the linguistic features of conjunction and modality, through taxonomies from Systemic Functional Linguistics. This segmentation has applications in automated summarization, particularly of large documents.
1148292	On hierarchical web catalog integration with conceptual relationships in thesaurus Web catalog integration is an interesting problem in current digital content management. Past studies have shown that using a flattened structure with auxiliary information extracted from the source catalog can improve the integration results. However, the nature of a flattened structure ignores the hierarchical relationships, and thus the performance improvement of catalog integration may be reduced. In this paper, we propose an enhanced hierarchical catalog integration (EHCI) approach with conceptual thesauri extracted from the source catalog. The results show that our enhanced hierarchical integration approach effectively boosts the accuracy of hierarchical catalog integration.
1148293	Rpref: a generalization of Bpref towards graded relevance judgments We present rpref ; our generalization of the bpref evaluation metric for assessing the quality of search engine results, given graded rather than binary user relevance judgments.
1148294	A new web page summarization method In this paper, we present a novel multi-webpage summarization algorithm. It adds the graph based ranking algorithm into the framework of Maximum Marginal Relevance (MMR) method, to not only capture the main topic of the web pages but also eliminate the redundancy existing in the sentences of the summary result. The experiment result indicates that the new approach has the better performance than the previous methods.
1148295	NMF and PLSI: equivalence and a hybrid algorithm In this paper, we show that PLSI and NMF optimize the same objective function, although PLSI and NMF are different algorithms as verified by experiments. In addition, we also propose a new hybrid method that runs PLSI and NMF alternatively to achieve better solutions.
1148296	Using historical data to enhance rank aggregation Rank aggregation is a pervading operation in IR technology. We hypothesize that the performance of score-based aggregation may be affected by artificial, usually meaningless deviations consistently occurring in the input score distributions, which distort the combined result when the individual biases differ from each other. We propose a score-based rank aggregation model where the source scores are normalized to a common distribution before being combined. Early experiments on available data from several TREC collections are shown to support our proposal.
1148297	Enterprise search behaviour of software engineers Technical professionals spend ~25% of their time at work searching for information, and have specialized information needs that are not well-served by generic enterprise search tools. In this study, we investigated how a group of software engineers use a workplace search system. We identify patterns of search behaviour specific to this group and distinct from general web and intranet search patterns, and make design recommendations for search systems that will better serve the needs of this group.
1148298	Evaluating sources of query expansion terms This study investigates the effectiveness of retrieval systems and human users in generating terms for query expansion. We compare three sources of terms: system generated terms, terms users select from top-ranked sentences, and user generated terms. Results demonstrate that overall the system generated more effective expansion terms than users, but that users' selection of terms improved precision at the top of the retrieved document list.
1148299	Comparing two blind relevance feedback techniques An abstract is not available.
1148300	Information retrieval with commonsense knowledge This paper employs ConceptNet, which covers a rich set of commonsense concepts, to retrieve images with text descriptions by focusing on spatial relationships. Evaluation on test data of the 2005 ImageCLEF shows that integrating commonsense knowledge in information retrieval is feasible.
1148301	Refining hierarchical taxonomy structure via semi-supervised learning An abstract is not available.
1148302	Quantative analysis of the impact of judging inconsistency on the performance of relevance feedback Practical constrains of user interfaces make the user's judgment (during the feedback loop) deviate from real thoughts (when the full document is read).This is often overlooked in evaluation of relevance feedback.This paper quantitatively analyze the impact of judging inconsistency on the performance of relevance feedback.
1148303	Swordfish: an unsupervised Ngram based approach to morphological analysis Extracting morphemes from words is a nontrivial task. Rule based stemming approaches such as Porter's algorithm have encountered some success, however they are restricted by their ability to identify a limited number of affixes and are language dependent. When dealing with languages with many affixes, rule based approaches generally require many more rules to deal with all the possible word forms. Deriving these rules requires a larger effort on the part of linguists and in some instances can be simply impractical. We propose an unsupervised ngram based approach, named Swordfish. Using ngram probabilities in the corpus, possible morphemes are identified. We look at two possible methods for identifying candidate morphemes, one using joint probabilities between two ngrams, and the second based on log odds between prefix probabilities. Initial results indicate the joint probability approach to be better for English while the prefix ratio approach is better for Finnish and Turkish.
1148304	Authorship attribution with thousands of candidate authors In this paper, we use a blog corpus to demonstrate that we can often identify the author of an anonymous text even where there are many thousands of candidate authors. Our approach combines standard information retrieval methods with a text categorization meta-learning scheme that determines when to even venture a guess.
1148305	Simple questions to improve pseudo-relevance feedback results We explore interactive methods to further improve the performance of pseudo-relevance feedback. Studies citeria suggest that new methods for tackling difficult queries are required. Our approach is to gather more information about the query from the user by asking her simple questions. The equally simple responses are used to modify the original query. Our experiments using the TREC Robust Track queries show that we can obtain a significant improvement in mean average precision averaging around 5% over pseudo-relevance feedback. This improvement is also spread across more queries compared to ordinary pseudo-relevance feedback, as suggested by geometric mean average precision.
1148306	Is XML retrieval meaningful to users?: searcher preferences for full documents vs. elements The aim of this study is to investigate whether element retrieval (as opposed to full-text retrieval) is meaningful and useful for searchers when carrying out information-seeking tasks. Our results suggest that searchers find the structural breakdown of documents useful when browsing within retrieved documents, and provide support for the usefulness of element retrieval in interactive settings.
1148307	Building a test collection for complex document information processing Research and development of information access technology for scanned paper documents has been hampered by the lack of public test collections of realistic scope and complexity. As part of a project to create a prototype system for search and mining of masses of document images, we are assembling a 1.5 terabyte dataset to support evaluation of both end-to-end complex document information processing (CDIP) tasks (e.g., text retrieval and data mining) as well as component technologies such as optical character recognition (OCR), document structure analysis, signature matching, and authorship attribution.
1148308	Enhancing topic tracking with temporal information In this paper, we propose a new strategy with time granularity reasoning for utilizing temporal information in topic tracking. Compared with previous ones, our work has four distinguished characteristics. Firstly, we try to determine a set of topic times for a target topic from the given on-topic stories. It helps to avoid the negative influence from other irrelevant times. Secondly, we take into account time granularity variance when deciding whether a coreference relationship exists between two times. Thirdly, both publication time and times presented in texts are considered. Finally, as time is only one attribute of a topic, we increase the similarity between a story and a target topic only when they are related not only temporally but also semantically. Experiments on two TDT corpora show that our method makes good use of temporal information in news stories.
1148309	A comparative study of the effect of search feature design on user experience in digital libraries (DLs) This study investigates the impact of different search feature designs in DLs on user search experience. The results indicate that the impact is significant in terms of the number of queries issued, search steps, zero-hits pages returned, and search errors.
1148310	Representing clusters for retrieval An abstract is not available.
1148311	One-sided measures for evaluating ranked retrieval effectiveness with spontaneous conversational speech Early speech retrieval experiments focused on news broadcasts, for which adequate Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) accuracy could be obtained. Like newspapers, news broadcasts are a manually selected and arranged set of stories. Evaluation designs reflected that, using known story boundaries as a basis for evaluation. Substantial advances in ASR accuracy now make it possible to build search systems for some types of spontaneous conversational speech, but present evaluation designs continue to rely on known topic boundaries that are no longer well matched to the nature of the materials. We propose a new class of measures for speech retrieval based on manual annotation of points at which a user with specific topical interests would wish replay to begin.
1148312	Combining fields in known-item email search Emails are examples of structured documents with various fields. These fields can be exploited to enhance the retrieval effectiveness of an Information Retrieval (IR) system that mailing list archives. In recent experiments of the TREC2005 Enterprise track, various fields were applied to varying degrees of success by the participants. In his work, using a field-based weighting model, we investigate the retrieval performance attainable by each field, and examine when fields evidence should be combined or not.
1148313	Improving QA retrieval using document priors We present a simple way to improve document retrieval for question answering systems. The method biases the retrieval system toward documents that contain words that have appeared in other documents containing answers to the same type of question. The method works with virtually any retrieval system, and exhibits a statistically significant performance improvement over a strong baseline.
1148314	Content-based video retrieval: does video's semantic visual feature matter? A new shot level video browsing method based on semantic visual features (e.g., car, mountain, and fire) is proposed to facilitate content-based retrieval. The video's binary semantic feature vector is utilized to calculate the score of similarity between two shot keyframes. The score is then used to browse the "similar" keyframes in terms of semantic visual features. A pilot user study was conducted to better understand users' behaviors in video retrieval context. Three video retrieval and browsing systems are compared: temporal neighbor, semantic visual feature, and fused browsing system. The initial results indicated that the semantic visual feature browsing was effective and efficient for Visual Centric tasks, but not for Non-visual Centric tasks.
1148315	Action modeling: language models that predict query behavior We present a novel language modeling approach to capturing the query reformulation behavior of Web search users. Based on a framework that categorizes eight different types of "user moves" (adding/removing query terms, etc.), we treat search sessions as sequence data and build n-gram language models to capture user behavior. We evaluated our models in a prediction task. The results suggest that useful patterns of activity can be extracted from user histories. Furthermore, by examining prediction performance under different order n-gram models, we gained insight into the amount of history/context that is associated with different types of user actions. Our work serves as the basis for more refined user models.
1148316	A method of rating the credibility of news documents on the web We propose a method to rate the credibility of news articles using three clues: (1) commonality of the contents of articles among different news publishers; (2) numerical agreement versus contradiction of numerical values reported in the articles; and (3) objectivity based on subjective speculative phrases and news sources. We tested this method on news stories taken from seven different news sites on the Web. The average agreement between the system-produced "credibility" and the manual judgments of three human assessors on the 52 sample articles was 69.1%. The limitations of the current approach and future directions are discussed.
1148317	An analysis of the coupling between training set and neighborhood sizes for the k NN classifier We consider the relationship between training set size and the parameter k for the k -Nearest Neighbors ( k NN) classifier. When few examples are available, we observe that accuracy is sensitive to k and that best k tends to increase with training size. We explore the subsequent risk that k tuned on partitions will be suboptimal after aggregation and re-training. This risk is found to be most severe when little data is available. For larger training sizes, accuracy becomes increasingly stable with respect to k and the risk decreases.
1148318	Fact-focused novelty detection: a feasibility study Methods for detecting sentences in an input document set, which are both relevant and novel with respect to an information need, would be of direct benefit to many systems, such as extractive text summarizers. However, satisfactory levels of agreement between judges performing this task manually have yet to demonstrated, leaving researchers to conclude that the task is too subjective. In previous experiments, judges were asked to first identify sentences that are relevant to a general topic, and then to eliminate sentences from the list that do not contain new information. Currently, a new task is proposed, in which annotators perform the same procedure, but within the context of a specific, factual information need. In the experiment, satisfactory levels of agreement between independent annotators were achieved on the first step of identifying sentences containing relevant information relevant. However, the results indicate that judges do not agree on which sentences contain novel information.
1148319	Unity: relevance feedback using user query logs The exponential growth of the Web and the increasing ability of web search engines to index data have led to a problem of plenty. The number of results returned per query is typically in the order of millions of documents for many common queries. Although there is the benefit of added coverage for every query, the problem of ranking these documents and giving the best results gets worse. The problem is even more difficult in case of temporal and ambiguous queries. We try to address this problem using feedback from user query logs. We leverage a technology called Units for generating query refinements which are shown as Also try queries on Yahoo! Search. We consider these refinements as sub-concepts which help define user intent and use them to improve search relevance. The results obtained via live testing on Yahoo! Search are encouraging.
1148320	Improving personalized web search using result diversification We present and evaluate methods for diversifying search results to improve personalized web search. A common personalization approach involves reranking the top N search results such that documents likely to be preferred by the user are presented higher. The usefulness of reranking is limited in part by the number and diversity of results considered. We propose three methods to increase the diversity of the top results and evaluate the effectiveness of these methods.
1148321	Using small XML elements to support relevance Small XML elements are often estimated relevant by the retrieval model but they are not desirable retrieval units. This paper presents a generic model that exploits the information obtained from small elements. We identify relationships between small and relevant elements and use this linking information to reinforce the relevance of other elements before removing the small ones. Our experiments using the INEX testbed show the effectiveness of our approach.
1148322	Give me just one highly relevant document: P-measure We introduce an evaluation metric called P-measure for the task of retrieving <ione highly relevant document. It models user behaviour in practical tasks such as known-item search, and is more stable and sensitive than Reciprocal Rank which cannot handle graded relevance.
1148323	Feature diversity in cluster ensembles for robust document clustering The performance of document clustering systems depends on employing optimal text representations, which are not only difficult to determine beforehand, but also may vary from one clustering problem to another. As a first step towards building robust document clusterers, a strategy based on feature diversity and cluster ensembles is presented in this work. Experiments conducted on a binary clustering problem show that our method is robust to near-optimal model order selection and able to detect constructive interactions between different document representations in the test bed.
1148324	Lightening the load of document smoothing for better language modeling retrieval We hypothesized that language modeling retrieval would improve if we reduced the need for document smoothing to provide an inverse document frequency (IDF) like effect. We created inverse collection frequency (ICF) weighted query models as a tool to partially separate the IDF-like role from document smoothing. Compared to maximum likelihood estimated (MLE) queries, the ICF weighted queries achieved a 6.4% improvement in mean average precision on description queries. The ICF weighted queries performed better with less document smoothing than that required by MLE queries. Language modeling retrieval may benefit from a means to separately incorporate an IDF-like behavior outside of document smoothing.
1148325	The effect of OCR errors on stylistic text classification Recently, interest is growing in non-topical text classification tasks such as genre classification, sentiment analysis, and authorship profiling. We study to what extent OCR errors affect stylistic text classification from scanned documents. We find that even a relatively high level of errors in the OCRed documents does not substantially affect stylistic classification accuracy.
1148326	History repeats itself: repeat queries in Yahoo's logs Thanks to the ubiquity of the Internet search engine search box, users have come to depend on search engines both to find and re-find information. However, re-finding behavior has not been significantly addressed. Here we look at re-finding queries issued to the Yahoo! search engine by 114 users over a year.
1148327	Early precision measures: implications from the downside of blind feedback We report the statistically significant mean impacts of blind feedback, as implemented by 7 participants for the 2003 Reliable Information Access (RIA) Workshop, on 30 retrieval measures, including several primary recall measures not originally reported. We find that blind feedback was detrimental to measures focused on the first relevant item even when it boosted "early precision" measures such as mean Precision@10, implying that the conventional reporting of ad hoc precision needs enhancement.
1148328	An experimental study on automatically labeling hierarchical clusters using statistical features An abstract is not available.
1148329	Strict and vague interpretation of XML-retrieval queries Structural hints in XML-retrieval queries can be used to specify both the granularity of the search result (the target element) and where in a document to search (support elements). These hints might be interpreted either strictly or vaguely, but does it matter if an XML search engine interprets these in one way and the user in another? The performance of all runs submitted to INEX 2005 content and structure (CAS) tasks were measured for each of four different interpretations of CAS. Runs that perform well for one interpretation of target elements do so regardless of the interpretation of support elements; but how to interpret the target element does matter. This suggests that to perform well on all CAS queries it is necessary to know how the target structure specification should be interpreted. We extend the NEXI query language to include this, and hypothesize that using this will increase the overall performance of search engines.
1148330	Why structural hints in queries do not help XML-retrieval For many years it has been commonly held that a user who adds structural "hints" to a query will improve precision in an element retrieval search. At INEX 2005 we conducted an experiment to test this assumption. We present the unexpected result that structural hints in queries do not improve precision. An analysis of the topics and the judgments suggests that this is because users are particularly bad at giving structural hints.
1148331	Searching the web using composed pages An abstract is not available.
1148332	A study of real-time query expansion effectiveness In this poster, we describe the study of an interface technique that provides a list of suggested additional query terms as a searcher types a search query, in effect offering interactive query expansion (IQE) options while the query is formulated. Analysis of the results shows that offering IQE during query formulation leads to better quality initial queries, and an increased uptake of query expansion. These findings have implications for how IQE should be offered in retrieval interfaces.
1148333	A graph-based framework for relation propagation and its application to multi-label learning Label propagation exploits the structure of the unlabeled documents by propagating the label information of the training documents to the unlabeled documents. The limitation with the existing label propagation approaches is that they can only deal with a single type of objects. We propose a framework, named " relation propagation ", that allows for information propagated among multiple types of objects. Empirical studies with multi-label text categorization showed that the proposed algorithm is more effective than several semi-supervised learning algorithms in that it is capable of exploring the correlation among different categories and the structure of unlabeled documents simultaneously.
1148334	Measuring similarity of semi-structured documents with context weights In this work, we study similarity measures for text-centric XML documents based on an extended vector space model, which considers both document content and structure. Experimental results based on a benchmark showed superior performance of the proposed measure over the baseline which ignores structural knowledge of XML documents.
1148335	Incorporating query difference for learning retrieval functions in information retrieval We discuss information retrieval methods that aim at serving a diverse stream of user queries. We propose methods that emphasize the importance of taking into consideration of query difference in learning effective retrieval functions. We formulate the problem as a multi-task learning problem using a risk minimization framework. In particular, we show how to calibrate the empirical risk to incorporate query difference in terms of introducing nuisance parameters in the statistical models, and we also propose an alternating optimization method to simultaneously learn the retrieval function and the nuisance parameters. We illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods using modeling data extracted from a commercial search engine.
1148336	Concept-based biomedical text retrieval One challenging problem for biomedical text retrieval is to find accurate synonyms or name variants for biomedical entities. In this paper, we propose a new concept-based approach to tackle this problem. In this approach, a set of concepts instead of keywords will be extracted from a query first. Then these concepts will be used for retrieval purpose. The experiment results show that the proposed approach can boost the retrieval performance and it generates very good results on 2005 TREC Genomics data sets.
1148338	The TIJAH XML information retrieval system An abstract is not available.
1148339	A location annotation system for personal photos An abstract is not available.
1148340	Appraisal navigator Much interesting text n the web consists largely of opinionated or evaluative text, as opposed to directly informative text. The new field of 'sentiment analysis' seeks to characterize such aspects of natural language text, as opposed to just the bare facts. We suggest that 'appraisal expression extraction' should be viewed as a fundamental task for sentiment analysis. We define an 'appraisal expression' to be a piece of text expressing some evaluative stance towards a particular object. The task is to find these elements and characterize the type and orientation (positive or negative) of the evaluative stance, as well as its target and possibly its source. Potential applications of these methods include new approaches to the now-traditional tasks of sentiment classification and pinion mining, as well as possibly for adversarial textual analysis and intention detection for intelligence applications.
1148341	A platform for Okapi-based contextual information retrieval We present an extensible java-based platform for contextual retrieval based on the probabilistic information retrieval model. Modules for dual indexes, relevance feedback with blind or machine learning approaches and query expansion with context are integrated into the Okapi system to deal with the contextual information. This platform allows easy extension to include other types of contextual information.
1148342	Project contexts to situate personal information The Personal Project Planner prototype works as an extension to the file manager to provide people with rich-text overlays to their information (folders, files and also email, web pages, notes). Rich-text, document-like project plans can be created which then provide a context in which to create or reference the email messages, electronic documents, web pages, etc. that are needed to complete the plan. The user can later locate an information item such as an email message with reference to the plan (e.g., as an alternative to a mostly context-free search through the inbox or sent mail). The Planner explores a possibility that an effective organization of project-related information can emerge as a natural by-product of efforts to plan and structure the project.
1148343	Cheshire3: retrieving from tera-scale grid-based digital libraries An abstract is not available.
1148344	DeWild: a tool for searching the web using wild cards An abstract is not available.
1148345	Searching for expertise using the terrier platform An abstract is not available.
1148346	DiLight: an ontology-based information access system for e-learning environments An abstract is not available.
1148347	Supporting semantic visual feature browsing in contentbased video retrieval A new shot level video retrieval system that supports semantic visual features (e.g., car, mountain, and fire) browsing is developed to facilitate content-based retrieval. The video's binary semantic feature vector is utilized to calculate the score of similarity between two shot keyframes. The score is then used to browse the "similar" keyframes in terms of semantic visual features.
1148348	MathFind: a math-aware search engine An abstract is not available.
1230135	SIGIR 2005 Doctoral Consortium An abstract is not available.
1277742	Strategy follows technology In strategic management there has been a debate over many years. Already in 1962 Alfred Chandler had stated: Structure follows Strategy. In the nineteen eighties, Michael Porter modified Chandler's dictum about structure following strategy by introducing a second level of structure: organizational structure follows strategy, which in turn follows structure. So the question became: what is leading what?. Technology has in this debate been seen as a part of either the structure of the organisation itself, or part of the development of the environment in which the organisation tries to survive by adapting. The notion that technological advancement can also change the paradigmas of organisational strategy-development is new. This has mainly to do with the impact of the technological changes on the workflow and procedures of organisations. Never before they were so profound as in our days. Technological change affects us on different levels of our strategic development. I will give three examples of changes that are occurring or have occurred in "Sound and Vision". The first is the introduction of RFID transmitters in admission rings for the Sound and Vision experience. The second is the setup of a back office media asset management, storage and distribution structure for the Public Broadcasters. The third is the development of the archive towards becoming a Media-Application Service Provider.
1277743	2007 Athena Lecturer Award introduction An abstract is not available.
1277744	Natural language and the information layer An abstract is not available.
1277746	Personalized query expansion for the web The inherent ambiguity of short keyword queries demands for enhanced methods for Web retrieval. In this paper we propose to improve such Web queries by expanding them with terms collected from each user's Personal Information Repository, thus implicitly personalizing the search output. We introduce five broad techniques for generating the additional query keywords by analyzing user data at increasing granularity levels, ranging from term and compound level analysis up to global co-occurrence statistics, as well as to using external thesauri. Our extensive empirical analysis under four different scenarios shows some of these approaches to perform very well, especially on ambiguous queries, producing a very strong increase in the quality of the output rankings. Subsequently, we move this personalized search framework one step further and propose to make the expansion process adaptive to various features of each query. A separate set of experiments indicates the adaptive algorithms to bring an additional statistically significant improvement over the best static expansion approach.
1277747	Using query contexts in information retrieval User query is an element that specifies an information need, but it is not the only one. Studies in literature have found many contextual factors that strongly influence the interpretation of a query. Recent studies have tried to consider the user's interests by creating a user profile. However, a single profile for a user may not be sufficient for a variety of queries of the user. In this study, we propose to use query-specific contexts instead of user-centric ones, including context around query and context within query . The former specifies the environment of a query such as the domain of interest, while the latter refers to context words within the query, which is particularly useful for the selection of relevant term relations. In this paper, both types of context are integrated in an IR model based on language modeling. Our experiments on several TREC collections show that each of the context factors brings significant improvements in retrieval effectiveness.
1277748	Towards task-based personal information management evaluations Personal Information Management (PIM) is a rapidly growing area of research concerned with how people store, manage and refind information. A feature of PIM research is that many systems have been designed to assist users manage and refind information, but very few have been evaluated. This has been noted by several scholars and explained by the difficulties involved in performing PIM evaluations. The difficulties include that people re-find information from within unique personal collections; researchers know little about the tasks that cause people to re-find information; and numerous privacy issues concerning personal information. In this paper we aim to facilitate PIM evaluations by addressing each of these difficulties. In the first part, we present a diary study of information re-finding tasks. The study examines the kind of tasks that require users to refind information and produces a taxonomy of refinding tasks for email messages and web pages. In the second part, we propose a task-based evaluation methodology based on our findings and examine the feasibility of the approach using two different methods of task creation.
1277750	Utility-based information distillation over temporally sequenced documents This paper examines a new approach to information distillation over temporally ordered documents, and proposes a novel evaluation scheme for such a framework. It combines the strengths of and extends beyond conventional adaptive filtering, novelty detection and non-redundant passage ranking with respect to long-lasting information needs ("tasks" with multiple queries). Our approach supports fine-grained user feedback via highlighting of arbitrary spans of text, and leverages such information for utility optimization in adaptive settings. For our experiments, we defined hypothetical tasks based on news events in the TDT4 corpus, with multiple queries per task. Answer keys (nuggets) were generated for each query and a semi-automatic procedure was used for acquiring rules that allow automatically matching nuggets against system responses. We also propose an extension of the NDCG metric for assessing the utility of ranked passages as a combination of relevance and novelty. Our results show encouraging utility enhancements using the new approach, compared to the baseline systems without incremental learning or the novelty detection components.
1277751	Effective missing data prediction for collaborative filtering Memory-based collaborative filtering algorithms have been widely adopted in many popular recommender systems, although these approaches all suffer from data sparsity and poor prediction quality problems. Usually, the user-item matrix is quite sparse, which directly leads to inaccurate recommendations. This paper focuses the memory-based collaborative filtering problems on two crucial factors: (1) similarity computation between users or items and (2) missing data prediction algorithms. First, we use the enhanced Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) algorithm by adding one parameter which overcomes the potential decrease of accuracy when computing the similarity of users or items. Second, we propose an effective missing data prediction algorithm, in which information of both users and items is taken into account. In this algorithm, we set the similarity threshold for users and items respectively, and the prediction algorithm will determine whether predicting the missing data or not. We also address how to predict the missing data by employing a combination of user and item information. Finally, empirical studies on dataset MovieLens have shown that our newly proposed method outperforms other state-of-the-art collaborative filtering algorithms and it is more robust against data sparsity.
1277752	Efficient bayesian hierarchical user modeling for recommendation system A content-based personalized recommendation system learns user specific profiles from user feedback so that it can deliver information tailored to each individual user's interest. A system serving millions of users can learn a better user profile for a new user, or a user with little feedback, by borrowing information from other users through the use of a Bayesian hierarchical model. Learning the model parameters to optimize the joint data likelihood from millions of users is very computationally expensive. The commonly used EM algorithm converges very slowly due to the sparseness of the data in IR applications. This paper proposes a new fast learning technique to learn a large number of individual user profiles. The efficacy and efficiency of the proposed algorithm are justified by theory and demonstrated on actual user data from Netflix and MovieLens.
1277754	Robust test collections for retrieval evaluation Low-cost methods for acquiring relevance judgments can be a boon to researchers who need to evaluate new retrieval tasks or topics but do not have the resources to make thousands of judgments. While these judgments are very useful for a one-time evaluation, it is not clear that they can be trusted when re-used to evaluate new systems. In this work, we formally define what it means for judgments to be reusable: the confidence in an evaluation of new systems can be accurately assessed from an existing set of relevance judgments. We then present a method for augmenting a set of relevance judgments with relevance estimates that require no additional assessor effort. Using this method practically guarantees reusability: with as few as five judgments per topic taken from only two systems, we can reliably evaluate a larger set of ten systems. Even the smallest sets of judgments can be useful for evaluation of new systems.
1277755	Reliable information retrieval evaluation with incomplete and biased judgements Information retrieval evaluation based on the pooling method is inherently biased against systems that did not contribute to the pool of judged documents. This may distort the results obtained about the relative quality of the systems evaluated and thus lead to incorrect conclusions about the performance of a particular ranking technique. We examine the magnitude of this effect and explore how it can be countered by automatically building an unbiased set of judgements from the original, biased judgements obtained through pooling. We compare the performance of this method with other approaches to the problem of incomplete judgements, such as bpref, and show that the proposed method leads to higher evaluation accuracy, especially if the set of manual judgements is rich in documents, but highly biased against some systems.
1277756	Alternatives to Bpref Recently, a number of TREC tracks have adopted a retrieval effectiveness metric called bpref which has been designed for evaluation environments with incomplete relevance data. A graded-relevance version of this metric called rpref has also been proposed. However, we show that the application of Q-measure, normalised Discounted Cumulative Gain (nDCG) or Average Precision (AveP)to condensed lists , obtained by ?ltering out all unjudged documents from the original ranked lists, is actually a better solution to the incompleteness problem than bpref. Furthermore, we show that the use of graded relevance boosts the robustness of IR evaluation to incompleteness and therefore that Q-measure and nDCG based on condensed lists are the best choices. To this end, we use four graded-relevance test collections from NTCIR to compare ten different IR metrics in terms of system ranking stability and pairwise discriminative power.
1277758	An interactive algorithm for asking and incorporating feature feedback into support vector machines Standard machine learning techniques typically require ample training data in the form of labeled instances. In many situations it may be too tedious or costly to obtain sufficient labeled data for adequate classifier performance. However, in text classification, humans can easily guess the relevance of features, that is, words that are indicative of a topic, thereby enabling the classifier to focus its feature weights more appropriately in the absence of sufficient labeled data. We will describe an algorithm for tandem learning that begins with a couple of labeled instances, and then at each iteration recommends features and instances for a human to label. Tandem learning using an "oracle" results in much better performance than learning on only features or only instances. We find that humans can emulate the oracle to an extent that results in performance (accuracy) comparable to that of the oracle. Our unique experimental design helps factor out system error from human error, leading to a better understanding of when and why interactive feature selection works.
1277759	Learn from web search logs to organize search results Effective organization of search results is critical for improving the utility of any search engine. Clustering search results is an effective way to organize search results, which allows a user to navigate into relevant documents quickly. However, two deficiencies of this approach make it not always work well: (1) the clusters discovered do not necessarily correspond to the interesting aspects of a topic from the user's perspective; and (2) the cluster labels generated are not informative enough to allow a user to identify the right cluster. In this paper, we propose to address these two deficiencies by (1) learning "interesting aspects" of a topic from Web search logs and organizing search results accordingly; and (2) generating more meaningful cluster labels using past query words entered by users. We evaluate our proposed method on a commercial search engine log data. Compared with the traditional methods of clustering search results, our method can give better result organization and more meaningful labels.
1277760	Regularized clustering for documents In recent years, document clustering has been receiving more and more attentions as an important and fundamental technique for unsupervised document organization, automatictopic extraction, and fast information retrieval or filtering. In this paper, we propose a novel method for clustering documents using regularization. Unlike traditional globally regularized clustering methods, our method first construct a local regularized linear label predictor for each document vector, and then combine all those local regularizers with a global smoothness regularizer. So we call our algorithm Clustering with Local and Global Regularization (CLGR) . We will show that the cluster memberships of the documents can be achieved by eigenvalue decomposition of a sparse symmetric matrix, which can be efficiently solved by iterative methods. Finally our experimental evaluations on several datasets are presented to show the superiorities of CLGR over traditional document clustering methods.
1277762	Towards automatic extraction of event and place semantics from flickr tags We describe an approach for extracting semantics of tags, unstructured text-labels assigned to resources on the Web, based on each tag's usage patterns. In particular, we focus on the problem of extracting place and event semantics for tags that are assigned to photos on Flickr, a popular photo sharing website that supports time and location (latitude/longitude) metadata. We analyze two methods inspired by well-known burst-analysis techniques and one novel method: Scale-structure Identification. We evaluate the methods on a subset of Flickr data, and show that our Scale-structure Identification method outperforms the existing techniques. The approach and methods described in this work can be used in other domains such as geo-annotated web pages, where text terms can be extracted and associated with usage patterns.
1277763	Hierarchical classification for automatic image annotation In this paper, a hierarchical classification framework has been proposed for bridging the semantic gap effectively and achieving multi-level image annotation automatically. First, the semantic gap between the low-level computable visual features and users' real information needs is partitioned into four smaller gaps, and multiple approachesallare proposed to bridge these smaller gaps more effectively. To learn more reliable contextual relationships between the atomic image concepts and the co-appearances of salient objects, a multi-modal boosting algorithm is proposed. To enable hierarchical image classification and avoid inter-level error transmission, a hierarchical boosting algorithm is proposed by incorporating concept ontology and multi-task learning to achieve hierarchical image classifier training with automatic error recovery. To bridge the gap between the computable image concepts and the users' real information needs, a novel hyperbolic visualization framework is seamlessly incorporated to enable intuitive query specification and evaluation by acquainting the users with a good global view of large-scale image collections. Our experiments on large-scale image databases have also obtained very positive results.
1277764	Laplacian optimal design for image retrieval Relevance feedback is a powerful technique to enhance Content-Based Image Retrieval (CBIR) performance. It solicits the user's relevance judgments on the retrieved images returned by the CBIR systems. The user's labeling is then used to learn a classifier to distinguish between relevant and irrelevant images. However, the top returnedimages may not be the most informative ones. The challenge is thus to determine which unlabeled images would be the most informative (i.e., improve the classifier the most) if they were labeled and used as training samples. In this paper, we propose a novel active learning algorithm, called Laplacian Optimal Design (LOD), for relevance feedback image retrieval. Our algorithm is based on aregression model which minimizes the least square error on the measured (or, labeled) images and simultaneously preserves the local geometrical structure of the image space. Specifically, we assume that if two images are sufficiently close to each other, then their measurements (or, labels) are close as well. By constructing a nearest neighbor graph, the geometrical structure of the image space can be described by the graph Laplacian. We discuss how results from the field of optimal experimental design may be used to guide our selection of a subset of images, which gives us the most amount of information. Experimental results on Corel database suggest that theproposed approach achieves higher precision in relevance feedback image retrieval.
1277766	Fast generation of result snippets in web search The presentation of query biased document snippets as part of results pages presented by search engines has become an expectation of search engine users. In this paper we explore the algorithms and data structures required as part of a search engine to allow efficient generation of query biased snippets. We begin by proposing and analysing a document compression method that reduces snippet generation time by 58% over a baseline using the zlib compression library. These experiments reveal that finding documents on secondary storage dominates the total cost of generating snippets, and so caching documents in RAM is essential for a fast snippet generation process. Using simulation, we examine snippet generation performance for different size RAM caches. Finally we propose and analyse document reordering and compaction, revealing a scheme that increases the number of document cache hits with only a marginal affect on snippet quality. This scheme effectively doubles the number of documents that can fit in a fixed size cache.
1277767	The influence of caption features on clickthrough patterns in web search Web search engines present lists of captions, comprising title, snippet, and URL, to help users decide which search results to visit. Understanding the influence of features of these captions on Web search behavior may help validate algorithms and guidelines for their improved generation. In this paper we develop a methodology to use clickthrough logs from a commercial search engine to study user behavior when interacting with search result captions. The findings of our study suggest that relatively simple caption features such as the presence of all terms query terms, the readability of the snippet, and the length of the URL shown in the caption, can significantly influence users' Web search behavior.
1277768	CollabSum: exploiting multiple document clustering for collaborative single document summarizations Almost all existing methods conduct the summarization tasks for single documents separately without interactions for each document under the assumption that the documents are considered independent of each other. This paper proposes a novel framework called CollabSum for collaborative single document summarizations by making use of mutual influences of multiple documents within a cluster context. In this study, CollabSum is implemented by first employing the clustering algorithm to obtain appropriate document clusters and then exploiting the graph-ranking based algorithm for collaborative document summarizations within each cluster. Both the with-document and cross-document relationships between sentences are incorporated in the algorithm. Experiments on the DUC2001 and DUC2002 datasets demonstrate the encouraging performance of the proposed approach. Different clustering algorithms have been investigated and we find that the summarization performance relies positively on the quality of document cluster.
1277770	Information re-retrieval: repeat queries in Yahoo's logs People often repeat Web searches, both to find new information on topics they have previously explored and to re-find information they have seen in the past. The query associated with a repeat search may differ from the initial query but can nonetheless lead to clicks on the same results. This paper explores repeat search behavior through the analysis of a one-year Web query log of 114 anonymous users and a separate controlled survey of an additional 119 volunteers. Our study demonstrates that as many as 40% of all queries are re-finding queries. Re-finding appears to be an important behavior for search engines to explicitly support, and we explore how this can be done. We demonstrate that changes to search engine results can hinder re-finding, and provide a way to automatically detect repeat searches and predict repeat clicks.
1277771	Studying the use of popular destinations to enhance web search interaction We present a novel Web search interaction feature which, for a given query, provides links to websites frequently visited by other users with similar information needs. These popular destinations complement traditional search results, allowing direct navigation to authoritative resources for the query topic. Destinations are identified using the history of search and browsing behavior of many users over an extended time period, whose collective behavior provides a basis for computing source authority. We describe a user study which compared the suggestion of destinations with the previously proposed suggestion of related queries, as well as with traditional, unaided Web search. Results show that search enhanced by destination suggestions outperforms other systems for exploratory tasks, with best performance obtained from mining past user behavior at query-level granularity.
1277772	Neighborhood restrictions in geographic IR Geographic information retrieval (GIR) systems allow users to specify a geographic context, in addition to a more traditional query, enabling the system to pinpoint interesting search results whose relevancy is location-dependent. In particular local search services have become a widely used mechanism to find businesses, such as hotels, restaurants, and shops, which satisfy a geographical restriction. Unfortunately, many useful types of geographic restrictions are currently not supported in these systems, including restrictions that specify the neighborhood in which the business should be located. As the boundaries of city neighborhoods are not readily available, automated techniques to construct representations of the spatial extent of neighborhoods are required to support this kind of restrictions. In this paper, we propose such a technique, using fuzzy footprints to cope with the inherent vagueness of most neighborhood boundaries, and we provide experimental results that demonstrate the potential of our technique in a local search setting.
1277774	Efficient document retrieval in main memory Disk access performance is a major bottleneck in traditional information retrieval systems. Compared to system memory, disk bandwidth is poor, and seek times are worse. We circumvent this problem by considering query evaluation strategies in main memory. We show how new accumulator trimming techniques combined with inverted list skipping can produce extremely high performance retrieval systems without resorting to methods that may harm effectiveness. We evaluate our techniques using Galago, a new retrieval system designed for efficient query processing. Our system achieves a 69% improvement in query throughput over previous methods.
1277775	The impact of caching on search engines In this paper we study the trade-offs in designing efficient caching systems for Web search engines. We explore the impact of different approaches, such as static vs. dynamic caching, and caching query results vs.caching posting lists. Using a query log spanning a whole year we explore the limitations of caching and we demonstrate that caching posting lists can achieve higher hit rates than caching query answers. We propose a new algorithm for static caching of posting lists, which outperforms previous methods. We also study the problem of finding the optimal way to split the static cache between answers and posting lists. Finally, we measure how the changes in the query log affect the effectiveness of static caching, given our observation that the distribution of the queries changes slowly over time. Our results and observations are applicable to different levels of the data-access hierarchy, for instance, for a memory/disk layer or a broker/remote server layer.
1277776	Pruning policies for two-tiered inverted index with correctness guarantee The Web search engines maintain large-scale inverted indexes which are queried thousands of times per second by users eager for information. In order to cope with the vast amounts of query loads, search engines prune their index to keep documents that are likely to be returned as top results, and use this pruned index to compute the first batches of results. While this approach can improve performance by reducing the size of the index, if we compute the top results only from the pruned index we may notice a significant degradation in the result quality: if a document should be in the top results but was not included in the pruned index, it will be placed behind the results computed from the pruned index. Given the fierce competition in the online search market, this phenomenon is clearly undesirable. In this paper, we study how we can avoid any degradation of result quality due to the pruning-based performance optimization, while still realizing most of its benefit. Our contribution is a number of modifications in the pruning techniques for creating the pruned index and a new result computation algorithm that guarantees that the top-matching pages are always placed at the top search results, even though we are computing the first batch from the pruned index most of the time. We also show how to determine the optimal size of a pruned index and we experimentally evaluate our algorithms on a collection of 130 million Web pages.
1277778	Topic segmentation with shared topic detection and alignment of multiple documents Topic detection and tracking and topic segmentation play an important role in capturing the local and sequential information of documents. Previous work in this area usually focuses on single documents, although similar multiple documents are available in many domains. In this paper, we introduce a novel unsupervised method for shared topic detection and topic segmentation of multiple similar documents based on mutual information (MI) and weighted mutual information (WMI) that is a combination of MI and term weights. The basic idea is that the optimal segmentation maximizes MI (or WMI). Our approach can detect shared topics among documents. It can find the optimal boundaries in a document, and align segments among documents at the same time. It also can handle single-document segmentation as a special case of the multi-document segmentation and alignment. Our methods can identify and strengthen cue terms that can be used for segmentation and partially remove stop words by using term weights based on entropy learned from multiple documents. Our experimental results show that our algorithm works well for the tasks of single-document segmentation, shared topic detection, and multi-document segmentation. Utilizing information from multiple documents can tremendously improve the performance of topic segmentation, and using WMI is even better than using MI for the multi-document segmentation.
1277779	Analyzing feature trajectories for event detection We consider the problem of analyzing word trajectories in both time and frequency domains, with the specific goal of identifying important and less-reported, periodic and aperiodic words. A set of words with identical trends can be grouped together to reconstruct an event in a completely un-supervised manner. The document frequency of each word across time is treated like a time series, where each element is the document frequency - inverse document frequency (DFIDF) score at one time point. In this paper, we 1) first applied spectral analysis to categorize features for different event characteristics: important and less-reported, periodic and aperiodic; 2) modeled aperiodic features with Gaussian density and periodic features with Gaussian mixture densities, and subsequently detected each feature's burst by the truncated Gaussian approach; 3) proposed an unsupervised greedy event detection algorithm to detect both aperiodic and periodic events. All of the above methods can be applied to time series data in general. We extensively evaluated our methods on the 1-year Reuters News Corpus [3] and showed that they were able to uncover meaningful aperiodic and periodic events.
1277780	New event detection based on indexing-tree and named entity New Event Detection (NED) aims at detecting from one or multiple streams of news stories that which one is reported on a new event (i.e. not reported previously). With the overwhelming volume of news available today, there is an increasing need for a NED system which is able to detect new events more efficiently and accurately. In this paper we propose a new NED model to speed up the NED task by using news indexing-tree dynamically. Moreover, based on the observation that terms of different types have different effects for NED task, two term reweighting approaches are proposed to improve NED accuracy. In the first approach, we propose to adjust term weights dynamically based on previous story clusters and in the second approach, we propose to employ statistics on training data to learn the named entity reweighting model for each class of stories. Experimental results on two Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC) datasets TDT2 and TDT3 show that the proposed model can improve both efficiency and accuracy of NED task significantly, compared to the baseline system and other existing systems.
1277782	Multiple-signal duplicate detection for search evaluation We consider the problem of duplicate document detection for search evaluation. Given a query and a small number of web results for that query, we show how to detect duplicate web documents with precision ~0.91 and recall ~77. In contrast, Charikar's algorithm, designed for duplicate detection in an indexing pipeline, achieves precision ~0.91 but with a recall of ~0.58. Our improvement in recall while maintaining high precision comes from combining three ideas. First, because we are only concerned with duplicate detection among results for the same query, the number of pairwise comparisons is small. Therefore we can afford to compute multiple pairwise signals for each pair of documents. A model learned with standard machine-learning techniques improves recall to ~0.68 with precision ~0.90. Second, most duplicate detection has focused on text analysis of the HTML contents of a document. In some web pages the HTML is not a good indicator of the final contents of the page. We use extended fetching techniques to fill in frames and execute Java script. Including signals based on our richer fetches further improves the recall to ~0.75 and the precision to ~0.91. Finally, we also explore using signals based on the query. Comparing contextual snippets based on the richer fetches improves the recall to ~0.77. We show that the overall accuracy of this final model approaches that of human judges.
1277783	Robust classification of rare queries using web knowledge We propose a methodology for building a practical robust query classification system that can identify thousands of query classes with reasonable accuracy, while dealing in real-time with the query volume of a commercial web search engine. We use a blind feedback technique: given a query, we determine its topic by classifying the web search results retrieved by the query. Motivated by the needs of search advertising, we primarily focus on rare queries, which are the hardest from the point of view of machine learning, yet in aggregation account for a considerable fraction of search engine traffic. Empirical evaluation confirms that our methodology yields a considerably higher classification accuracy than previously reported. We believe that the proposed methodology will lead to better matching of online ads to rare queries and overall to a better user experience.
1277784	Random walks on the click graph Search engines can record which documents were clicked for which query, and use these query-document pairs as "soft" relevance judgments. However, compared to the true judgments, click logs give noisy and sparse relevance information. We apply a Markov random walk model to a large click log, producing a probabilistic ranking of documents for a given query. A key advantage of the model is its ability to retrieve relevant documents that have not yet been clicked for that query and rank those effectively. We conduct experiments on click logs from image search, comparing our ("backward") random walk model to a different ("forward") random walk, varying parameters such as walk length and self-transition probability. The most effective combination is a long backward walk with high self-transition probability.
1277786	Supporting multiple information-seeking strategies in a single system framework This paper reports on an experiment comparing the retrieval effectiveness of an interactive information retrieval (IIR) system which adapts to support different information seeking strategies, with that of a standard baseline IIR system. The experiment, with 32 subjects each searching on 8 different topics, indicates that using the integrated IIR system resulted in significantly better performance, including user satisfaction with search results, significantly more effective interaction, and significantly better usability than using the baseline system.
1277787	Investigating the querying and browsing behavior of advanced search engine users One way to help all users of commercial Web search engines be more successful in their searches is to better understand what those users with greater search expertise are doing, and use this knowledge to benefit everyone. In this paper we study the interaction logs of advanced search engine users (and those not so advanced) to better understand how these user groups search. The results show that there are marked differences in the queries, result clicks, post-query browsing, and search success of users we classify as advanced (based on their use of query operators), relative to those classified as non-advanced. Our findings have implications for how advanced users should be supported during their searches, and how their interactions could be used to help searchers of all experience levels find more relevant information and learn improved searching strategies.
1277788	Term feedback for information retrieval with language models In this paper we study term-based feedback for information retrieval in the language modeling approach. With term feedback a user directly judges the relevance of individual terms without interaction with feedback documents, taking full control of the query expansion process. We propose a cluster-based method for selecting terms to present to the user for judgment, as well as effective algorithms for constructing refined query language models from user term feedback. Our algorithms are shown to bring significant improvement in retrieval accuracy over a non-feedback baseline, and achieve comparable performance to relevance feedback. They are helpful even when there are no relevant documents in the top.
1277790	A support vector method for optimizing average precision Machine learning is commonly used to improve ranked retrieval systems. Due to computational difficulties, few learning techniques have been developed to directly optimize for mean average precision (MAP), despite its widespread use in evaluating such systems. Existing approaches optimizing MAP either do not find a globally optimal solution, or are computationally expensive. In contrast, we present a general SVM learning algorithm that efficiently finds a globally optimal solution to a straightforward relaxation of MAP. We evaluate our approach using the TREC 9 and TREC 10 Web Track corpora (WT10g), comparing against SVMs optimized for accuracy and ROCArea. In most cases we show our method to produce statistically significant improvements in MAP scores.
1277791	Ranking with multiple hyperplanes The central problem for many applications in Information Retrieval is ranking and learning to rank is considered as a promising approach for addressing the issue. Ranking SVM, for example, is a state-of-the-art method for learning to rank and has been empirically demonstrated to be effective. In this paper, we study the issue of learning to rank, particularly the approach of using SVM techniques to perform the task. We point out that although Ranking SVM is advantageous, it still has shortcomings. Ranking SVM employs a single hyperplane in the feature space as the model for ranking, which is too simple to tackle complex ranking problems. Furthermore, the training of Ranking SVM is also computationally costly. In this paper, we look at an alternative approach to Ranking SVM, which we call "Multiple Hyperplane Ranker" (MHR), and make comparisons between the two approaches. MHR takes the divide-and-conquer strategy. It employs multiple hyperplanes to rank instances and finally aggregates the ranking results given by the hyperplanes. MHR contains Ranking SVM as a special case, and MHR can overcome the shortcomings which Ranking SVM suffers from. Experimental results on two information retrieval datasets show that MHR can outperform Ranking SVM in ranking.
1277792	A regression framework for learning ranking functions using relative relevance judgments Effective ranking functions are an essential part of commercial search engines. We focus on developing a regression framework for learning ranking functions for improving relevance of search engines serving diverse streams of user queries. We explore supervised learning methodology from machine learning, and we distinguish two types of relevance judgments used as the training data: 1) absolute relevance judgments arising from explicit labeling of search results; and 2) relative relevance judgments extracted from user click throughs of search results or converted from the absolute relevance judgments. We propose a novel optimization framework emphasizing the use of relative relevance judgments. The main contribution is the development of an algorithm based on regression that can be applied to objective functions involving preference data, i.e., data indicating that a document is more relevant than another with respect to a query. Experimental results are carried out using data sets obtained from a commercial search engine. Our results show significant improvements of our proposed methods over some existing methods.
1277794	An exploration of proximity measures in information retrieval In most existing retrieval models, documents are scored primarily based on various kinds of term statistics such as within-document frequencies, inverse document frequencies, and document lengths. Intuitively, the proximity of matched query terms in a document can also be exploited to promote scores of documents in which the matched query terms are close to each other. Such a proximity heuristic, however, has been largely under-explored in the literature; it is unclear how we can model proximity and incorporate a proximity measure into an existing retrieval model. In this paper,we systematically explore the query term proximity heuristic. Specifically, we propose and study the effectiveness of five different proximity measures, each modeling proximity from a different perspective. We then design two heuristic constraints and use them to guide us in incorporating the proposed proximity measures into an existing retrieval model. Experiments on five standard TREC test collections show that one of the proposed proximity measures is indeed highly correlated with document relevance, and by incorporating it into the KL-divergence language model and the Okapi BM25 model, we can significantly improve retrieval performance.
1277795	Estimation and use of uncertainty in pseudo-relevance feedback Existing pseudo-relevance feedback methods typically perform averaging over the top-retrieved documents, but ignore an important statistical dimension: the risk or variance associated with either the individual document models, or their combination. Treating the baseline feedback method as a black box, and the output feedback model as a random variable, we estimate a posterior distribution for the feed-back model by resampling a given query's top-retrieved documents, using the posterior mean or mode as the enhanced feedback model. We then perform model combination over several enhanced models, each based on a slightly modified query sampled from the original query. We find that resampling documents helps increase individual feedback model precision by removing noise terms, while sampling from the query improves robustness (worst-case performance) by emphasizing terms related to multiple query aspects. The result is a meta-feedback algorithm that is both more robust and more precise than the original strong baseline method.
1277796	Latent concept expansion using markov random fields Query expansion, in the form of pseudo-relevance feedback or relevance feedback, is a common technique used to improve retrieval effectiveness. Most previous approaches have ignored important issues, such as the role of features and the importance of modeling term dependencies. In this paper, we propose a robust query expansion technique based onthe Markov random field model for information retrieval. The technique, called latent concept expansion, provides a mechanism for modeling term dependencies during expansion. Furthermore, the use of arbitrary features within the model provides a powerful framework for going beyond simple term occurrence features that are implicitly used by most other expansion techniques. We evaluate our technique against relevance models, a state-of-the-art language modeling query expansion technique. Our model demonstrates consistent and significant improvements in retrieval effectiveness across several TREC data sets. We also describe how our technique can be used to generate meaningful multi-term concepts for tasks such as query suggestion/reformulation.
1277797	A study of Poisson query generation model for information retrieval Many variants of language models have been proposed for information retrieval. Most existing models are based on multinomial distribution and would score documents based on query likelihood computed based on a query generation probabilistic model. In this paper, we propose and study a new family of query generation models based on Poisson distribution. We show that while in their simplest forms, the new family of models and the existing multinomial models are equivalent. However, based on different smoothing methods, the two families of models behave differently. We show that the Poisson model has several advantages, including naturally accommodating per-term smoothing and modeling accurate background more efficiently. We present several variants of the new model corresponding to different smoothing methods, and evaluate them on four representative TREC test collections. The results show that while their basic models perform comparably, the Poisson model can out perform multinomial model with per-term smoothing. The performance can be further improved with two-stage smoothing.
1277799	Deconstructing nuggets: the stability and reliability of complex question answering evaluation A methodology based on "information nuggets" has recently emerged as the de facto standard by which answers to complex questions are evaluated. After several implementations in the TREC question answering tracks, the community has gained a better understanding of its many characteristics. This paper focuses on one particular aspect of the evaluation: the human assignment of nuggets to answer strings, which serves as the basis of the F-score computation. As a byproduct of the TREC 2006 ciQA task, identical answer strings were independently evaluated twice, which allowed us to assess the consistency of human judgments. Based on these results, we explored simulations of assessor behavior that provide a method to quantify scoring variations. Understanding these variations in turn lets researchers be more confident in their comparisons of systems.
1277800	Interesting nuggets and their impact on definitional question answering Current approaches to identifying definitional sentences in the context of Question Answering mainly involve the use of linguistic or syntactic patterns to identify informative nuggets. This is insufficient as they do not address the novelty factor that a definitional nugget must also possess. This paper proposes to address the deficiency by building a "Human Interest Model" from external knowledge. It is hoped that such a model will allow the computation of human interest in the sentence with respect to the topic. We compare and contrast our model with current definitional question answering models to show that interestingness plays an important factor in definitional question answering.
1277801	A probabilistic graphical model for joint answer ranking in question answering Graphical models have been applied to various information retrieval and natural language processing tasks in the recent literature. In this paper, we apply a probabilistic graphical model for answer ranking in question answering. This model estimates the joint probability of correctness of all answer candidates, from which the probability of correctness of an individual candidate can be inferred. The joint prediction model can estimate both the correctness of individual answers as well as their correlations, which enables a list of accurate and comprehensive answers. This model was compared with a logistic regression model which directly estimates the probability of correctness of each individual answer candidate. An extensive set of empirical results based on TREC questions demonstrates the effectiveness of the joint model for answer ranking. Furthermore, we combine the joint model with the logistic regression model to improve the efficiency and accuracy of answer ranking.
1277802	Structured retrieval for question answering Bag-of-words retrieval is popular among Question Answering (QA) system developers, but it does not support constraint checking and ranking on the linguistic and semantic information of interest to the QA system. We present anapproach to retrieval for QA, applying structured retrieval techniques to the types of text annotations that QA systems use. We demonstrate that the structured approach can retrieve more relevant results, more highly ranked, compared with bag-of-words, on a sentence retrieval task. We also characterize the extent to which structured retrieval effectiveness depends on the quality of the annotations.
1277804	On the robustness of relevance measures with incomplete judgments We investigate the robustness of three widely used IR relevance measures for large data collections with incomplete judgments. The relevance measures we consider are the bpref measure introduced by Buckley and Voorhees [7], the inferred average precision (infAP) introduced by Aslam and Yilmaz [4], and the normalized discounted cumulative gain (NDCG) measure introduced by Järvelin and Kekäläinen [8]. Our main results show that NDCG consistently performs better than both bpref and infAP. The experiments are performed on standard TREC datasets, under different levels of incompleteness of judgments, and using two different evaluation methods, namely, the Kendall correlation measures order between system rankings and pairwise statistical significance testing; the latter may be of independent interest.
1277805	Test theory for assessing IR test collections How good is an IR test collection? A series of papers in recent years has addressed the question by empirically enumerating the consistency of performance comparisons using alternate subsets of the collection. In this paper we propose using Test Theory, which is based on analysis of variance and is specifically designed to assess test collections. Using the method, we not only can measure test reliability after the fact, but we can estimate the test collection's reliability before it is even built or used. We can also determine an optimal allocation of resources before the fact, e.g. whether to invest in more judges or queries. The method, which is in widespread use in the field of educational testing, complements data-driven approaches to assessing test collections. Whereas the data-driven method focuses on test results, test theory focuses on test designs. It offers unique practical results, as well as insights about the variety and implications of alternative test designs.
1277806	Strategic system comparisons via targeted relevance judgments Relevance judgments are used to compare text retrieval systems. Given a collection of documents and queries, and a set of systems being compared, a standard approach to forming judgments is to manually examine all documents that are highly ranked by any of the systems. However, not all of these relevance judgments provide the same benefit to the final result, particularly if the aim is to identify which systems are best, rather than to fully order them. In this paper we propose new experimental methodologies that can significantly reduce the volume of judgments required in system comparisons. Using rank-biased precision, a recently proposed effectiveness measure, we show that judging around 200 documents for each of 50 queries in a TREC-scale system evaluation containing over 100 runs is sufficient to identify the best systems.
1277808	FRank: a ranking method with fidelity loss Ranking problem is becoming important in many fields, especially in information retrieval (IR). Many machine learning techniques have been proposed for ranking problem, such as RankSVM, RankBoost, and RankNet. Among them, RankNet, which is based on a probabilistic ranking framework, is leading to promising results and has been applied to a commercial Web search engine. In this paper we conduct further study on the probabilistic ranking framework and provide a novel loss function named fidelity loss for measuring loss of ranking. The fidelity loss notonly inherits effective properties of the probabilistic ranking framework in RankNet, but possesses new properties that are helpful for ranking. This includes the fidelity loss obtaining zero for each document pair, and having a finite upper bound that is necessary for conducting query-level normalization. We also propose an algorithm named FRank based on a generalized additive model for the sake of minimizing the fedelity loss and learning an effective ranking function. We evaluated the proposed algorithm for two datasets: TREC dataset and real Web search dataset. The experimental results show that the proposed FRank algorithm outperforms other learning-based ranking methods on both conventional IR problem and Web search.
1277809	AdaRank: a boosting algorithm for information retrieval In this paper we address the issue of learning to rank for document retrieval. In the task, a model is automatically created with some training data and then is utilized for ranking of documents. The goodness of a model is usually evaluated with performance measures such as MAP (Mean Average Precision) and NDCG (Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain). Ideally a learning algorithm would train a ranking model that could directly optimize the performance measures with respect to the training data. Existing methods, however, are only able to train ranking models by minimizing loss functions loosely related to the performance measures. For example, Ranking SVM and RankBoost train ranking models by minimizing classification errors on instance pairs. To deal with the problem, we propose a novel learning algorithm within the framework of boosting, which can minimize a loss function directly defined on the performance measures. Our algorithm, referred to as AdaRank, repeatedly constructs 'weak rankers' on the basis of reweighted training data and finally linearly combines the weak rankers for making ranking predictions. We prove that the training process of AdaRank is exactly that of enhancing the performance measure used. Experimental results on four benchmark datasets show that AdaRank significantly outperforms the baseline methods of BM25, Ranking SVM, and RankBoost.
1277810	A combined component approach for finding collection-adapted ranking functions based on genetic programming In this paper, we propose a new method to discover collection-adapted ranking functions based on Genetic Programming (GP). Our Combined Component Approach (CCA)is based on the combination of several term-weighting components (i.e.,term frequency, collection frequency, normalization) extracted from well-known ranking functions. In contrast to related work, the GP terminals in our CCA are not based on simple statistical information of a document collection, but on meaningful, effective, and proven components. Experimental results show that our approach was able to outper form standard TF-IDF, BM25 and another GP-based approach in two different collections. CCA obtained improvements in mean average precision up to 40.87% for the TREC-8 collection, and 24.85% for the WBR99 collection (a large Brazilian Web collection), over the baseline functions. The CCA evolution process also was able to reduce the overtraining, commonly found in machine learning methods, especially genetic programming, and to converge faster than the other GP-based approach used for comparison.
1277811	Feature selection for ranking Ranking is a very important topic in information retrieval. While algorithms for learning ranking models have been intensively studied, this is not the case for feature selection, despite of its importance. The reality is that many feature selection methods used in classification are directly applied to ranking. We argue that because of the striking differences between ranking and classification, it is better to develop different feature selection methods for ranking. To this end, we propose a new feature selection method in this paper. Specifically, for each feature we use its value to rank the training instances, and define the ranking accuracy in terms of a performance measure or a loss function as the importance of the feature. We also define the correlation between the ranking results of two features as the similarity between them. Based on the definitions, we formulate the feature selection issue as an optimization problem, for which it is to find the features with maximum total importance scores and minimum total similarity scores. We also demonstrate how to solve the optimization problem in an efficient way. We have tested the effectiveness of our feature selection method on two information retrieval datasets and with two ranking models. Experimental results show that our method can outperform traditional feature selection methods for the ranking task.
1277813	Relaxed online SVMs for spam filtering Spam is a key problem in electronic communication, including large-scale email systems and the growing number of blogs. Content-based filtering is one reliable method of combating this threat in its various forms, but some academic researchers and industrial practitioners disagree on how best to filter spam. The former have advocated the use of Support Vector Machines (SVMs) for content-based filtering, as this machine learning methodology gives state-of-the-art performance for text classification. However, similar performance gains have yet to be demonstrated for online spam filtering. Additionally, practitioners cite the high cost of SVMs as reason to prefer faster (if less statistically robust) Bayesian methods. In this paper, we offer a resolution to this controversy. First, we show that online SVMs indeed give state-of-the-art classification performance on online spam filtering on large benchmark data sets. Second, we show that nearly equivalent performance may be achieved by a Relaxed Online SVM (ROSVM) at greatly reduced computational cost. Our results are experimentally verified on email spam, blog spam, and splog detection tasks.
1277814	Know your neighbors: web spam detection using the web topology Web spam can significantly deteriorate the quality of search engine results. Thus there is a large incentive for commercial search engines to detect spam pages efficiently and accurately. In this paper we present a spam detection system that combines link-based and content-based features, and uses the topology of the Web graph by exploiting the link dependencies among the Web pages. We find that linked hosts tend to belong to the same class: either both are spam or both are non-spam. We demonstrate three methods of incorporating the Web graph topology into the predictions obtained by our base classifier: (i) clustering the host graph, and assigning the label of all hosts in the cluster by majority vote, (ii) propagating the predicted labels to neighboring hosts, and (iii) using the predicted labels of neighboring hosts as new features and retraining the classifier. The result is an accurate system for detecting Web spam, tested on a large and public dataset, using algorithms that can be applied in practice to large-scale Web data.
1277815	DiffusionRank: a possible penicillin for web spamming While the PageRank algorithm has proven to be very effective for ranking Web pages, the rank scores of Web pages can be manipulated. To handle the manipulation problem and to cast a new insight on the Web structure, we propose a ranking algorithm called DiffusionRank. DiffusionRank is motivated by the heat diffusion phenomena, which can be connected to Web ranking because the activities flow on the Web can be imagined as heat flow, the link from a page to another can be treated as the pipe of an air-conditioner, and heat flow can embody the structure of the underlying Web graph. Theoretically we show that DiffusionRank can serve as a generalization of PageRank when the heat diffusion co-efficient ? tends to infinity. In such a case 1=?= 0, DiffusionRank (PageRank) has low ability of anti-manipulation. When ? = 0, DiffusionRank obtains the highest ability of anti-manipulation, but in such a case, the web structure is completely ignored. Consequently, ? is an interesting factor that can control the balance between the ability of preserving the original Web and the ability of reducing the effect of manipulation. It is found empirically that, when ? = 1, DiffusionRank has a Penicillin-like effect on the link manipulation. Moreover, DiffusionRank can be employed to find group-to-group relations on the Web, to divide the Web graph into several parts, and to find link communities. Experimental results show that the DiffusionRank algorithm achieves the above mentioned advantages as expected.
1277817	Towards musical query-by-semantic-description using the CAL500 data set Query-by-semantic-description (QBSD)is a natural paradigm for retrieving content from large databases of music. A major impediment to the development of good QBSD systems for music information retrieval has been the lack of a cleanly-labeled, publicly-available, heterogeneous data set of songs and associated annotations. We have collected the Computer Audition Lab 500-song (CAL500) data set by having humans listen to and annotate songs using a survey designed to capture 'semantic associations' between music and words. We adapt the supervised multi-class labeling (SML) model, which has shown good performance on the task of image retrieval, and use the CAL500 data to learn a model for music retrieval. The model parameters are estimated using the weighted mixture hierarchies expectation-maximization algorithm which has been specifically designed to handle real-valued semantic association between words and songs, rather than binary class labels. The output of the SML model, a vector of class-conditional probabilities, can be interpreted as a semantic multinomial distribution over a vocabulary. By also representing a semantic query as a query multinomial distribution, we can quickly rank order the songs in a database based on the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the query multinomial and each song's semantic multinomial. Qualitative and quantitative results demonstrate that our SML model can both annotate a novel song with meaningful words and retrieve relevant songs given a multi-word, text-based query.
1277818	A music search engine built upon audio-based and web-based similarity measures An approach is presented to automatically build a search engine for large-scale music collections that can be queried through natural language. While existing approaches depend on explicit manual annotations and meta-data assigned to the individual audio pieces, we automatically derive descriptions by making use of methods from Web Retrieval and Music Information Retrieval. Based on the ID3 tags of a collection of mp3 files, we retrieve relevant Web pages via Google queries and use the contents of these pages to characterize the music pieces and represent them by term vectors. By incorporating complementary information about acous tic similarity we are able to both reduce the dimensionality of the vector space and improve the performance of retrieval, i.e. the quality of the results. Furthermore, the usage of audio similarity allows us to also characterize audio pieces when there is no associated information found on the Web.
1277820	Building simulated queries for known-item topics: an analysis using six european languages There has been increased interest in the use of simulated queries for evaluation and estimation purposes in Information Retrieval. However, there are still many unaddressed issues regarding their usage and impact on evaluation because their quality, in terms of retrieval performance, is unlike real queries. In this paper, wefocus on methods for building simulated known-item topics and explore their quality against real known-item topics. Using existing generation models as our starting point, we explore factors which may influence the generation of the known-item topic. Informed by this detailed analysis (on six European languages) we propose a model with improved document and term selection properties, showing that simulated known-item topics can be generated that are comparable to real known-item topics. This is a significant step towards validating the potential usefulness of simulated queries: for evaluation purposes, and becausebuilding models of querying behavior provides a deeper insight into the querying process so that better retrieval mechanisms can be developed to support the user.
1277821	Cross-lingual query suggestion using query logs of different languages Query suggestion aims to suggest relevant queries for a given query, which help users better specify their information needs. Previously, the suggested terms are mostly in the same language of the input query. In this paper, we extend it to cross-lingual query suggestion (CLQS): for a query in one language, we suggest similar or relevant queries in other languages. This is very important to scenarios of cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) and cross-lingual keyword bidding for search engine advertisement. Instead of relying on existing query translation technologies for CLQS, we present an effective means to map the input query of one language to queries of the other language in the query log. Important monolingual and cross-lingual information such as word translation relations and word co-occurrence statistics, etc. are used to estimate the cross-lingual query similarity with a discriminative model. Benchmarks show that the resulting CLQS system significantly out performs a baseline system based on dictionary-based query translation. Besides, the resulting CLQS is tested with French to English CLIR tasks on TREC collections. The results demonstrate higher effectiveness than the traditional query translation methods.
1277823	Hits on the web: how does it compare? This paper describes a large-scale evaluation of the effectiveness of HITS in comparison with other link-based ranking algorithms, when used in combination with a state-of-the-art text retrieval algorithm exploiting anchor text. We quantified their effectiveness using three common performance measures: the mean reciprocal rank, the mean average precision, and the normalized discounted cumulative gain measurements. The evaluation is based on two large data sets: a breadth-first search crawl of 463 million web pages containing 17.6 billion hyperlinks and referencing 2.9 billion distinct URLs; and a set of 28,043 queries sampled from a query log, each query having on average 2,383 results, about 17 of which were labeled by judges. We found that HITS outperforms PageRank, but is about as effective as web-page in-degree. The same holds true when any of the link-based features are combined with the text retrieval algorithm. Finally, we studied the relationship between query specificity and the effectiveness of selected features, and found that link-based features perform better for general queries, whereas BM25F performs better for specific queries.
1277824	Hits hits TREC: exploring IR evaluation results with network analysis We propose a novel method of analysing data gathered fromTREC or similar information retrieval evaluation experiments. We define two normalized versions of average precision, that we use to construct a weighted bipartite graph of TREC systems and topics. We analyze the meaning of well known - and somewhat generalized - indicators fromsocial network analysis on the Systems-Topics graph. We apply this method to an analysis of TREC 8 data; amongthe results, we find that authority measures systems performance, that hubness of topics reveals that some topics are better than others at distinguishing more or less effective systems, that with current measures a system that wants to be effective in TREC needs to be effective on easy topics, and that by using different effectiveness measures this is no longer the case.
1277825	Combining content and link for classification using matrix factorization The world wide web contains rich textual contents that areinterconnected via complex hyperlinks. This huge database violates the assumption held by most of conventional statistical methods that each web page is considered as an independent and identical sample. It is thus difficult to apply traditional mining or learning methods for solving web mining problems, e.g., web page classification, by exploiting both the content and the link structure. The research in this direction has recently received considerable attention but are still in an early stage. Though a few methods exploit both the link structure or the content information, some of them combine the only authority information with the content information, and the others first decompose the link structure into hub and authority features, then apply them as additional document features. Being practically attractive for its great simplicity, this paper aims to design an algorithm that exploits both the content and linkage information, by carrying out a joint factorization on both the linkage adjacency matrix and the document-term matrix, and derives a new representation for web pages in a low-dimensional factor space, without explicitly separating them as content, hub or authority factors. Further analysis can be performed based on the compact representation of web pages. In the experiments, the proposed method is compared with state-of-the-art methods and demonstrates an excellent accuracy in hypertext classification on the WebKB and Cora benchmarks.
1277827	Federated text retrieval from uncooperative overlapped collections In federated text retrieval systems, the query is sent to multiple collections at the same time. The results returned by collections are gathered and ranked by a central broker that presents them to the user. It is usually assumed that the collections have little overlap. However, in practice collections may share many common documents as either exact or near duplicates, potentially leading to high numbers of duplicates in the final results. Considering the natural band width restrictions and efficiency issues of federated search, sendingqueries to redundant collections leads to unnecessary costs. We propose a novel method for estimating the rate of over-lap among collections based on sampling. Then, using theestimated overlap statistics, we propose two collection selection methods that aim to maximize the number of unique relevant documents in the final results. We show experimentally that, although our estimates of overlap are not in exact, our suggested techniques can significantly improve the search effectiveness when collections overlap.
1277828	Evaluating sampling methods for uncooperative collections Many server selection methods suitable for distributed information retrieval applications rely, in the absence of cooperation, on the availability of unbiased samples of documents from the constituent collections. We describe a number of sampling methods which depend only on the normal query-response mechanism of the applicable search facilities. We evaluate these methods on a number of collections typical of a personal metasearch application. Results demonstrate that biases exist for all methods, particularly toward longer documents, and that in some cases these biases can be reduced but not eliminated by choice of parameters.We also introduce a new sampling technique, "multiple queries", which produces samples of similar quality to the best current techniques but with significantly reduced cost.
1277829	Updating collection representations for federated search To facilitate the search for relevant information across a setof online distributed collections, a federated information retrieval system typically represents each collection, centrally, by a set of vocabularies or sampled documents. Accurate retrieval is therefore related to how precise each representation reflects the underlying content stored in that collection. As collections evolve over time, collection representations should also be updated to reflect any change, however, a current solution has not yet been proposed. In this study we examine both the implications of out-of-date representation sets on retrieval accuracy, as well as proposing three different policies for managing necessary updates. Each policyis evaluated on a testbed of forty-four dynamic collections over an eight-week period. Our findings show that out-of-date representations significantly degrade performance overtime, however, adopting a suitable update policy can minimise this problem.
1277831	A time machine for text search Text search over temporally versioned document collections such as web archives has received little attention as a research problem. As a consequence, there is no scalable and principled solution to search such a collection as of a specified time. In this work, we address this shortcoming and propose an efficient solution for time-travel text search by extending the inverted file index to make it ready for temporal search. We introduce approximate temporal coalescing as a tunable method to reduce the index size without significantly affecting the quality of results. In order to further improve the performance of time-travel queries, we introduce two principled techniques to trade off index size for its performance. These techniques can be formulated as optimization problems that can be solved to near-optimality. Finally, our approach is evaluated in a comprehensive series of experiments on two large-scale real-world datasets. Results unequivocally show that our methods make it possible to build an efficient "time machine" scalable to large versioned text collections.
1277832	Principles of hash-based text retrieval Hash-based similarity search reduces a continuous similarity relation to the binary concept "similar or not similar": two feature vectors are considered as similar if they are mapped on the same hash key. From its runtime performance this principle is unequaled--while being unaffected by dimensionality concerns at the same time. Similarity hashing is applied with great success for near similarity search in large document collections, and it is considered as a key technology for near-duplicate detection and plagiarism analysis. This papers reveals the design principles behind hash-based search methods and presents them in a unified way. We introduce new stress statistics that are suited to analyze the performance of hash-based search methods, and we explain the rationale of their effectiveness. Based on these insights, we show how optimum hash functions for similarity search can be derived. We also present new results of a comparative study between different hash-based search methods.
1277833	Compressed permuterm index Recently [Manning et al., 2007] resorted the Permuterm indexof Garfield (1976) as a time-efficient and elegant solution to the string dictionary problem in which pattern queries may possibly include one wild-card symbol (called, Tolerant Retrieval problem). Unfortunately the Permuterm index is space inefficient because its quadruples the dictionary size. In this paper we propose the Compressed Permuterm Index which solves the Tolerant Retrieval problem in optimal query time, i.e. time proportional to the length of the searched pattern, and space close to the k-th order empirical entropy of the indexed dictionary. Our index can be used to solve also more sophisticated queries which involve several wild-card symbols, or require to prefix-match multiple fields in a database of records.The result is based on an elegant variant of the Burrows-Wheeler Transform defined on a dictionary of strings of variable length, which allows to easily adapt known compressed indexes [Makinen-Navarro, 2007] to solve the Tolerant Retrieval problem. Experiments show that our index supports fast queries within a space occupancy that is close to the one achievable by compressing the string dictionary via gzip, bzip or ppmdi. This improves known approaches based on front-coding by more than 50% in absolute space occupancy, still guaranteeing comparable query time.
1277835	Query performance prediction in web search environments Current prediction techniques, which are generally designed for content-based queries and are typically evaluated on relatively homogenous test collections of small sizes, face serious challenges in web search environments where collections are significantly more heterogeneous and different types of retrieval tasks exist. In this paper, we present three techniques to address these challenges. We focus on performance prediction for two types of queries in web search environments: content-based and Named-Page finding. Our evaluation is mainly performed on the GOV2 collection. In addition to evaluating our models for the two types of queries separately, we consider a more challenging and realistic situation that the two types of queries are mixed together without prior information on query types. To assist prediction under the mixed-query situation, a novel query classifier is adopted. Results show that our prediction of web query performance is substantially more accurate than the current state-of-the-art prediction techniques. Consequently, our paper provides a practical approach to performance prediction in real-world web settings.
1277836	Broad expertise retrieval in sparse data environments Expertise retrieval has been largely unexplored on data other than the W3C collection. At the same time, many intranets of universities and other knowledge-intensive organisations offer examples of relatively small but clean multilingual expertise data, covering broad ranges of expertise areas. We first present two main expertise retrieval tasks, along with a set of baseline approaches based on generative language modeling, aimed at finding expertise relations between topics and people. For our experimental evaluation, we introduce (and release) a new test set based on a crawl of a university site. Using this test set, we conduct two series of experiments. The first is aimed at determining the effectiveness of baseline expertise retrieval methods applied to the new test set. The second is aimed at assessing refined models that exploit characteristic features of the new test set, such as the organizational structure of the university, and the hierarchical structure of the topics in the test set. Expertise retrieval models are shown to be robust with respect to environments smaller than the W3C collection, and current techniques appear to be generalizable to other settings.
1277837	A semantic approach to contextual advertising Contextual advertising or Context Match (CM) refers to the placement of commercial textual advertisements within the content of a generic web page, while Sponsored Search (SS) advertising consists in placing ads on result pages from a web search engine, with ads driven by the originating query. In CM there is usually an intermediary commercial ad-network entity in charge of optimizing the ad selection with the twin goal of increasing revenue (shared between the publisher and the ad-network) and improving the user experience. With these goals in mind it is preferable to have ads relevant to the page content, rather than generic ads. The SS market developed quicker than the CM market, and most textual ads are still characterized by "bid phrases" representing those queries where the advertisers would like to have their ad displayed. Hence, the first technologies for CM have relied on previous solutions for SS, by simply extracting one or more phrases from the given page content, and displaying ads corresponding to searches on these phrases, in a purely syntactic approach. However, due to the vagaries of phrase extraction, and the lack of context, this approach leads to many irrelevant ads. To overcome this problem, we propose a system for contextual ad matching based on a combination of semantic and syntactic features.
1277839	How well does result relevance predict session satisfaction? Per-query relevance measures provide standardized, repeatable measurements of search result quality, but they ignore much of what users actually experience in a full search session. This paper examines how well we can approximate a user's ultimate session-level satisfaction using a simple relevance metric. We find that thisrelationship is surprisingly strong. By incorporating additional properties of the query itself, we construct a model which predicts user satisfaction even more accurately than relevance alone.
1277840	A new approach for evaluating query expansion: query-document term mismatch The effectiveness of information retrieval (IR) systems is influenced by the degree of term overlap between user queries and relevant documents. Query-document term mismatch, whether partial or total, is a fact that must be dealt with by IR systems. Query Expansion (QE) is one method for dealing with term mismatch. IR systems implementing query expansion are typically evaluated by executing each query twice, with and without query expansion, and then comparing the two result sets. While this measures an overall change in performance, it does not directly measure the effectiveness of IR systems in overcoming the inherent issue of term mismatch between the query and relevant documents, nor does it provide any insight into how such systems would behave in the presence of query-document term mismatch. In this paper, we propose a new approach for evaluating query expansion techniques. The proposed approach is attractive because it provides an estimate of system performance under varying degrees of query-document term mismatch, it makes use of readily available test collections, and it does not require any additional relevance judgments or any form of manual processing.
1277841	Performance prediction using spatial autocorrelation Evaluation of information retrieval systems is one of the core tasks in information retrieval. Problems include the inability to exhaustively label all documents for a topic, generalizability from a small number of topics, and incorporating the variability of retrieval systems. Previous work addresses the evaluation of systems, the ranking of queries by difficulty, and the ranking of individual retrievals by performance. Approaches exist for the case of few and even no relevance judgments. Our focus is on zero-judgment performance prediction of individual retrievals. One common shortcoming of previous techniques is the assumption of uncorrelated document scores and judgments. If documents are embedded in a high-dimensional space (as they often are), we can apply techniques from spatial data analysis to detect correlations between document scores. We find that the low correlation between scores of topically close documents often implies a poor retrieval performance. When compared to a state of the art baseline, we demonstrate that the spatial analysis of retrieval scores provides significantly better prediction performance. These new predictors can also be incorporated with classic predictors to improve performance further. We also describe the first large-scale experiment to evaluate zero-judgment performance prediction for a massive number of retrieval systems over a variety collections in several languages.
1277843	An outranking approach for rank aggregation in information retrieval Research in Information Retrieval usually shows performanceimprovement when many sources of evidence are combined to produce a ranking of documents (e.g., texts, pictures, sounds, etc.). In this paper, we focus on the rank aggregation problem, also called data fusion problem, where rankings of documents, searched into the same collection and provided by multiple methods, are combined in order to produce a new ranking. In this context, we propose a rank aggregation method within a multiple criteria framework using aggregation mechanisms based on decision rules identifying positive and negative reasons for judging whether a document should get a better rank than another. We show that the proposed method deals well with the Information Retrieval distinctive features. Experimental results are reported showing that the suggested method performs better than the well-known CombSUM and CombMNZ operators.
1277844	Enhancing relevance scoring with chronological term rank We introduce a new relevance scoring technique that enhances existing relevance scoring schemes with term position information. This technique uses chronological term rank (CTR) which captures the positions of terms as they occur in the sequence of words in a document. CTR is both conceptually and computationally simple when compared to other approaches that use document structure information, such as term proximity, term order and document features. CTR works well when paired with Okapi BM25. We evaluate the performance of various combinations of CTR with Okapi BM25 in order to identify the most effective formula. We then compare the performance of the selected approach against the performance of existing methods such as Okapi BM25, pivoted length normalization and language models. Significant improvements are seen consistently across a variety of TREC data and topic sets, measured by the major retrieval performance metrics. This seems to be the first use of this statistic for relevance scoring. There is likely to be greater retrieval improvements possible using chronological term rank enhanced methods in future work.
1277845	ARSA: a sentiment-aware model for predicting sales performance using blogs Due to its high popularity, Weblogs (or blogs in short) present a wealth of information that can be very helpful in assessing the general public's sentiments and opinions. In this paper, we study the problem of mining sentiment information from blogs and investigate ways to use such information for predicting product sales performance. Based on an analysis of the complex nature of sentiments, we propose Sentiment PLSA (S-PLSA), in which a blog entry is viewed as a document generated by a number of hidden sentiment factors. Training an S-PLSA model on the blog data enables us to obtain a succinct summary of the sentiment information embedded in the blogs. We then present ARSA, an autoregressive sentiment-aware model, to utilize the sentiment information captured by S-PLSA for predicting product sales performance. Extensive experiments were conducted on a movie data set. We compare ARSA with alternative models that do not take into account the sentiment information, as well as a model with a different feature selection method. Experiments confirm the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed approach.
1277847	Vocabulary independent spoken term detection We are interested in retrieving information from speech data like broadcast news, telephone conversations and roundtable meetings. Today, most systems use large vocabulary continuous speech recognition tools to produce word transcripts; the transcripts are indexed and query terms are retrieved from the index. However, query terms that are not part of the recognizer's vocabulary cannot be retrieved, and the recall of the search is affected. In addition to the output word transcript, advanced systems provide also phonetic transcripts, against which query terms can be matched phonetically. Such phonetic transcripts suffer from lower accuracy and cannot be an alternative to word transcripts.We present a vocabulary independent system that can handle arbitrary queries, exploiting the information provided by having both word transcripts and phonetic transcripts. A speech recognizer generates word confusion networks and phonetic lattices. The transcripts are indexed for query processing and ranking purpose.The value of the proposed method is demonstrated by the relative high performance ofour system, which received the highest overall ranking for US English speech data in the recent NIST Spoken Term Detection evaluation.
1277848	Improving text classification for oral history archives with temporal domain knowledge This paper describes two new techniques for increasing the accuracy oftopic label assignment to conversational speech from oral history interviews using supervised machine learning in conjunction with automatic speech recognition. The first, time-shifted classification, leverages local sequence information from the order in which the story is told. The second, temporal label weighting, takes the complementary perspective by using the position within an interview to bias label assignment probabilities. These methods, when used in combination, yield between 6% and 15% relative improvements in classification accuracy using a clipped R-precision measure that models the utility of label sets as segment summaries in interactive speech retrieval applications.
1277849	Indexing confusion networks for morph-based spoken document retrieval In this paper, we investigate methods for improving the performance of morph-based spoken document retrieval in Finnish by extracting relevant index terms from confusion networks. Our approach uses morpheme-like subword units ("morphs") for recognition and indexing. This alleviates the problem of out-of-vocabulary words, especially with inflectional languages like Finnish. Confusion networks offer a convenient representation of alternative recognition candidates by aligning mutually exclusive terms and by giving the posterior probability of each term. The rank of the competing terms and their posterior probability is used to estimate term frequency for indexing. Comparing against 1-best recognizer transcripts, we show that retrieval effectiveness is significantly improved. Finally, the effect of pruning in recognition is analyzed, showing that when recognition speed is increased, the reduction in retrieval performance due to the increase in the 1-best error rate can be compensated by using confusion networks.
1277851	Context sensitive stemming for web search Traditionally, stemming has been applied to Information Retrieval tasks by transforming words in documents to the their root form before indexing, and applying a similar transformation to query terms. Although it increases recall, this naive strategy does not work well for Web Search since it lowers precision and requires a significant amount of additional computation. In this paper, we propose a context sensitive stemming method that addresses these two issues. Two unique properties make our approach feasible for Web Search. First, based on statistical language modeling, we perform context sensitive analysis on the query side. We accurately predict which of its morphological variants is useful to expand a query term with before submitting the query to the search engine. This dramatically reduces the number of bad expansions, which in turn reduces the cost of additional computation and improves the precision at the same time. Second, our approach performs a context sensitive document matching for those expanded variants. This conservative strategy serves as a safeguard against spurious stemming, and it turns out to be very important for improving precision. Using word pluralization handling as an example of our stemming approach, our experiments on a major Web search engine show that stemming only 29% of the query traffic, we can improve relevance as measured by average Discounted Cumulative Gain (DCG5) by 6.1% on these queriesand 1.8% over all query traffic.
1277852	Detecting, categorizing and clustering entity mentions in Chinese text The work presented in this paper is motivated by the practical need for content extraction, and the available data source and evaluation benchmark from the ACE program. The Chinese Entity Detection and Recognition (EDR) task is of particular interest to us. This task presents us several language-independent and language-dependent challenges, e.g. rising from the complication of extraction targets and the problem of word segmentation, etc. In this paper, we propose a novel solution to alleviate the problems special in the task. Mention detection takes advantages of machine learning approaches and character-based models. It manipulates different types of entities being mentioned and different constitution units (i.e. extents and heads) separately. Mentions referring to the same entity are linked together by integrating most-specific-first and closest-first rule based pairwise clustering algorithms. Types of mentions and entities are determined by head-driven classification approaches. The implemented system achieves ACE value of 66.1 when evaluated on the EDR 2005 Chinese corpus, which has been one of the top-tier results. Alternative approaches to mention detection and clustering are also discussed and analyzed.
1277853	Knowledge-intensive conceptual retrieval and passage extraction of biomedical literature This paper presents a study of incorporating domain-specific knowledge (i.e., information about concepts and relationships between concepts in a certain domain) in an information retrieval (IR) system to improve its effectiveness in retrieving biomedical literature. The effects of different types of domain-specific knowledge in performance contribution are examined. Based on the TREC platform, we show that appropriate use of domain-specific knowledge in a proposed conceptual retrieval model yields about 23% improvement over the best reported result in passage retrieval in the Genomics Track of TREC 2006.
1277855	Heavy-tailed distributions and multi-keyword queries Intersecting inverted indexes is a fundamental operation for many applications in information retrieval and databases. Efficient indexing for this operation is known to be a hard problem for arbitrary data distributions. However, text corpora used in Information Retrieval applications often have convenient power-law constraints (also known as Zipf's Law and long tails) that allow us to materialize carefully chosen combinations of multi-keyword indexes, which significantly improve worst-case performance without requiring excessive storage. These multi-keyword indexes limit the number of postings accessed when computing arbitrary index intersections. Our evaluation on an e-commerce collection of 20 million products shows that the indexes of up to four arbitrary keywords can be intersected while accessing less than 20% of the postings in the largest single-keyword index.
1277856	ESTER: efficient search on text, entities, and relations We present ESTER, a modular and highly efficient system for combined full-text and ontology search. ESTER builds on a query engine that supports two basic operations: prefix search and join. Both of these can be implemented very efficiently with a compact index, yet in combination provide powerful querying capabilities. We show how ESTER can answer basic SPARQL graph-pattern queries on the ontology by reducing them to a small number of these two basic operations. ESTER further supports a natural blend of such semantic queries with ordinary full-text queries. Moreover, the prefix search operation allows for a fully interactive and proactive user interface, which after every keystroke suggests to the user possible semantic interpretations of his or her query, and speculatively executes the most likely of these interpretations. As a proof of concept, we applied ESTER to the English Wikipedia, which contains about 3 million documents, combined with the recent YAGO ontology, which contains about 2.5 million facts. For a variety of complex queries, ESTER achieves worst-case query processing times of a fraction of a second, on a single machine, with an index size of about 4 GB.
1277857	Web text retrieval with a P2P query-driven index In this paper, we present a query-driven indexing/retrieval strategy for efficient full text retrieval from large document collections distributed within a structured P2P network. Our indexing strategy is based on two important properties: (1) the generated distributed index stores posting lists for carefully chosen indexing term combinations, and (2) the posting lists containing too many document references are truncated to a bounded number of their top-ranked elements. These two properties guarantee acceptable storage and bandwidth requirements, essentially because the number of indexing term combinations remains scalable and the transmitted posting lists never exceed a constant size. However, as the number of generated term combinations can still become quite large, we also use term statistics extracted from available query logs to index only such combinations that are frequently present in user queries. Thus, by avoiding the generation of superfluous indexing term combinations, we achieve an additional substantial reduction in bandwidth and storage consumption. As a result, the generated distributed index corresponds to a constantly evolving query-driven indexing structure that efficiently follows current information needs of the users. More precisely, our theoretical analysis and experimental results indicate that, at the price of a marginal loss in retrieval quality for rare queries, the generated index size and network traffic remain manageable even for web-size document collections. Furthermore, our experiments show that at the same time the achieved retrieval quality is fully comparable to the one obtained with a state-of-the-art centralized query engine.
1277859	Using gradient descent to optimize language modeling smoothing parameters An abstract is not available.
1277860	Locality discriminating indexing for document classification This paper introduces a locality discriminating indexing (LDI) algorithm for document classification. Based on the hypothesis that samples from different classes reside in class-specific manifold structures, LDI seeks for a projection which best preserves the within-class local structures while suppresses the between-class overlap. Comparative experiments show that the proposed method isable to derives compact discriminating document representations for classification.
1277861	Management of keyword variation with frequency based generation of word forms in IR This paper presents a new management method for morphological variation of keywords. The method is called FCG, Frequent Case Generation. It is based on the skewed distributions of word forms in natural languages and is suitable for languages that have either fair amount of morphological variation or are morphologically very rich. The proposed method has been evaluated so far with four languages, Finnish, Swedish, German and Russian, which show varying degrees of morphological complexity.
1277862	OMES: a new evaluation strategy using optimal matching for document clustering Existing measures for evaluating clustering results (e.g. F-measure) have the limitation of overestimating cluster quality because they usually adopt the greedy matching between classes (reference clusters) and clusters (system clusters) to allow multiple classes to correspond to one same cluster, which is in fact a locally optimal solution. This paper proposes a new evaluation strategy to overcome the limitation of existing evaluation measures by using optimal matching in graph theory. A weighted bipartite graph is built with classes and clusters as two disjoint sets of vertices and the edge weight between any class and any cluster is computed using a basic metric. Then the total weight of the optimal matching in the graph is acquired and we use it to evaluate the quality of the clusters. The optimal matching allows only one-to-one matching between classes and clusters and a globally optimal solution can be achieved. A preliminary study is performed to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed evaluation strategy.
1277863	Revisiting the dependence language model for information retrieval In this paper, we revisit the dependence language modelfor information retrieval proposed in [1], and show that thismodel is deficient from a theoretical point of view. We thenpropose a new model, well founded theoretically, for integratingdependencies between terms in the language model.This new model is simpler, yet more general, than the oneproposed in [1], and yields similar results in our experiments,on both syntactic and semantic dependencies.
1277864	Quantify query ambiguity using ODP metadata Query ambiguity prevents existing retrieval systems from returning reasonable results for every query. As there is already lots of work done on resolving ambiguity, vague queries could be handled using corresponding approaches separately if they can be identified in advance. Quantification of the degree of (lack of) ambiguity laysthe groundwork for the identification. In this poster, we propose such a measure using query topics based on the topic structure selected from the Open Directory Project (ODP) taxonomy. We introduce clarity score to quantify the lack of ambiguity with respect to data sets constructed from the TREC collections and the rank correlation test results demonstrate a strong positive association between the clarity scores and retrieval precisions for queries.
1277865	Combining error-correcting output codes and model-refinement for text categorization In this work, we explore the use of error-correcting output codes (ECOC) to enhance the performance of centroid text classifier. The framework is to decompose one multi-class problem into multiple binary problems and then learn the individual binary classification problems by centroid classifier. However, this kind of decomposition incurs considerable bias for centroid classifier, which results in noticeable degradation of performance. To address this issue, we use Model-Refinement to adjust this so-called bias.
1277866	User-oriented text segmentation evaluation measure The paper describes a user oriented performance evaluation measure for text segmentation. Experiments show that the proposed measure differentiates well between error distributions with varying user impact.
1277867	Story segmentation of broadcast news in Arabic, Chinese and English using multi-window features The paper describes a maximum entropy based story segmentation system for Arabic, Chinese and English. In experiments with broadcast news data from TDT-3, TDT-4, and corpora collected in the DARPA GALE project we obtain a substantial performance gain using multiple overlapping windows for text-based features.
1277868	Recommending citations for academic papers We approach the problem of academic literature search by considering an unpublished manuscript as a query to a search system. We use the text of previous literature as well as the citation graph that connects it to find relevant related material. We evaluate our technique with manual and automatic evaluation methods, and find an order of magnitude improvement in mean average precision as compared to a text similarity baseline.
1277869	Exploration of the tradeoff between effectiveness and efficiency for results merging in federated search Federated search is the task of retrieving relevant documents from different information resources. One of the main research problems in federated search is to combine the results from different sources into a single ranked list. Recent work proposed a regression based method to download some documents from each ranked list of the different sources, calculated comparable scores for the documents and estimated mapping functions that transform source-specific scores into comparable scores. Experiments have shown that downloading more documents improves the accuracy of results merging. However downloading more documents increases the computation and communication costs. This paper proposes a utility based optimization method that enables the system to automatically decide on the desired number of training documents to download according to the user's need for effectiveness and efficiency.
1277870	Understanding the relationship of information need specificity to search query length When searching, people's information needs flowthrough to expressing an information retrieval request posed to asearch engine. We hypothesise that the degree of specificity of anIR request might correspond to the length of a search query. Ourresults show a strong correlation between decreasing query lengthand increasing broadness or generality of the IR request. We foundan average cross-over point of specificity from broad to narrow of 3words in the query. These results have implications for searchengines in responding to queries of differing lengths.
1277871	An effective snippet generation method using the pseudo relevance feedback technique A (page or web) snippet is document excerpts allowing a user to understand if a document is indeed relevant without accessing it. This paper proposes an effective snippet generation method. The pseudo relevance feedback technique and text summarization techniques are applied to salient sentences extraction for generating good quality snippets. In the experimental results, the proposed method showed much better performance than other methods including Google and Naver.
1277872	Probability ranking principle via optimal expected rank This paper presents a new perspective of the probability ranking principle (PRP) by defining retrieval effectiveness in terms of our novel expected rank measure of a set of documents for a particular query. This perspective is based on preserving decision preferences, and it imposes weaker conditions on PRP than the utility-theoretic perspective of PRP.
1277873	Combining term-based and event-based matching for question answering In question answering, two main kinds of matching methods for finding answer sentences for a question are term-based approaches -- which are simple, efficient, effective, and yield high recall -- and event-based approaches that take syntactic and semantic information into account. The latter often sacrifice recall for increased precision, but actually capture the meaning of the events denoted by the textual units of a passage or sentence. We propose a robust, data-driven method that learns the mapping between questions and answers using logistic regression and show that combining term-based and event-based approaches significantly outperforms the individual methods.
1277874	Confluence : enhancing contextual desktop search We present Confluence , an enhancement to a desktop file search tool called Confluence which extracts conceptual relationships between files by their temporal access patterns in the file system. A limitation of a purely file-based approach is that as file operations are increasingly abstracted by applications, their correlation to a user's activity weakens and thereby reduces the applicability of their temporal patterns. To deal with this problem, we augment the file event stream with a stream of window focus events from the UI layer. We present 3 algorithms that analyze this new stream, extracting the user's task information which informs the existing Confluence algorithms. We present results and conclusions from a preliminary user study on Confluence.
1277875	Estimating the value of automatic disambiguation A common motivation for personalised search systems is the ability to disambiguate queries based on some knowledge of a user's interests. An analysis of log files from three search providers, covering a range of scenarios, suggests that this sort of disambiguation would be of marginal use for more specialised providers but may be of use for whole-of-Web search.
1277876	A generic framework for machine transliteration An abstract is not available.
1277877	Where to start reading a textual XML document? In structured information retrieval, the aim is to exploit document structure to retrieve relevant components, allowing the user to go straight to the relevant material. This paper looks at the so-called best entry points (BEPs), which are intended to give the user the best starting point to access the relevant information in the document. We examine the relationship between BEPs and relevant components in the INEX 2006 ad hoc assessments. Our main findings are the following: First, although documents are short, assessors often choose the best entry point some distance from the start of the document. Second, many of the best entry points coincide with the first relevant character in relevant documents, showing a strong relation between the BEP and relevant text. Third, we find browsing BEPs in articles with a single relevant passages, and container BEPs or context BEPs in articles with more relevant passages.
1277878	Novelty detection using local context analysis An abstract is not available.
1277879	Intra-assessor consistency in question answering In this paper we investigate the consistency of answer assessment in a complex question answering task examining features of assessor consistency, types of answers and question type.
1277880	Towards robust query expansion: model selection in the language modeling framework We propose a language-model-based approach for addressing the performance robustness problem -- with respect to free-parameters' values -- of pseudo-feedback-based query-expansion methods. Given a query, we create a set of language models representing different forms of its expansion by varying the parameters' values of some expansion method; then, we select a single model using criteria originally proposed for evaluating the performance of using the original query, or for deciding whether to employ expansion at all. Experimental results show that these criteria are highly effective in selecting relevance language models that are not only significantly more effective than poor performing ones, but that also yield performance that is almost indistinguishable from that of manually optimized relevance models.
1277881	Automatic classification of web pages into bookmark categories We describe a technique to automatically classify a web page into an existing bookmark category to help a user to bookmark a page. HyperBK compares a bag-of-words representation of the page to descriptions of categories in the user's bookmark file. Unlike default web browser dialog boxes in which the user may be presented with the category into which he or she saved the last bookmarked file, HyperBK also offers the category most similar to the page being bookmarked. The user can also opt to create a new category; or save the page elsewhere. In an evaluation, the user's preferred category was offered on average 61% of the time.
1277882	What emotions do news articles trigger in their readers? We study the classification of news articles into emotions they invoke in their readers. Our work differs from previous studies, which focused on the classification of documents into their authors' emotions instead of the readers'. We use various combinations of feature sets to find the best combination for identifying the emotional influences of news articles on readers.
1277883	Evaluating discourse-based answer extraction for why -question answering An abstract is not available.
1277884	Topic segmentation using weighted lexical links (WLL) This paper presents two new approaches of lexical chains for topic segmentation using weighted lexical chains (WLC) or weighted lexical links (WLL) between repeated occurrences of lemmas along the text. The main advantage of using these new approaches is the suppression of the empirical parameter called hiatus in lexical chain processing. An evaluation according to the WindowDiff measure on a large automatically built corpus shows slight improvements in WLL compared to state-of-the-art methods based on lexical chains.
1277885	Lexical analysis for modeling web query reformulation Modeling Web query reformulation processes is still an unsolved problem. In this paper we argue that lexical analysis is highly beneficial for this purpose. We propose to use the variation in Query Clarity, as well as the Part-Of-Speech pattern transitions as indicators of user's search actions. Experiments with a log of 2.4 million queries showed our techniques to be more flexible than the current approaches, while also providing us with interesting insights into user's Web behavioral patterns.
1277886	Bridging the digital divide: understanding information access practices in an indian village community For digital library and information retrieval technologies to provide solutions for bridging the digital divide in developing countries, we need to understand the information access practices of remote and often poor communities in these countries. We must understand the information needs of these communities, and the best means to provide them access to relevant information. To this end, we investigated the current information access practices in an Indian village.
1277887	BordaConsensus: a new consensus function for soft cluster ensembles Consensus clustering is the task of deriving a single labeling by applying a consensus function on a cluster ensemble. This work introduces BordaConsensus, a new consensus function for soft cluster ensembles based on the Borda voting scheme. In contrast to classic, hard consensus functions that operate on labelings, our proposal considers cluster membership information, thus being able to tackle multiclass clustering problems. Initial small scale experiments reveal that, compared to state-of-the-art consensus functions, BordaConsensus constitutes a good performance vs. complexity trade-off.
1277888	A flexible retrieval system of shapes in binary images This poster overviews the main characteristics of a flexible retrieval systems of shapes present in binary images and discusses some evaluation results. The system applies multiple indexing criteria of the shapes synthesizing distinct characteristics such as global features of the objects contour (Fourier Coefficients), boundary irregularities (Multifractal Spectrum), presence of concavities and convexities on the boundary (Contour Scale Space distribution). The system is flexible since it allows customizing the retrieval function to fit an application need. The query is a binary image containing the desired shape and a set of parameters specifying the distinct importance of the shape characteristics that must be taken into account to evaluate the relevance of the retrieved shapes. The retrieval function is then defined as a Flexible Multicriteria fusion Function producing ranked results. The evaluation experiments showed that this system can be suited to different retrieval purposes, and that generally the combination of the distinct shape indexing criteria increases both Recall and Precision with respect to the application of any single indexing criterion alone.
1277889	Semantic text classification of disease reporting Traditional text classification studied in the IR literature is mainly based on topics. That is, each class or category represents a particular topic, e.g., sports, politics or sciences. However, many real-world text classification problems require more refined classification based on some semantic aspects. For example, in a set of documents about a particular disease, some documents may report the outbreak of the disease, some may describe how to cure the disease, some may discuss how to prevent the disease, and yet some others may include all the above information. To classify text at this semantic level, the traditional "bag of words" model is no longer sufficient. In this paper, we report a text classification study at the semantic level and show that sentence semantic and structure features are very useful for such kind of classification. Our experimental results based on a disease outbreak dataset demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
1277890	Evaluating relevant in context: document retrieval with a twist The Relevant in Context retrieval task is document or article retrieval with a twist, where not only the relevant articles should be retrieved but also the relevant information within each article (captured by a set of XML elements) should be correctly identified. Our main research question is: how to evaluate the Relevant in Context task? We propose a generalized average precision measure that meets two main requirements: i) the score reflects the ranked list of articles inherent in the result list, and at the same time ii) the score also reflects how well the retrieved information per article (i.e., the set of elements) corresponds to the relevant information. The resulting measure was used at INEX 2006.
1277891	IDF revisited: a simple new derivation within the Robertson-Spärck Jones probabilistic model There have been a number of prior attempts to theoretically justify the effectiveness of the inverse document frequency (IDF). Those that take as their starting point Robertson and Sparck Jones's probabilistic model are based on strong or complex assumptions. We show that a more intuitively plausible assumption suffices. Moreover, the new assumption, while conceptually very simple, provides a solution to an estimation problem that had been deemed intractable by Robertson and Walker (1997).
1277892	Validity and power of t-test for comparing MAP and GMAP We examine the validity and power of the t-test, Wilcoxon test, and sign test in determining whether or not the difference in performance between two IR systems is significant. Empirical tests conducted on subsets of the TREC2004 Robust Retrieval collection indicate that the p-values computed by these tests for the difference in mean average precision (MAP) between two systems are very accurate fora wide range of sample sizes and significance estimates. Similarly, these tests have good power, with the t-test proving superior overall. The t-test is also valid for comparing geometric mean average precision (GMAP), exhibiting slightly superior accuracy and slightly inferior power than for MAPcomparison.
1277893	Model-averaged latent semantic indexing This poster introduces a novel approach to information retrieval that uses statistical model averaging to improve latent semantic indexing (LSI). Instead of choosing a single dimensionality $k$ for LSI , we propose using several models of differing dimensionality to inform retrieval. To manage this ensemble we weight each model's contribution to an extent inversely proportional to its AIC (Akaike information criterion). Thus each model contributes proportionally to its expected Kullback-Leibler divergence from the distribution that generated the data. We present results on three standard IR test collections, demonstrating significant improvement over both the traditional vector space model and single-model LSI.
1277894	Characterizing the value of personalizing search We investigate the diverse goals that people have when they issue the same query to a search engine, and the ability of current search engines to address such diversity. We quantify the potential value of personalizing search results based on this analysis. Great variance was found in the results that different individuals rated as relevant for the same query -- even when the same information goal was expressed. Our analysis suggests that while search engines do a good job of ranking results to maximize global happiness, they do not do a very good job for specific individuals.
1277895	Improving retrieval accuracy by weighting document types with clickthrough data For enterprise search, there exists a relationship between work task and document type that can be used to refine search results. In this poster, we adapt the popular Okapi BM25 scoring function to weight term frequency based on the relevance of a document type to a work task. Also, we use click frequency for each task-type pair to estimate a realistic weight. Using the W3C collection from the TREC Enterprise track for evaluations, our approach leads to significant improvements on search precision.
1277896	Protecting source privacy in federated search Many information sources contain information that can only be accessed through search-specific search engines. Federated search provides search solutions of this type of hidden information that cannot be searched by conventional search engines. In many scenarios of federated search, such as the search among health care providers or among intelligence agencies, an individual information source does not want to disclose the source of the search results to users or other sources. Therefore, this paper proposes a two-step federated search protocol that protects the privacy of information sources. As far as we know, this is the first attempt to address the research problem of protecting source privacy in federated text search.
1277897	Applying ranking SVM in query relaxation We propose an approach QRRS (Query Relaxative Ranking SVM) that divides a ranking function into different relaxation steps, so that only cheap features are used in Ranking SVM of early steps for query efficiency. We show search quality in the approach is improved compared to conventional Ranking SVM.
1277898	Learning to rank collections Collection selection, ranking collections according to user query is crucial in distributed search. However, few features are used to rank collections in the current collection selection methods, while hundreds of features are exploited to rank web pages in web search. The lack of features affects the efficiency of collection selection in distributed search. In this paper, we exploit some new features and learn to rank collections with them through SVM and RankingSVM respectively. Experimental results show that our features are beneficial to collection selection, and the learned ranking functions outperform the classical CORI algorithm.
1277899	VideoReach: an online video recommendation system This paper presents a novel online video recommendation system called VideoReach , which alleviates users' efforts on finding the most relevant videos according to current viewings without a sufficient collection of user profiles as required in traditional recommenders. In this system, video recommendation is formulated as finding a list of relevant videos in terms of multimodal relevance (i.e. textual, visual, and aural relevance) and user click-through. Since different videos have different intra-weights of relevance within an individual modality and inter-weights among different modalities, we adopt relevance feedback to automatically find optimal weights by user click-though, as well as an attention fusion function to fuse multimodal relevance. We use 20 clips as the representative test videos, which are searched by top 10 queries from more than 13 k online videos, and report superior performance compared with an existing video site.
1277900	Modelling epistemic uncertainty in ir evaluation Modern information retrieval (IR) test collections violate the completeness assumption of the Cranfield paradigm. In order to maximise the available resources, only a sample of documents (i.e. the pool) are judged for relevance by a human assessor(s). The subsequent evaluation protocol does not make any distinctions between assessed or unassesseddocuments, as documents that are not in the pool are assumedto be not relevant for the topic. This is beneficial from a practical point of view, as the relative performance can be compared with confidence if the experimental conditions are fair for all systems. However, given the incompleteness of relevance assessments, two forms of uncertainty emerge during evaluation. The first is Aleatory uncertainty, which refers to variation in system performance across the topic set, which is often addressed through the use of statistical significance tests. The second form of uncertainty is Epistemic, which refers to the amount of knowledge (or ignorance) we have about the estimate of a system's performance. Epistemic uncertainty is a consequence of incompleteness and is not addressed by the current evaluation protocol. In this study, we present a first attempt at modelling both aleatory and epistemic uncertainty associatedwith IR evaluation. We aim to account for both the variability associated with system performance and the amount of knowledge known about the performance estimate.
1277901	On the importance of preserving the part-order in shape retrieval This paper discusses the importance of part-order-preservation in shape matching. A part descriptor is introduced that supports both preserving and abandoning the order of parts. The evaluation shows that retrieval results are improved by almost 38% if the original ordering is preserved.
1277902	The relationship between IR effectiveness measures and user satisfaction This paper presents an experimental study of users assessing the quality of Google web search results. In particular we look at how users' satisfaction correlates with the effectiveness of Google as quantified by IR measures such as precision and the suite of Cumulative Gain measures (CG, DCG, NDCG). Results indicate strong correlation between users' satisfaction, CG and precision, moderate correlation with DCG, with perhaps surprisingly negligible correlation with NDCG. The reasons for the low correlation with NDCG are examined.
1277903	A multi-criteria content-based filtering system In this paper we present a novel filtering system, based on a new model which reshapes the aims of content-based filtering. The filtering system has been developed within the EC project PENG, aimed at providing news professionals, such as journalists, with a system supporting both filtering and retrieval capabilities. In particular, we suggest that in tackling the problem of information overload, it is necessary for filtering systems to take into account multiple aspects of incoming documents in order to estimate their relevance to a user's profile, and in order to help users better understand documents, as distinct from solely attempting to either select relevant material from a stream, or block inappropriate material. Aiming to so this, a filtering model based on multiple criteria has been defined, based on the ideas gleamed in the project requirements stage. The filtering model is briefly described in this paper.
1277904	Boosting static pruning of inverted files This paper revisits the static term-based pruning technique presented in Carmel et al., SIGIR 2001 for ad-hoc retrieval, addressing different issues concerning its algorithmic design not yet taken into account. Although the original technique is able to retain precision when a considerable part of the inverted file is removed, we show that it is possible to improve precision in some scenarios if some key design features are properly selected.
1277905	Resource monitoring in information extraction It is often argued that in information extraction (IE), certain machine learning (ML) approaches save development time over others, or that certain ML methods (e.g. Active Learning) require less training data than others, thus saving development cost. However, such development cost claims are not normally backed up by controlled studies which show that such development cost savings actually occur. This situation in Language Engineering is contrasted with Software Engineering in general, where a lot of studies investigating system development cost have been carried out. We argue for the need of controlled studies that measure actual system development time in language engineering. To this end, we carry out an experiment in resource monitoring for an IE task: three named entity taggers for the same "surprise" domain are developed in parallel, using competing methods. Their human development time is accounted forusing a logging facility.We report development cost results for parallel implementations of a named entity tagger and present a breakdown of the development time for the three alternative methods. We are not aware of detailed previous parallel studies that detail how system development time is spent when creating a named entity tagger.
1277906	The DILIGENT framework for distributed information retrieval An abstract is not available.
1277907	Varying approaches to topical web query classification Topical classification of web queries has drawn recent interest because of the promise it offers in improving retrieval effectiveness and efficiency. However, much of this promise depends on whether classification is performed before or after the query is used to retrieve documents. We examine two previously unaddressed issues in query classification: pre versus post-retrieval classification effectiveness and the effect of training explicitly from classified queries versus bridging a classifier trained using a document taxonomy. Bridging classifiers map the categories of a document taxonomy onto those of a query classification problem to provide sufficient training data. We find that training classifiers explicitly from manually classified queries outperforms the bridged classifier by 48% in F1 score. Also, a pre-retrieval classifier using only the query terms performs merely 11% worse than the bridged classifier which requires snippets from retrieved documents.
1277908	A comparison of pooled and sampled relevance judgments Test collections are most useful when they are reusable, that is, when they can be reliably used to rank systems that did not contribute to the pools. Pooled relevance judgments for very large collections may not be reusable for two easons: they will be very sparse and not sufficiently complete, and they may be biased in the sense that theywill unfairly rank some class of systems. The TREC 2006 terabyte track judged both a pool and a deep random sample in order to measure the effects of sparseness and bias.
1277909	Clustering short texts using wikipedia Subscribers to the popular news or blog feeds (RSS/Atom) often face the problem of information overload as these feed sources usually deliver large number of items periodically. One solution to this problem could be clustering similar items in the feed reader to make the information more manageable for a user. Clustering items at the feed reader end is a challenging task as usually only a small part of the actual article is received through the feed. In this paper, we propose a method of improving the accuracy of clustering short texts by enriching their representation with additional features from Wikipedia. Empirical results indicate that this enriched representation of text items can substantially improve the clustering accuracy when compared to the conventional bag of words representation.
1277910	Estimating collection size with logistic regression Collection size is an important feature to represent the content summaries of a collection, and plays a vital role in collection selection for distributed search. In uncooperative environments, collection size estimation algorithms are adopted to estimate the sizes of collections with their search interfaces. This paper proposes heterogeneous capture (HC) algorithm, in which the capture probabilities of documents are modeled with logistic regression. With heterogeneous capture probabilities, HC algorithm estimates collection size through conditional maximum likelihood. Experimental results on real web data show that our HC algorithm outperforms both multiple capture-recapture and capture history algorithms.
1277911	Selection and ranking of text from highly imperfect transcripts for retrieval of video content In the domain of video content retrieval, we present an approach for selecting words and phrases from highly imperfect automatically generated transcripts. Extracted terms are ranked according to their descriptiveness and presented to the user in a multimedia browser interface. We use sense querying from the WordNet lexical database for our method of text selection and ranking. Evaluation of 679 video summarization tasks from 442 users shows that the method of ranking and emphasizing terms according to descriptiveness results in higher accuracy responses in less time compared to the baseline of no ranking.
1277912	Enhancing patent retrieval by citation analysis This paper proposes a method to combine text-based and citation-based retrieval methods in the invalidity patent search. Using the NTCIR-6 test collection including eight years of USPTO patents, we show the effectiveness of our method experimentally.
1277913	MRF based approach for sentence retrieval This poster focuses on the study of term context dependence in the application of sentence retrieval. Based on Markov Random Field (MRF), three forms of dependence among query terms are considered. Under different assumptions of term dependence relationship, three feature functions are defined, with the purpose to utilize association features between query terms in sentence to evaluate the relevance of sentence. Experimental results have proven the efficiency of the proposed retrieval models in improving the performance of sentence retrieval.
1277914	Improving weak ad-hoc queries using wikipedia asexternal corpus In an ad-hoc retrieval task, the query is usually short and the user expects to find the relevant documents in the first several result pages. We explored the possibilities of using Wikipedia's articles as an external corpus to expand ad-hoc queries. Results show promising improvements over measures that emphasize on weak queries.
1277915	Fine-grained named entity recognition and relation extraction for question answering An abstract is not available.
1277916	World knowledge in broad-coverage information filtering An abstract is not available.
1277917	The influence of basic tokenization on biomedical document retrieval Tokenization is a fundamental preprocessing step in Information Retrieval systems in which text is turned into index terms. This paper quantifies and compares the influence of various simple tokenization techniques on document retrieval effectiveness in two domains: biomedicine and news. As expected, biomedical retrieval is more sensitive to small changes in the tokenization method. The tokenization strategy can make the difference between a mediocre and well performing IR system, especially in the biomedical domain.
1277918	Using clustering to enhance text classification This paper addresses the problem of learning to classify textsby exploiting information derived from clustering both training and testing sets. The incorporation of knowledge resulting from clustering into the feature space representation of the texts is expected to boost the performance of a classifier. Experiments conducted on several widely used datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm especially for small training sets.
1277919	A fact/opinion classifier for news articles Many online news/blog aggregators like Google, Yahoo and MSN allow users to browse/search many hundreds of news sources. This results in dozens, often hundreds, of stories about the same event. While the news aggregators cluster these stories, allowing the user to efficiently scan the major news items at any given time, they do not currently allow alternative browsing mechanisms within the clusters. Furthermore, their intra-cluster ranking mechanisms are often based on a notion of authority/popularity of the source. In many cases, this leads to the classic power law phenomenon -- the popular stories/sources are the ones that are already popular/authoritative, thus reinforcing one dominant viewpoint. Ideally, these aggregators would exploit the availability of the tremendous number of sources to identify the various dominant threads or viewpoints about a story and highlight these threads for the users. This paper presents an initial limited approach to such an interface: it classifies articles into two categories: fact and opinion. We show that the combination of (i) a classifier trained on a small (140K) training set of editorials/reports and (ii) an interactive user interface that ameliorates classification errors by re-ordering the presentation can be effective in highlighting different underlying viewpoints in a story-cluster. We briefly discuss the classifier used here, the training set and the UI and report on some initial anecdotal user feedback and evaluation.
1277920	Matching resumes and jobs based on relevance models We investigate the difficult problem of matching semi-structured resumes and jobs in a large scale real-world collection. We compare standard approaches to Structured Relevance Models (SRM), an extensionof relevance-based language model for modeling and retrieving semi-structured documents. Preliminary experiments show that the SRM approach achieved promising performance and performed better than typical unstructured relevance models.
1277921	The utility of linguistic rules in opinion mining Online product reviews are one of the important opinion sources on the Web. This paper studies the problem of determining the semantic orientations (positive or negative) of opinions expressed on product features in reviews. Most existing approaches use a set of opinion words for the purpose. However, the semantic orientations of many words are context dependent. In this paper, we propose to use some linguistic rules to deal with the problem together with a new opinion aggregation function. Extensive experiments show that these rules and the function are highly effective. A system, called Opinion Observer, has also been built.
1277922	A comparison of sentence retrieval techniques Identifying redundant information in sentences is useful for several applications such as summarization, document provenance, detecting text reuse and novelty detection. The task of identifying redundant information in sentences is defined as follows: Given a query sentence the task is to retrieve sentences from a given collection that express all or some subset of the information present in the query sentence. Sentence retrieval techniques rank sentences based on some measure of their similarity to a query. The effectiveness of such techniques depends on the similarity measure used to rank sentences. An effective retrieval model should be able to handle low word overlap between query and candidate sentences and go beyond just word overlap. Simple language modeling techniques like query likelihood retrieval have outperformed TF-IDF and word overlap based methods for ranking sentences. In this paper, we compare the performance of sentence retrieval using different language modeling techniques for the problem of identifying redundant information.
1277923	High-dimensional visual vocabularies for image retrieval In this paper we formulate image retrieval by text query as a vector space classification problem. This is achieved by creating a high-dimensional visual vocabulary that represents the image documents in great detail. We show how the representation of these image documents enables the application of well known text retrieval techniques such as Rocchio tf-idf and naíve Bayes to the semantic image retrieval problem. We tested these methods on a Corel images subset and achieve state-of-the-art retrieval performance using the proposed methods.
1277924	A web page topic segmentation algorithm based on visual criteria and content layout This paper presents experiments using an algorithm of web page topic segmentation that show significant precision improvement in the retrieval of documents issued from the Web track corpus of TREC 2001. Instead of processing the whole document, a web page is segmented into different semantic blocks according to visual criteria (such as horizontal lines, colors) and structural tags (such as headings <H1>~<H6>, paragraph <P>). We conclude that combining visual and content layout criteria gives the best results for increasing the precision: the ranking of the page is calculated for relevant segments of pages resulting from the segmentation algorithm.
1277925	Document clustering: an optimization problem Clustering algorithms have been widely used in information retrieval applications. However, it is difficult to define an objective "best" result. This article analyzes some document clustering algorithms and illustrates that they are equivalent to the optimization problem of some global functions. Experiments show their good performance, but there are still counter-examples where they fail to return the optimal solution. We argue that Monte-Carlo algorithms in the global optimization framework have the potential to find better solutions than traditional clustering, and they are able to handle more complex structures.
1277926	Finding similar experts The task of finding people who are experts on a topic has recently received increased attention. We introduce a different expert finding task for which a small number of example experts is given (instead of a natural language query), and the system's task is to return similar experts . We define, compare, and evaluate a number of ways of representing experts, and investigate how the size of theinitial example set affects performance. We show that morefine-grained representations of candidates result in higher performance, and larger sample sets as input lead to improved precision.
1277927	Active learning for class imbalance problem The class imbalance problem has been known to hinder the learning performance of classification algorithms. Various real-world classification tasks such as text categorization suffer from this phenomenon. We demonstrate that active learning is capable of solving the problem.
1277928	Strategies for retrieving plagiarized documents For the identification of plagiarized passages in large document collections we present retrieval strategies which rely on stochastic sampling and chunk indexes. Using the entire Wikipedia corpus we compile n-gram indexes and compare them to a new kind of fingerprint index in a plagiarism analysis use case. Our index provides an analysis speed-up by factor 1.5 and is an order of magnitude smaller, while being equivalent in terms of precision and recall.
1277929	Generative modeling of persons and documents for expert search In this paper we address the task of automatically finding an expert within the organization, known as the expert search problem. We present the theoretically-based probabilistic algorithm which models retrieved documents as mixtures of expert candidate language models. Experiments show that our approach outperforms existing theoretically sound solutions.
1277930	Random walk term weighting for information retrieval We present a way of estimating term weights for Information Retrieval (IR), using term co-occurrence as a measure of dependency between terms.We use the random walk graph-based ranking algorithm on a graph that encodes terms and co-occurrence dependencies in text, from which we derive term weights that represent a quantification of how a term contributes to its context. Evaluation on two TREC collections and 350 topics shows that the random walk-based term weights perform at least comparably to the traditional tf-idf term weighting, while they outperform it when the distance between co-occurring terms is between 6 and 30 terms.
1277931	Comparing query logs and pseudo-relevance feedbackfor web-search query refinement Query logs and pseudo-relevance feedback (PRF) offer ways in which terms to refine Web searchers' queries can be selected, offered to searchers, and used to improve search effectiveness. In this poster we present a study of these techniques that aims to characterize the degree of similarity between them across a set of test queries, and the same set broken out by query type. The results suggest that: (i) similarity increases with the amount of evidence provided to the PRF algorithm, (ii) similarity is higherwhen titles/snippets are used for PRF than full-text, and (iii) similarity is higher for navigational than informational queries. The findings have implications for the combined usage of query logs and PRF in generating query refinement alternatives.
1277932	Automatic extension of non-english wordnets An abstract is not available.
1277933	First experiments searching spontaneous Czech speech An abstract is not available.
1277934	Power and bias of subset pooling strategies We define a method to estimate the random and systematic errors resulting from incomplete relevance assessments.Mean Average Precision (MAP) computed over a large number of topics with a shallow assessment pool substantially outperforms -- for the same adjudication effort MAP computed over fewer topics with deeper pools, and P@k computed with pools of the same depth. Move-to-front pooling,previously reported to yield substantially better rank correlation, yields similar power, and lower bias, compared tofixed-depth pooling.
1277935	Problems with Kendall's tau This poster describes a potential problem with a relatively well used measure in Information Retrieval research: Kendall's Tau rank correlation coefficient. The coefficient is best known for its use in determining the similarity of test collections when ranking sets of retrieval runs. Threshold values for the coefficient have been defined and used in a number of published studies in information retrieval. However, this poster presents results showing that basing decisions on such thresholds is not as reliableas has been assumed.
1277936	Opinion holder extraction from author and authority viewpoints Opinion holder extraction research is important for discriminating between opinions that are viewed from different perspectives. In this paper, we describe our experience of participation in the NTCIR-6 Opinion Analysis Pilot Task by focusing on opinion holder extraction results in Japanese and English. Our approach to opinion holder extraction was based on the discrimination between author and authority viewpoints in opinionated sentences, and the evaluation results were fair with respect to the Japanese documents.
1277937	Incorporating term dependency in the dfr framework Term dependency, or co-occurrence, has been studied in language modelling, for instance by Metzler & Croft who showed that retrieval performance could be significantlyenhanced using term dependency information. In this work, weshow how term dependency can be modelled within the Divergence From Randomness (DFR) framework. We evaluate our term dependency model on the two adhoc retrieval tasks using the TREC .GOV2 Terabyte collection. Furthermore, we examine the effect of varying the term dependency window size on the retrieval performance of the proposed model. Our experiments show that term dependency can indeed besuccessfully incorporated within the DFR framework.
1277938	Hits on question answer portals: exploration of link analysis for author ranking Question-Answer portals such as Naver and Yahoo! Answers are growing in popularity. However, despite the increased popularity, the quality of answers is uneven, and while some users usually provide good answers, many others often provide bad answers. Hence, estimating the authority, or the expected quality of users, is a crucial task for this emerging domain, with potential applications to answer ranking and to incentive mechanism design. We adapt a powerful link analysis methodology from the web domain as a first step towards estimating authority in Question Answer portals. Our experimental results over more than 3 million answers from Yahoo! Answers are promising, and warrant further exploration along the lines outlined in this poster.
1277939	Heads and tails: studies of web search with common and rare queries A large fraction of queries submitted to Web search enginesoccur very infrequently. We describe search log studiesaimed at elucidating behaviors associated with rare andcommon queries. We present several analyses and discussresearch directions.
1277940	Dimensionality reduction for dimension-specific search Dimensionality reduction plays an important role in efficient similarity search, which is often based on k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) queries over a high-dimensional feature space. In this paper, we introduce a novel type of k-NN query, namely conditional k-NN (ck-NN), which considers dimension-specific constraint in addition to the inter-point distances. However, existing dimensionality reduction methods are not applicable to this new type of queries. We propose a novel Mean-Std (standard deviation) guided Dimensionality Reduction (MSDR) to support a pruning based efficient ck-NN query processing strategy. Our preliminary experimental results on 3D protein structure data demonstrate that the MSDR method is promising.
1277941	An effective method for finding best entry points in semi-structured documents Focused structured document retrieval employs the concept of best entry point (BEP), which is intended to provide optimal starting-point from which users can browse to relevant document components [4]. In this paper we describe and evaluate a method for finding BEPs in XML documents. Experiments conducted within the framework of INEX 2006 evaluation campaign on the Wikipedia XML collection [2] shown the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
1277942	Query rewriting using active learning for sponsored search Sponsored search is a major revenue source for search companies. Web searchers can issue any queries, while advertisement keywords are limited. Query rewriting technique effectively matches user queries with relevant advertisement keywords, thus increases the amount of web advertisements available. The match relevance is critical for clicks. In this study, we aim to improve query rewriting relevance. For this purpose, we use an active learning algorithm called Transductive Experimental Design to select the most informative samples to train the query rewriting relevance model. Experiments show that this approach significantly improves model accuracy and rewriting relevance.
1277943	An analysis of peer-to-peer file-sharing system queries Many studies focus on the Web, but yet, few focus on peer-to-peer file-sharing system queries despite their massive scale in terms of Internet traffic. We analyzed several million queries collected on the Gnutella network and differentiated our findings from those of Web queries.
1277944	Investigating the relevance of sponsored results for web ecommerce queries Are sponsored links, the primary business model for Web search engines, providing Web consumers with relevant results? This research addresses this issue by investigating the relevance of sponsored and non-sponsored links for ecommerce queries from the major search engines. The results show that average relevance ratings for sponsored and non-sponsored links are virtually the same, although the relevance ratings for sponsored links are statistically higher. We used 108 ecommerce queries and 8,256 retrieved links for these queries from three major Web search engines, Google, MSN, and Yahoo!. We present the implications for Web search engines and sponsored search as a long-term business model as well as a mechanism for finding relevant information for searchers.
1277945	Viewing online searching within a learning paradigm In this research, we investigate whether one can model online searching as a learning paradigm. We examined the searching characteristics of 41 participants engaged in 246 searching tasks. We classified the searching tasks according to Anderson and Krathwohl's Taxonomy, an updated version of Bloom's taxonomy. Anderson and Krathwohl is a six level categorization of cognitive learning. Research results show that Applying takes the most searching effort as measured by queries per session and specific topics searched per sessions. The categories of Remembering and Understanding, which are lower-order learning levels, exhibit searching characteristics similar to the higher order categories of Evaluating and Creating. It seems that searchers rely primarily on their internal knowledge and use searching primarily as fact checking and verification when engaged in Evaluating and Creating. Implications are that the commonly held notions of Web searchers having simple information goals may not be correct. We discuss the implications for Web searching, including designing interfaces to support exploration and alternate views.
1277946	More efficient parallel computation of pagerank An abstract is not available.
1277947	Using similarity links as shortcuts to relevant web pages Successful navigation from a relevant web page to other relevant pages depends on the page linking to other relevant pages. We measured the distance to travel from relevant page to relevant page and found a bimodal distribution of distances peaking at 4 and 15 hops. In an attempt to make it easier to navigate among relevant pages, we added content similarity links to pages. With these additional links, significantly more relevant documents were close to each other. A browser plug-in or other tool that provides links to pages similar to a given page should increase the ability of web users to find relevant pages via navigation.
1277948	Fast exact maximum likelihood estimation for mixture of language models A common language modeling approach assumes the data D is generated from a mixture of several language models. EM algorithm is usually used to find the maximum likelihood estimation of one unknown mixture component, given the mixture weights and the other language models. In this paper, we provide an efficient algorithm of O ( k ) complexity to find the exact solution, where k is the number of words occurred at least once in D . Another merit is that the probabilities of many words are exactly zeros, which means that the mixture language model also serves as a feature selection technique.
1277949	TimedTextRank: adding the temporal dimension to multi-document summarization Graph-ranking based algorithms (e.g. TextRank) have been proposed for multi-document summarization in recent years. However, these algorithms miss an important dimension, the temporal dimension, for summarizing evolving topics. For an evolving topic, recent documents are usually more important than earlier documents because recent documents contain much more novel information than earlier documents and a novelty-oriented summary should be more appropriate to reflect the changing topic. We propose the TimedTextRank algorithm to make use of the temporal information of documents based on the graph-ranking based algorithm. A preliminary study is performed to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed TimedTextRank algorithm for dynamic multi-document summarization.
1277950	Winnowing wheat from the chaff: propagating trust to sift spam from the web The Web today includes many pages intended to deceive search engines, and attain an unwarranted result ranking. Since the links among web pages are used to calculate authority, ranking systems would benefit from knowing which pages contain content to be trusted and which do not. We propose and compare various trust propagation methods to estimate the trustworthiness of each page. We find that a non-trust-preserving propagation method is able to achieve close to a fifty percent improvement over TrustRank in separating spam from non-spam pages.
1277951	Feature engineering for mobile (SMS) spam filtering Mobile spam in an increasing threat that may be addressed using filtering systems like those employed against email spam. We believe that email filtering techniques require some adaptation to reach good levels of performance on SMS spam, especially regarding message representation. In order to test this assumption, we have performed experiments on SMS filtering using top performing email spam filters on mobile spam messages using a suitable feature representation, with results supporting our hypothesis.
1277952	Ranking by community relevance A web page may be relevant to multiple topics; even when nominally on a single topic, the page may attract attention (and thus links) from multiple communities. Instead of indiscriminately summing the authority provided by all pages, we decompose a web page into separate subnodes with respect to each community pointing to it. By considering the relevance of these communities, we are able to better model the query-specific reputation for each potential result. We apply a total of 125 queries to the TREC .GOV dataset to demonstrate how the use of community relevance can improve ranking performance.
1277953	Query suggestion based on user landing pages This poster investigates a novel query suggestion technique that selects query refinements through a combination of many users' post-query navigation patterns and the query logs of a large search engine. We compare this technique, which uses the queries that retrieve in the top-ranked search results places where searchers end up after post-query browsing (i.e., the landing pages), with an approach based on query refinements from user search sessions extracted from query logs. Our findings demonstrate the effectiveness of using landing pages for the direct generation of query suggestions, as well as the complementary nature of the suggestions it generates with regard to traditional query log based refinement methodologies.
1277954	Making mind and machine meet: a study of combining cognitive and algorithmic relevance feedback Using Saracevic's relevance types, we explore approaches to combining algorithm and cognitive relevance in a term relevance feedback scenario. Data collected from 21 users who provided relevance feedback about terms suggested by a system for 50 TREC HARD topics are used. The former type of feedback is considered as cognitive relevance and the latter type is considered as algorithm relevance. We construct retrieval runs using these two types of relevance feedback and experiment with ways of combining them with simple Boolean operators. Results show minimal differences in performance with respect to the different techniques.
1277955	Using collaborative queries to improve retrieval for difficult topics We describe a preliminary analysis of queries created by 81 users for 4 topics from the TREC Robust Track. Our goal was to explore the potential benefits of using queries created by multiple users on retrieval performance for difficult topics. We first examine the overlap in users' queries and the overlap in results with respect to different queries for the same topic. We then explore the potential benefits of combining users' queries in various ways. Our results provide some evidence that having access to multiple users' queries can improve retrieval for individual searchers and for difficult topics.
1277956	Retrieval of discussions from enterprise mailing lists Mailing list archives in an enterprise are a valuable source for employees to dig into the past proceedings of the organization that could be relevant to their present task. Going through the proceedings of discussions about certain topics might be cumbersome and regular search techniques might not work in this context due to the genre that the documents belong to. In this paper, we propose methods, based on theory of subjectivity, to retrieve email messages that could contain argumentative discussions about the topic that the user is interested in.
1277957	Effects of highly agreed documents in relevancy prediction Finding significant contextual features is a challenging task in the development of interactive information retrieval (IR) systems. This paper investigated a simple method to facilitate such a task by looking at aggregated relevance judgements of retrieved documents. Our study suggested that the agreement on relevance judgements can indicate the effectiveness of retrieved documents as the source of significant features. The effect of highly agreed documents gives us practical implication for the design of adaptive search models in interactive IR systems.
1277958	Detecting word substitutions: PMI vs. HMM Those who want to conceal the content of their communications can do so by replacing words that might trigger attention. For example, instead of writing "The bomb is in position", a terrorist may chose to write "The flower is in position." The substituted sentence would sound a bit "odd" for a human reader and it has been shown in prior research that such oddity is detectable by text mining approaches. However, the importance of each component in the suggested oddity detection approach has not been thoroughly investigated. Also, the approach has not been compared with such an obvious candidate for the task as Hidden Markov Models (HMM). In this work, we explore further oddity detection algorithms reported earlier, specifically those based on pointwise mutual information (PMI) and Hidden Markov Models (HMM).
1277959	Workload sampling for enterprise search evaluation In real world use of test collection methods, it is essential that the query test set be representative of the work load expected in the actual application. Using a random sample of queries from a media company's query log as a 'gold standard' test set we demonstrate that biases in sitemap-derived and top n query sets can lead to significant perturbations in engine rankings and big differences in estimated performance levels.
1277960	Document layout and color driven image retrieval This paper presents a contribution to image indexing applied to the document creation task. The presented method ranks a set of photographs based on how well they aesthetically work within a predefined document. Color harmony, document visual balance and image quality are taken into consideration. A user study conducted on people with a range of expertise in document creation helped gather the right visual features to consider by the algorithm. This shows some benefits for the traditional document creation task, as well as for the case of ever-changing web page banner colors and layout.
1277961	Large-scale cluster-based retrieval experiments on Turkish texts We present cluster-based retrieval (CBR) experiments on the largest available Turkish document collection. Our experiments evaluate retrieval effectiveness and efficiency on both an automatically generated clustering structure and a manual classification of documents. In particular, we compare CBR effectiveness with full-text search (FS) and evaluate several implementation alternatives for CBR. Our findings reveal that CBR yields comparable effectiveness figures with FS. Furthermore, by using a specifically tailored cluster-skipping inverted index we significantly improve in-memory query processing efficiency of CBR in comparison to other traditional CBR techniques and even FS.
1277962	Improving active learning recall via disjunctive boolean constraints Active learning efficiently hones in on the decision boundary between relevant and irrelevant documents, but in the process can miss entire clusters of relevant documents, yielding classifiers with low recall. In this paper, we propose a method to increase active learning recall by constraining sampling to a document subset rich in relevant examples.
1277963	Creativity support: information discovery and exploratory search We are developing support for creativity in learning through information discovery and exploratory search. Users engage in creative tasks, such as inventing new products and services. The system supports evolving information needs. It gathers and presents relevant information visually using images and text. Users are able to search, browse, and explore results from multiple queries and interact with information elements by manipulating design and expressing interest. A field study was conducted to evaluate the system in an undergraduate class. The results demonstrated the efficacy of our system for developing creative ideas. Exposure to diverse information in visual and interactive forms is shown to support students engaged in invention tasks.
1277965	MQX: multi-query engine for compressed XML data An abstract is not available.
1277966	ISKODOR: unified user modeling for integrated searching ISKODOR integrates personal collections, peer search, and centralized search services. User modeling in ISKODOR fills three roles: discovery of sites with suitable information stores, context-based query interpretation, and automatic profile-based filtering of new information. Explanation and control are achieved through graphical depiction of sources, explicit feedback regard ingutility, and explicit control over peer association behavior and information sharing.
1277967	Babel: a machine transliteration workbench An abstract is not available.
1277968	X-Site: a workplace search tool for software engineers Professionals in the workplace need high-precision search tools capable of retrieving information that is useful and appropriate to the task at hand. One approach to identifying content, which is not only relevant but also useful, is to make use of the task context of the search. We present X-Site, an enterprise search engine for the software engineering domain that exploits relationships between user's tasks and document genres in the collection to improve retrieval precision.
1277969	The wild thing goes local Suppose you are on a mobile device with no keyboard (e.g., a cell phone) and you want to perform a "near me" search. Where is the nearest pizza? How do you enter queries quickly? T9? The Wild Thing encourages users to enter patterns with implicit and explicit wild cards (regular expressions). The search engine uses Microsoft Local Live logs to find the most likely queries for a particular location. For example, 7#6 is short-hand for the regular expression: /^[PQRS].*[ ][MNO].*/, which matches "post office" in many places (but "Space Needle" in Seattle). Some queries are more local than others. Pizza is likely everywhere, whereas "Boeing Company," is very likely in Seattle and Chicago, moderately likely nearby, and somewhat likely elsewhere. Smoothing is important. Not every query is observed everywhere.
1277970	DiscoverInfo: a tool for discovering information with relevance and novelty An abstract is not available.
1277971	Radio Oranje: searching the queen's speech(es) The 'Radio Oranje' demonstrator shows an attractive multimedia user experience in the cultural heritage domain based on a collection of mono-media audio documents. It supports online search and browsing of the collection using indexing techniques, specialized content visualizations and a related photo database.
1277972	Mobile interface of the memoria project This project develops tools to manage personal memories that include a multimedia retrieval system and user interfaces for different devices. This paper and demonstration presents the mobile interface which allows browsing, retrieving, and taking pictures that are automatically annotated with GPS data and audio information. The multimedia retrieval system uses multimodal information: visual content, GPS metadata and audio information. The interface was evaluated in a cultural heritage site.
1277973	A full-text retrieval toolkit for mobile desktop search An abstract is not available.
1277974	EXPOSE: searching the web for expertise An abstract is not available.
1277975	Text categorization for streams We describe a novel system for evaluating and performing stream-based text categorization. Stream-based text categorization considers the text being categorized as a stream of symbols, which differs from the traditional feature-based approach which relies on extracting features from the text. The system implements character-based languages models--specifically models based on the PPM text compression scheme--as well as count-based measures such as R-Measure and C-Measure. Use of the system demonstrates that all of these techniques outperform SVM, a feature-based classifier, at stream-related classification tasks such as authorship ascription.
1277976	Search results using timeline visualizations An abstract is not available.
1277977	Wikipedia in the pocket: indexing technology for near-duplicate detection and high similarity search We develop and implement a new indexing technology which allows us to use complete (and possibly very large) documents as queries, while having a retrieval performance comparable to a standard term query. Our approach aims at retrieval tasks such as near duplicate detection and high similarity search. To demonstrate the performance of our technology we have compiled the search index "Wikipedia in the Pocket", which contains about 2 million English and German Wikipedia articles. 1 This index--along with a search interface--fits on a conventional CD (0.7 gigabyte). The ingredients of our indexing technology are similarity hashing and minimal perfect hashing.
1277978	Nexus: a real time QA system An abstract is not available.
1277979	Geographic ranking for a local search engine Traditional ranking schemes of the relevance of a Web page to a user query in a search engine are less appropriate when the search term contains geographic information. Often, geographic entities, such as addresses, city names, and location names, appear only once or twice in a Web page, and are typically not in a heading or larger font. Consequently, an alternative ranking approach to the traditional weighted tf*idf relevance ranking is need. Further, if a Web site contains a geographic entity, it is often the case that its in- and out-neighbours do not refer to the same entity, although they may refer to other geographic entities. We present a local search engine that applies a novel ranking algorithm suitable for ranking Web pages with geographic content. We describe its major components: geographic ranking, focused crawling, geographic extractor, and the related web-sites feature.
1277980	Focused ranking in a vertical search engine Since the debut of PageRank and HITS, hyperlink-induced Web document ranking has come a long way. The Web has become increasingly vast and topically diverse. Such vastness has led many into the area of topic-sensitive ranking and its variants. We address the high dimensionality of the Web by providing tools for focused search. A focused search engine is one which seeks coverage over a subset of topics of the Web and presents users with relevant search results in a known domain. This demonstration will introduce readers to the GenieKnows.com Vertical Search Engine.
1277981	A do-it-yourself evaluation service for music information retrieval systems An abstract is not available.
1277982	IR-Toolbox: an experiential learning tool for teaching IR An abstract is not available.
1277984	Beyond classical measures: how to evaluate the effectiveness of interactive information retrieval system? This research explores the relationship between Information Retrieval (IR) systems' effectiveness and users' performance (accuracy and speed) and their satisfaction with the retrieved results (precision of the results, completeness of the results and overall system success). Previous studies have concluded that improvements in IR systems based on increase in IR effectiveness measures do not reflect on improvement in users' performance. This work aims at exploiting factors that can possibly be considered as confounding variables in Interactive Information Retrieval (IIR) evaluation. In this research, we look at substantive approaches to evaluate IIR systems. We aim to build an interactive evaluation framework that brings together aspects of systems' effectiveness and users' performance and satisfaction. This research also involves developing methods for capturing users' satisfaction with the retrieved results of IR systems, as well as examination how users assess their own performance in task completion. Furthermore, we are also interested in identifying evaluation measures which are used in batch mode (non-interactive experiment), but correlate well in interactive IR system. Thus, by the end of this research, we hope to develop a valid and reliable metrics for IIR evaluation. A first study was set up to explore the relationship between system effectiveness as quantified by traditional measures, such as precision and recall, and users' effectiveness and satisfaction of the results, though this study was limited to few users. The tasks involve finding images for recall-based tasks. It was concluded that no direct relationship between system effectiveness and users' performance. People learn to adapt to a system regardless to its effectiveness. This study recommends that a combination of measures (e.g. system effectiveness, user performance and satisfaction) to be used to evaluate IIR systems. Based on our observation from this study, we found that users' familiarity of the search topic has increased their performance. Thus, we set up a second experiment to investigate how users' satisfaction correlate with some IR effectiveness measures such as precision and the suite of Cumulative Gain measures (CG, DCG, NDCG) in simple web searching tasks. Results from this study have shown that CG and Precision are better than NDCG at reflecting users' satisfaction with the results of an IR system. We have also concluded that users of web search engines, in the context of simple search task, are more concerned with precision than completeness of the search. This stemmed from the stronger correlation between users' satisfaction with the success of overall search and their satisfaction with the accuracy of the search results than with their satisfaction with the completeness of the search. Many scholars such as [1], [2], [3], and [4] have recommended considering perceptions of the users as important as IR effectiveness measures, and both should be interpreted as measures of effectiveness. Therefore, the issue in IIR evaluation should not be focusing on maximizing the retrieval performance, by refining IR techniques alone, but also understanding users' satisfaction, behaviors and information needs. This raises the need for more investigation on measures that translate users' performance and satisfaction as the criterion of a system. Future plans are to incorporate variables domain knowledge, motivation, task complexity and search behaviours on user performance and users evaluation of IR system performance when evaluating interactive IR systems; this is in an attempt to explore the suitability of different measures in IIR evaluation. Thus, the proposed approach adopts a systematic and multidimensional approach to evaluation including not only classical traditional evaluation measures, such as precision and recall, but also interactive non-traditional measures, such as users' characteristics and their satisfaction.
1277985	People search in the enterprise An abstract is not available.
1277986	Efficient integration of proximity for text, semi-structured and graph retrieval An abstract is not available.
1277987	Attention-based information retrieval In the proposed PhD thesis, it will be examined how attention data from the user, especially generated by an eye tracker, can be exploited in order to enhance and personalize information retrieval methods.
1277988	A summarisation logic for structured documents The logical approach to Information Retrieval tries to model the relevance of a document given a query as the logical implication between documents and queries. In early work, van Rijsbergen states that the retrieval status value of a document given a query is proportional to the degree of implication between a document and a query. Based on this, several probabilistic logics for information retrieval have been conceived, which add an additional layer of abstraction to the information retrieval task: probabilistic models for the retrieval of documents are expressed in those logics, rather than implemented directly. The aim of the research presented here is to develop a logic for the IR task of document summarisation. Such a summarisation logic adds an abstraction layer to the summarisation task, similarly to the way a logic for document retrieval adds a layer to the retrieval task. Probabilistic models for document summarisation will thus be expressed as logical formulae, with the actual implementation hidden by the logical expressions. The "extract-worthyness" of textual components in this logic is measured as the degree of implication from those textual components to their surrounding contexts, providing a measure of how much said components are "about" the context within which they are situated.
1277989	Information-behaviour modeling with external cues Much of human activity defines an information context. We awaken, start work, and hold meetings at roughly the same time every day, and retrieve the same information items (day planners, itineraries, schedules, agendas, reports, menus, web pages, etc.) for many of these activities. Information retrieval systems in general lack sensitivity to such recurrent context, requiring users to remember and re-enter search cues for objects regardless of how regularly or consistently the objects are used, and to develop ad-hoc storage strategies. We propose that in addition to semantic cues, information objects should also be indexed by temporal and sensory cues, such as clock time and location, so that objects can be retrieved by external environmental context, in addition to any internal semantic content. Our cue-event-object (CEO) model uses a network representation to associate information objects with the times and conditions (location, weather, etc.) when they are typically used. Users can query the system to review their activities, revealing what they do at particular times, and which information objects tend to be most often used and when. The system can also pre-fetch items that have proven useful in past similar situations. The CEO model is incremental, real-time, and dynamic, maintaining an accurate summary even as a user's information behaviour changes over time. Such environmentally-aware systems have applications in personal information management, mobile devices, and smart homes. As a memory prosthesis, the model can support autonomous living for the cognitively impaired. We present a comprehensive research agenda based on some promising preliminary findings.
1277990	Fuzzy temporal and spatial reasoning for intelligent information retrieval Temporal and spatial information in text documents is often expressed in a qualitative way. Moreover, both are frequently affected by vagueness, calling for appropriate extensions of traditional frameworks for qualitative reasoning about time and space. Our research aims at defining such extensions based on fuzzy set theory, and applying the resulting frameworks to two important kinds of intelligent information retrieval, viz. temporal question answering and geographic information retrieval.
1277991	Paragraph retrieval for why -question answering An abstract is not available.
1277992	Global resources for peer-to-peer text retrieval The thesis presented in this paper tackles selected issues in unstructured peer-to-peer information retrieval (P2PIR) systems, using world knowledge for solving P2PIR problems. A first part uses so-called reference corpora for estimating global term weights such as IDF instead of sampling them from the distributed collection. A second part of the work will be dedicated to the question of query routing in unstructured P2PIR systems using peer resource descriptions and world knowledge for query expansion.
1277993	Automatic query-time generation of retrieval expert coefficients for multimedia retrieval Content-based Multimedia Information Retrieval can be defined as the task of matching a multi-modal information need against various components of a multimedia corpus and retrieving relevant elements. Generally the matching and retrieval takes place across multiple 'features' which can either be visual or audio, or can be high-level or low-level, and each of which can be seen to be an independent retrieval expert. The task of answering a query can thus be formulated as a data fusion problem. Depending on the query, each expert may perform differently and so retrieval coefficients can be used to weight each expert to increase overall performance. Previous approaches to expert coefficient generation have included query-independent coefficients, identification of query-classes and machine learning methods, to name a few. The approach I propose is different, as it seeks to dynamically create expert coefficients which are query-dependent. This approach is based upon earlier experiments where an initial correlation was observed between the score distribution of a retrieval expert, and its relative performance when compared against other experts for that query. I have created a basic method which leverages these observations to create query-time coefficients which achieve comparable performance to oracle-determined query-independent weights, for the experts and collections used in the aforementioned experiment. Previous research which examinedscore distribution did so with respect to relevance, whereas this work seeks to compare expert scores for a given query to determine relative performance. In my work I aim to explore this correlation by eliminating potential bias from the data collections, the retrieval experts and the queries used in experiments to obtain more robust observations. Using and extending previous investigations into data fusion, I will explore where data fusion succeeds in multimedia retrieval, and where it does not. I then aim to refine and extend my existing techniques for automatic coefficient generation to incorporate the new observations, so as to improve performance. Finally I will combine this approach with existing data fusion methods, such as query-class coefficients, with each approach complimenting the other to achieve further performance improvements.
1390335	Delighting Chinese users: the Google China experience Google entered China market as a late-comer in late-2005, with no local employees, an inadequate product line, and small market share. This talk will discuss Google China's efforts to build up a team, learn about local user needs, apply its global innovation model, and won over users in the past 2.5 years. This talk will cover the results of our user studies, and our key findings about Chinese users for searching and using the Internet. It will also discuss how these findings were applied to our products, and how these products gained traction in the market place. It will also discuss Google's progress in Chinese search relevance, search user experience, and key technology areas where we innovated. This talk will also discuss the process of internationalization - how Google hired locally, and applied its global 20% project approach to encourage truly relevant local innovations. It will discuss several examples of these innovations - from product innovations like the weather map, the input method editor, SMS greetings search, to research innovations like parallel SVM/SVD. Google China's progress dispelled the myth that multinational Internet companies cannot succeed in China. The key ingredients, like in any other success story, are: focus on the customer, embrace the corporate culture, empower local flexibility, and of course, innovate, innovate, innovate.
1390336	Guilt by association as a search principle The exploitation of fundamental invariants is among the most elegant solutions to many computational problems in a wide variety of domains. One of the more powerful approaches to exploit invariants is the principle of "guilt by association". In particular, the principle of guilt by association is the foundation of remote homolog detection, protein function prediction, disease subtype diagnosis, treatment plan prognosis, and other challenges in computational biology. The principle suggests that two entities are in a specific relationship if they exhibit invariant properties underlying that relationship. For example, a protein is predicted to have a particular biological function if it exhibits the underlying invariant properties of that functional group---viz., guilty by association to other members of that functional group through the shared invariant properties. In my talk, I plan to present several facets of guilt by association in the computational prediction of protein function and draw parallels of these facets in information retrieval. Specifically, I plan to touch on the following facets: (a) the issue of chance associations; (b) novel generalizable forms of association; (c) fusion of multiple heterogeneous sources of evidence; (d) the dichotomy of knowing to a high degree of reliability that two entities are in some relationship and yet not knowing what that relationship is. I hope this talk will be, for the informational retrieval community, a window to the opportunities in computational biology that may benefit from the depth and variety of solutions information retrieval has to offer.
1390338	On iterative intelligent medical search Searching for medical information on the Web has become highly popular, but it remains a challenging task because searchers are often uncertain about their exact medical situations and unfamiliar with medical terminology. To address this challenge, we have built an intelligent medical Web search engine called iMed, which uses medical knowledge and an interactive questionnaire to help searchers form queries. This paper focuses on iMed's iterative search advisor, which integrates medical and linguistic knowledge to help searchers improve search results iteratively. Such an iterative process is common for general Web search, and especially crucial for medical Web search, because searchers often miss desired search results due to their limited medical knowledge and the task's inherent difficulty. iMed's iterative search advisor helps the searcher in several ways. First, relevant symptoms and signs are automatically suggested based on the searcher's description of his situation. Second, instead of taking for granted the searcher's answers to the questions, iMed ranks and recommends alternative answers according to their likelihoods of being the correct answers. Third, related MeSH medical phrases are suggested to help the searcher refine his situation description. We demonstrate the effectiveness of iMed's iterative search advisor by evaluating it using real medical case records and USMLE medical exam questions.
1390339	Effective and efficient user interaction for long queries Handling long queries can involve either pruning the query to retain only the important terms (reduction), or expanding the query to include related concepts (expansion). While automatic techniques to do so exist, roughly 25% performance improvements in terms of MAP have been realized in past work through interactive variants. We show that selectively reducing or expanding a query leads to an average improvement of 51% in MAP over the baseline for standard TREC test collections. We demonstrate how user interaction can be used to achieve this improvement. Most interaction techniques present users with a fixed number of options for all queries. We achieve improvements by interacting less with the user, i.e., we present techniques to identify the optimal number of options to present to users, resulting in an interface with an average of 70% fewer options to consider. Previous algorithms supporting interactive reduction and expansion are exponential in nature. To extend their utility to operational environments, we present techniques to make the complexity of the algorithms polynomial. We finally present an analysis of long queries that continue to exhibit poor performance in spite of our new techniques.
1390340	How do users find things with PubMed?: towards automatic utility evaluation with user simulations In the context of document retrieval in the biomedical domain, this paper explores the complex relationship between the quality of initial query results and the overall utility of an interactive retrieval system. We demonstrate that a content-similarity browsing tool can compensate for poor retrieval results, and that the relationship between retrieval performance and overall utility is non-linear. Arguments are advanced with user simulations, which characterize the relevance of documents that a user might encounter with different browsing strategies. With broader implications to IR, this work provides a case study of how user simulations can be exploited as a formative tool for automatic utility evaluation. Simulation-based studies provide researchers with an additional evaluation tool to complement interactive and Cranfield-style experiments.
1390342	Towards breaking the quality curse.: a web-querying approach to web people search. Searching for people on the Web is one of the most common query types to the web search engines today. However, when a person name is queried, the returned webpages often contain documents related to several distinct namesakes who have the queried name. The task of disambiguating and finding the webpages related to the specific person of interest is left to the user. Many Web People Search (WePS) approaches have been developed recently that attempt to automate this disambiguation process. Nevertheless, the disambiguation quality of these techniques leaves a major room for improvement. This paper presents a new server-side WePS approach. It is based on collecting co-occurrence information from theWeb and thus it uses theWeb as an external data source. A skyline-based classification technique is developed for classifying the collected co-occurrence information in order to make clustering decisions. The clustering technique is specifically designed to (a) handle the dominance that exists in data and (b) to adapt to a given clustering quality measure. These properties allow the framework to get a major advantage in terms of result quality over all the latest WePS techniques we are aware of, including all the 18 methods covered in the recent WePS competition [2].
1390343	An unsupervised framework for extracting and normalizing product attributes from multiple web sites We have developed an unsupervised framework for simultaneously extracting and normalizing attributes of products from multiple Web pages originated from different sites. Our framework is designed based on a probabilistic graphical model that can model the page-independent content information and the page-dependent layout information of the text fragments in Web pages. One characteristic of our framework is that previously unseen attributes can be discovered from the clue contained in the layout format of the text fragments. Our framework tackles both extraction and normalization tasks by jointly considering the relationship between the content and layout information. Dirichlet process prior is employed leading to another advantage that the number of discovered product attributes is unlimited. An unsupervised inference algorithm based on variational method is presented. The semantics of the normalized attributes can be visualized by examining the term weights in the model. Our framework can be applied to a wide range of Web mining applications such as product matching and retrieval. We have conducted extensive experiments from four different domains consisting of over 300 Web pages from over 150 different Web sites, demonstrating the robustness and effectiveness of our framework.
1390344	Enhancing web search by promoting multiple search engine use Any given Web search engine may provide higher quality results than others for certain queries. Therefore, it is in users' best interest to utilize multiple search engines. In this paper, we propose and evaluate a framework that maximizes users' search effective-ness by directing them to the engine that yields the best results for the current query. In contrast to prior work on meta-search, we do not advocate for replacement of multiple engines with an aggregate one, but rather facilitate simultaneous use of individual engines. We describe a machine learning approach to supporting switching between search engines and demonstrate its viability at tolerable interruption levels. Our findings have implications for fluid competition between search engines.
1390346	Score standardization for inter-collection comparison of retrieval systems The goal of system evaluation in information retrieval has always been to determine which of a set of systems is superior on a given collection. The tool used to determine system ordering is an evaluation metric such as average precision, which computes relative, collection-specific scores. We argue that a broader goal is achievable. In this paper we demonstrate that, by use of standardization, scores can be substantially independent of a particular collection, allowing systems to be compared even when they have been tested on different collections. Compared to current methods, our techniques provide richer information about system performance, improved clarity in outcome reporting, and greater simplicity in reviewing results from disparate sources.
1390347	The good and the bad system: does the test collection predict users' effectiveness? Test collections are extensively used in the evaluation of information retrieval systems. Crucial to their use is the degree to which results from them predict user effectiveness. At first, past studies did not substantiate a relationship between system and user effectiveness; more recently, however, correlations have begun to emerge. The results of this paper strengthen and extend those findings. We introduce a novel methodology for investigating the relationship, which shows great success in establishing a significant correlation between system and user effectiveness. It is shown that users behave differently and discern differences between pairs of systems that have a very small absolute difference in test collection effectiveness. Our results strengthen the use of test collections in IR evaluation, confirming that users' effectiveness can be predicted successfully.
1390348	Retrieval sensitivity under training using different measures Various measures, such as binary preference (bpref), inferred average precision (infAP), and binary normalised discounted cumulative gain (nDCG) have been proposed as alternatives to mean average precision (MAP) for being less sensitive to the relevance judgements completeness. As the primary aim of any system building is to train the system to respond to user queries in a more robust and stable manner, in this paper, we investigate the importance of the choice of the evaluation measure for training, under different levels of evaluation incompleteness. We simulate evaluation incompleteness by sampling from the relevance assessments. Through large-scale experiments on two standard TREC test collections, we examine retrieval sensitivity when training - i.e. if a training process, based on any of the four discussed measures has an impact on the final retrieval performance. Experimental results show that training by bpref, infAP and nDCG provides significantly better retrieval performance than training by MAP when relevance judgements completeness is extremely low. When relevance judgements completeness increases, the measures behave more similarly.
1390350	Attack resistant collaborative filtering The widespread deployment of recommender systems has lead to user feedback of varying quality. While some users faithfully express their true opinion, many provide noisy ratings which can be detrimental to the quality of the generated recommendations. The presence of noise can violate modeling assumptions and may thus lead to instabilities in estimation and prediction. Even worse, malicious users can deliberately insert attack profiles in an attempt to bias the recommender system to their benefit. While previous research has attempted to study the robustness of various existing Collaborative Filtering (CF) approaches, this remains an unsolved problem. Approaches such as Neighbor Selection algorithms, Association Rules and Robust Matrix Factorization have produced unsatisfactory results. This work describes a new collaborative algorithm based on SVD which is accurate as well as highly stable to shilling. This algorithm exploits previously established SVD based shilling detection algorithms, and combines it with SVD based-CF. Experimental results show a much diminished effect of all kinds of shilling attacks. This work also offers significant improvement over previous Robust Collaborative Filtering frameworks.
1390351	EigenRank: a ranking-oriented approach to collaborative filtering A recommender system must be able to suggest items that are likely to be preferred by the user. In most systems, the degree of preference is represented by a rating score. Given a database of users' past ratings on a set of items, traditional collaborative filtering algorithms are based on predicting the potential ratings that a user would assign to the unrated items so that they can be ranked by the predicted ratings to produce a list of recommended items. In this paper, we propose a collaborative filtering approach that addresses the item ranking problem directly by modeling user preferences derived from the ratings. We measure the similarity between users based on the correlation between their rankings of the items rather than the rating values and propose new collaborative filtering algorithms for ranking items based on the preferences of similar users. Experimental results on real world movie rating data sets show that the proposed approach outperforms traditional collaborative filtering algorithms significantly on the NDCG measure for evaluating ranked results.
1390352	Personalized active learning for collaborative filtering Collaborative Filtering (CF) requires user-rated training examples for statistical inference about the preferences of new users. Active learning strategies identify the most informative set of training examples through minimum interactions with the users. Current active learning approaches in CF make an implicit and unrealistic assumption that a user can provide rating for any queried item. This paper introduces a new approach to the problem which does not make such an assumption. We personalize active learning for the user, and query for only those items which the user can provide rating for. We propose an extended form of Bayesian active learning and use the Aspect Model for CF to illustrate and examine the idea. A comparative evaluation of the new method and a well-established baseline method on benchmark datasets shows statistically significant improvements with our method over the performance of the baseline method that is representative for existing approaches which do not take personalization into account.
1390354	A boosting algorithm for learning bipartite ranking functions with partially labeled data This paper presents a boosting based algorithm for learning a bipartite ranking function (BRF) with partially labeled data. Until now different attempts had been made to build a BRF in a transductive setting, in which the test points are given to the methods in advance as unlabeled data. The proposed approach is a semi-supervised inductive ranking algorithm which, as opposed to transductive algorithms, is able to infer an ordering on new examples that were not used for its training. We evaluate our approach using the TREC-9 Ohsumed and the Reuters-21578 data collections, comparing against two semi-supervised classification algorithms for ROCArea (AUC), uninterpolated average precision (AUP), mean precision@50 (TP) and Precision-Recall (PR) curves. In the most interesting cases where there are an unbalanced number of irrelevant examples over relevant ones, we show our method to produce statistically significant improvements with respect to these ranking measures.
1390355	Directly optimizing evaluation measures in learning to rank One of the central issues in learning to rank for information retrieval is to develop algorithms that construct ranking models by directly optimizing evaluation measures used in information retrieval such as Mean Average Precision (MAP) and Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG). Several such algorithms including SVM map and AdaRank have been proposed and their effectiveness has been verified. However, the relationships between the algorithms are not clear, and furthermore no comparisons have been conducted between them. In this paper, we conduct a study on the approach of directly optimizing evaluation measures in learning to rank for Information Retrieval (IR). We focus on the methods that minimize loss functions upper bounding the basic loss function defined on the IR measures. We first provide a general framework for the study and analyze the existing algorithms of SVM map and AdaRank within the framework. The framework is based on upper bound analysis and two types of upper bounds are discussed. Moreover, we show that we can derive new algorithms on the basis of this analysis and create one example algorithm called PermuRank. We have also conducted comparisons between SVM map , AdaRank, PermuRank, and conventional methods of Ranking SVM and RankBoost, using benchmark datasets. Experimental results show that the methods based on direct optimization of evaluation measures can always outperform conventional methods of Ranking SVM and RankBoost. However, no significant difference exists among the performances of the direct optimization methods themselves.
1390356	Query dependent ranking using K-nearest neighbor Many ranking models have been proposed in information retrieval, and recently machine learning techniques have also been applied to ranking model construction. Most of the existing methods do not take into consideration the fact that significant differences exist between queries, and only resort to a single function in ranking of documents. In this paper, we argue that it is necessary to employ different ranking models for different queries and onduct what we call query-dependent ranking. As the first such attempt, we propose a K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) method for query-dependent ranking. We first consider an online method which creates a ranking model for a given query by using the labeled neighbors of the query in the query feature space and then rank the documents with respect to the query using the created model. Next, we give two offline approximations of the method, which create the ranking models in advance to enhance the efficiency of ranking. And we prove a theory which indicates that the approximations are accurate in terms of difference in loss of prediction, if the learning algorithm used is stable with respect to minor changes in training examples. Our experimental results show that the proposed online and offline methods both outperform the baseline method of using a single ranking function.
1390358	Asymmetric distance estimation with sketches for similarity search in high-dimensional spaces Efficient similarity search in high-dimensional spaces is important to content-based retrieval systems. Recent studies have shown that sketches can effectively approximate L 1 distance in high-dimensional spaces, and that filtering with sketches can speed up similarity search by an order of magnitude. It is a challenge to further reduce the size of sketches, which are already compact, without compromising accuracy of distance estimation. This paper presents an efficient sketch algorithm for similarity search with L 2 distances and a novel asymmetric distance estimation technique. Our new asymmetric estimator takes advantage of the original feature vector of the query to boost the distance estimation accuracy. We also apply this asymmetric method to existing sketches for cosine similarity and L 1 distance. Evaluations with datasets extracted from images and telephone records show that our L 2 sketch outperforms existing methods, and the asymmetric estimators consistently improve the accuracy of different sketch methods. To achieve the same search quality, asymmetric estimators can reduce the sketch size by 10% to 40%.
1390359	ResIn: a combination of results caching and index pruning for high-performance web search engines Results caching is an efficient technique for reducing the query processing load, hence it is commonly used in real search engines. This technique, however, bounds the maximum hit rate due to the large fraction of singleton queries, which is an important limitation. In this paper we propose ResIn - an architecture that uses a combination of res ults caching and in dex pruning to overcome this limitation. We argue that results caching is an inexpensive and efficient way to reduce the query processing load and show that it is cheaper to implement compared to a pruned index. At the same time, we show that index pruning performance is fundamentally affected by the changes in the query traffic that the results cache induces. We experiment with real query logs and a large document collection, and show that the combination of both techniques enables efficient reduction of the query processing costs and thus is practical to use in Web search engines.
1390360	Reorganizing compressed text Recent research has demonstrated beyond doubts the benefits of compressing natural language texts using word-based statistical semistatic compression. Not only it achieves extremely competitive compression rates, but also direct search on the compressed text can be carried out faster than on the original text; indexing based on inverted lists benefits from compression as well. Such compression methods assign a variable-length codeword to each different text word. Some coding methods (Plain Huffman and Restricted Prefix Byte Codes) do not clearly mark codeword boundaries, and hence cannot be accessed at random positions nor searched with the fastest text search algorithms. Other coding methods (Tagged Huffman, End-Tagged Dense Code, or ( s, c )-Dense Code) do mark codeword boundaries, achieving a self-synchronization property that enables fast search and random access, in exchange for some loss in compression effectiveness. In this paper, we show that by just performing a simple reordering of the target symbols in the compressed text (more precisely, reorganizing the bytes into a wavelet-treelike shape) and using little additional space, searching capabilities are greatly improved without a drastic impact in compression and decompression times. With this approach, all the codes achieve synchronism and can be searched fast and accessed at arbitrary points. Moreover, the reordered compressed text becomes an implicitly indexed representation of the text, which can be searched for words in time independent of the text length. That is, we achieve not only fast sequential search time, but indexed search time, for almost no extra space cost. We experiment with three well-known word-based compression techniques with different characteristics (Plain Huffman, End-Tagged Dense Code and Restricted Prefix Byte Codes), and show the searching capabilities achieved by reordering the compressed representation on several corpora. We show that the reordered versions are not only much more efficient than their classical counterparts, but also more efficient than explicit inverted indexes built on the collection, when using the same amount of space.
1390362	User adaptation: good results from poor systems Several recent studies have found only a weak relationship between the performance of a retrieval system and the "success" achievable by human searchers. We hypothesize that searchers are successful precisely because they alter their behavior. To explore the possible causal relation between system performance and search behavior, we control system performance, hoping to elicit adaptive search behaviors. 36 subjects each completed 12 searches using either a standard system or one of two degraded systems. Using a general linear model, we isolate the main effect of system performance, by measuring and removing main effects due to searcher variation, topic difficulty, and the position of each search in the time series. We find that searchers using our degraded systems are as successful as those using the standard system, but that, in achieving this success, they alter their behavior in ways that could be measured, in real time, by a suitably instrumented system. Our findings suggest, quite generally, that some aspects of behavioral dynamics may provide unobtrusive indicators of system performance.
1390363	Exploring folksonomy for personalized search As a social service in Web 2.0, folksonomy provides the users the ability to save and organize their bookmarks online with "social annotations" or "tags". Social annotations are high quality descriptors of the web pages' topics as well as good indicators of web users' interests. We propose a personalized search framework to utilize folksonomy for personalized search. Specifically, three properties of folksonomy, namely the categorization, keyword, and structure property, are explored. In the framework, the rank of a web page is decided not only by the term matching between the query and the web page's content but also by the topic matching between the user's interests and the web page's topics. In the evaluation, we propose an automatic evaluation framework based on folksonomy data, which is able to help lighten the common high cost in personalized search evaluations. A series of experiments are conducted using two heterogeneous data sets, one crawled from Del.icio.us and the other from Dogear. Extensive experimental results show that our personalized search approach can significantly improve the search quality.
1390364	To personalize or not to personalize: modeling queries with variation in user intent In most previous work on personalized search algorithms, the results for all queries are personalized in the same manner. However, as we show in this paper, there is a lot of variation across queries in the benefits that can be achieved through personalization. For some queries, everyone who issues the query is looking for the same thing. For other queries, different people want very different results even though they express their need in the same way. We examine variability in user intent using both explicit relevance judgments and large-scale log analysis of user behavior patterns. While variation in user behavior is correlated with variation in explicit relevance judgments the same query, there are many other factors, such as result entropy, result quality, and task that can also affect the variation in behavior. We characterize queries using a variety of features of the query, the results returned for the query, and people's interaction history with the query. Using these features we build predictive models to identify queries that can benefit from personalization.
1390366	The opposite of smoothing: a language model approach to ranking query-specific document clusters Exploiting information induced from (query-specific) clustering of top-retrieved documents has long been proposed as means for improving precision at the very top ranks of the returned results. We present a novel language model approach to ranking query-specific clusters by the presumed percentage of relevant documents that they contain. While most previous cluster ranking approaches focus on the cluster as a whole, our model also exploits information induced from documents associated with the cluster. Our model substantially outperforms previous approaches for identifying clusters containing a high relevant-document percentage. Furthermore, using the model to produce document ranking yields precision-at-top-ranks performance that is consistently better than that of the initial ranking upon which clustering is performed; the performance also favorably compares with that of a state-of-the-art pseudo-feedback retrieval method.
1390367	Enhancing text clustering by leveraging Wikipedia semantics Most traditional text clustering methods are based on "bag of words" ( BOW ) representation based on frequency statistics in a set of documents. BOW , however, ignores the important information on the semantic relationships between key terms. To overcome this problem, several methods have been proposed to enrich text representation with external resource in the past, such as WordNet. However, many of these approaches suffer from some limitations: 1) WordNet has limited coverage and has a lack of effective word-sense disambiguation ability; 2) Most of the text representation enrichment strategies, which append or replace document terms with their hypernym and synonym, are overly simple. In this paper, to overcome these deficiencies, we first propose a way to build a concept thesaurus based on the semantic relations (synonym, hypernym, and associative relation) extracted from Wikipedia. Then, we develop a unified framework to leverage these semantic relations in order to enhance traditional content similarity measure for text clustering. The experimental results on Reuters and OHSUMED datasets show that with the help of Wikipedia thesaurus, the clustering performance of our method is improved as compared to previous methods. In addition, with the optimized weights for hypernym, synonym, and associative concepts that are tuned with the help of a few labeled data users provided, the clustering performance can be further improved.
1390368	Knowledge transformation from word space to document space In most IR clustering problems, we directly cluster the documents, working in the document space, using cosine similarity between documents as the similarity measure. In many real-world applications, however, we usually have knowledge on the word side and wish to transform this knowledge to the document (concept) side. In this paper, we provide a mechanism for this knowledge transformation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first model for such type of knowledge transformation. This model uses a nonnegative matrix factorization model X = FSG T , where X is the word document semantic matrix, F is the posterior probability of a word belonging to a word cluster and represents knowledge in the word space, G is the posterior probability of a document belonging to a document cluster and represents knowledge in the document space, and S is a scaled matrix factor which provides a condensed view of X . We show how knowledge on words can improve document clustering, i.e, knowledge in the word space is transformed into the document space. We perform extensive experiments to validate our approach.
1390370	A study of learning a merge model for multilingual information retrieval This paper proposes a learning approach for the merging process in multilingual information retrieval (MLIR). To conduct the learning approach, we also present a large number of features that may influence the MLIR merging process; these features are mainly extracted from three levels: query, document, and translation. After the feature extraction, we then use the FRank ranking algorithm to construct a merge model; to our knowledge, this practice is the first attempt to use a learning-based ranking algorithm to construct a merge model for MLIR merging. In our experiments, three test collections for the task of crosslingual information retrieval (CLIR) in NTCIR3, 4, and 5 are employed to assess the performance of our proposed method; moreover, several merging methods are also carried out for a comparison, including traditional merging methods, the 2-step merging strategy, and the merging method based on logistic regression. The experimental results show that our method can significantly improve merging quality on two different types of datasets. In addition to the effectiveness, through the merge model generated by FRank, our method can further identify key factors that influence the merging process; this information might provide us more insight and understanding into MLIR merging.
1390371	Bilingual topic aspect classification with a few training examples This paper explores topic aspect (i.e., subtopic or facet) classification for English and Chinese collections. The evaluation model assumes a bilingual user who has found documents on a topic and identified a few passages in each language on aspects of that topic. Additional passages are then automatically labeled using a k-Nearest-Neighbor classifier and local (i.e., result set) Latent Semantic Analysis. Experiments show that when few training examples are available in either language, classification using training examples from both languages can often achieve higher effectiveness than using training examples from just one language. When the total number of training examples is held constant, classification effectiveness correlates positively with the fraction of same-language training examples in the training set. These results suggest that supervised classification can benefit from hand-annotating a few same-language examples, and that when performing classification in bilingual collections it is useful to label some examples in each language.
1390372	Crosslingual location search Address geocoding, the process of finding the map location for a structured postal address, is a relatively well-studied problem. In this paper we consider the more general problem of crosslingual location search, where the queries are not limited to postal addresses, and the language and script used in the search query is different from the one in which the underlying data is stored. To the best of our knowledge, our system is the first crosslingual location search system that is able to geocode complex addresses. We use a statistical machine transliteration system to convert location names from the script of the query to that of the stored data. However, we show that it is not sufficient to simply feed the resulting transliterations into a monolingual geocoding system, as the ambiguity inherent in the conversion drastically expands the location search space and significantly lowers the quality of results. The strength of our approach lies in its integrated, end-to-end nature: we use abstraction and fuzzy search (in the text domain) to achieve maximum coverage despite transliteration ambiguities, while applying spatial constraints (in the geographic domain) to focus only on viable interpretations of the query. Our experiments with structured and unstructured queries in a set of diverse languages and scripts (Arabic, English, Hindi and Japanese) searching for locations in different regions of the world, show full crosslingual location search accuracy at levels comparable to that of commercial monolingual systems. We achieve these levels of performance using techniques that may be applied to crosslingual searches in any language/script, and over arbitrary spatial data.
1390374	A study of methods for negative relevance feedback Negative relevance feedback is a special case of relevance feedback where we do not have any positive example; this often happens when the topic is difficult and the search results are poor. Although in principle any standard relevance feedback technique can be applied to negative relevance feedback, it may not perform well due to the lack of positive examples. In this paper, we conduct a systematic study of methods for negative relevance feedback. We compare a set of representative negative feedback methods, covering vector-space models and language models, as well as several special heuristics for negative feedback. Evaluating negative feedback methods requires a test set with sufficient difficult topics, but there are not many naturally difficult topics in the existing test collections. We use two sampling strategies to adapt a test collection with easy topics to evaluate negative feedback. Experiment results on several TREC collections show that language model based negative feedback methods are generally more effective than those based on vector-space models, and using multiple negative models is an effective heuristic for negative feedback. Our results also show that it is feasible to adapt test collections with easy topics for evaluating negative feedback methods through sampling.
1390375	A bayesian logistic regression model for active relevance feedback Relevance feedback, which traditionally uses the terms in the relevant documents to enrich the user's initial query, is an effective method for improving retrieval performance. The traditional relevance feedback algorithms lead to overfitting because of the limited amount of training data and large term space. This paper introduces an online Bayesian logistic regression algorithm to incorporate relevance feedback information. The new approach addresses the overfitting problem by projecting the original feature space onto a more compact set which retains the necessary information. The new set of features consist of the original retrieval score, the distance to the relevant documents and the distance to non-relevant documents. To reduce the human evaluation effort in ascertaining relevance, we introduce a new active learning algorithm based on variance reduction to actively select documents for user evaluation. The new active learning algorithm aims to select feedback documents to reduce the model variance. The variance reduction approach leads to capturing relevance, diversity and uncertainty of the unlabeled documents in a principled manner. These are the critical factors of active learning indicated in previous literature. Experiments with several TREC datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
1390376	A cluster-based resampling method for pseudo-relevance feedback Typical pseudo-relevance feedback methods assume the top-retrieved documents are relevant and use these pseudo-relevant documents to expand terms. The initial retrieval set can, however, contain a great deal of noise. In this paper, we present a cluster-based resampling method to select better pseudo-relevant documents based on the relevance model. The main idea is to use document clusters to find dominant documents for the initial retrieval set, and to repeatedly feed the documents to emphasize the core topics of a query. Experimental results on large-scale web TREC collections show significant improvements over the relevance model. For justification of the resampling approach, we examine relevance density of feedback documents. A higher relevance density will result in greater retrieval accuracy, ultimately approaching true relevance feedback. The resampling approach shows higher relevance density than the baseline relevance model on all collections, resulting in better retrieval accuracy in pseudo-relevance feedback. This result indicates that the proposed method is effective for pseudo-relevance feedback.
1390377	Selecting good expansion terms for pseudo-relevance feedback Pseudo-relevance feedback assumes that most frequent terms in the pseudo-feedback documents are useful for the retrieval. In this study, we re-examine this assumption and show that it does not hold in reality - many expansion terms identified in traditional approaches are indeed unrelated to the query and harmful to the retrieval. We also show that good expansion terms cannot be distinguished from bad ones merely on their distributions in the feedback documents and in the whole collection. We then propose to integrate a term classification process to predict the usefulness of expansion terms. Multiple additional features can be integrated in this process. Our experiments on three TREC collections show that retrieval effectiveness can be much improved when term classification is used. In addition, we also demonstrate that good terms should be identified directly according to their possible impact on the retrieval effectiveness, i.e. using supervised learning, instead of unsupervised learning.
1390379	Learning to rank with partially-labeled data Ranking algorithms, whose goal is to appropriately order a set of objects/documents, are an important component of information retrieval systems. Previous work on ranking algorithms has focused on cases where only labeled data is available for training (i.e. supervised learning). In this paper, we consider the question whether unlabeled (test) data can be exploited to improve ranking performance. We present a framework for transductive learning of ranking functions and show that the answer is affirmative. Our framework is based on generating better features from the test data (via KernelPCA) and incorporating such features via Boosting, thus learning different ranking functions adapted to the individual test queries. We evaluate this method on the LETOR (TREC, OHSUMED) dataset and demonstrate significant improvements.
1390380	Learning to rank with SoftRank and Gaussian processes In this paper we address the issue of learning to rank for document retrieval using Thurstonian models based on sparse Gaussian processes. Thurstonian models represent each document for a given query as a probability distribution in a score space; these distributions over scores naturally give rise to distributions over document rankings. However, in general we do not have observed rankings with which to train the model; instead, each document in the training set is judged to have a particular relevance level: for example "Bad", "Fair", "Good", or "Excellent". The performance of the model is then evaluated using information retrieval (IR) metrics such as Normalised Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG). Recently Taylor et al. presented a method called SoftRank which allows the direct gradient optimisation of a smoothed version of NDCG using a Thurstonian model. In this approach, document scores are represented by the outputs of a neural network, and score distributions are created artificially by adding random noise to the scores. The SoftRank mechanism is a general one; it can be applied to different IR metrics, and make use of different underlying models. In this paper we extend the SoftRank framework to make use of the score uncertainties which are naturally provided by a Gaussian process (GP), which is a probabilistic non-linear regression model. We further develop the model by using sparse Gaussian process techniques, which give improved performance and efficiency, and show competitive results against baseline methods when tested on the publicly available LETOR OHSUMED data set. We also explore how the available uncertainty information can be used in prediction and how it affects model performance.
1390381	Learning to rank at query-time using association rules Some applications have to present their results in the form of ranked lists. This is the case of many information retrieval applications, in which documents must be sorted according to their relevance to a given query. This has led the interest of the information retrieval community in methods that automatically learn effective ranking functions. In this paper we propose a novel method which uncovers patterns (or rules) in the training data associating features of the document with its relevance to the query, and then uses the discovered rules to rank documents. To address typical problems that are inherent to the utilization of association rules (such as missing rules and rule explosion), the proposed method generates rules on a demand-driven basis, at query-time. The result is an extremely fast and effective ranking method. We conducted a systematic evaluation of the proposed method using the LETOR benchmark collections. We show that generating rules on a demand-driven basis can boost ranking performance, providing gains ranging from 12% to 123%, outperforming the state-of-the-art methods that learn to rank, with no need of time-consuming and laborious pre-processing. As a highlight, we also show that additional information, such as query terms, can make the generated rules more discriminative, further improving ranking performance.
1390382	Learning to rank with ties Designing effective ranking functions is a core problem for information retrieval and Web search since the ranking functions directly impact the relevance of the search results. The problem has been the focus of much of the research at the intersection of Web search and machine learning, and learning ranking functions from preference data in particular has recently attracted much interest. The objective of this paper is to empirically examine several objective functions that can be used for learning ranking functions from preference data. Specifically, we investigate the roles of ties in the learning process. By ties, we mean preference judgments that two documents have equal degree of relevance with respect to a query. This type of data has largely been ignored or not properly modeled in the past. In this paper, we analyze the properties of ties and develop novel learning frameworks which combine ties and preference data using statistical paired comparison models to improve the performance of learned ranking functions. The resulting optimization problems explicitly incorporating ties and preference data are solved using gradient boosting methods. Experimental studies are conducted using three publicly available data sets which demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed new methods.
1390384	Query-sensitive mutual reinforcement chain and its application in query-oriented multi-document summarization Sentence ranking is the issue of most concern in document summarization. Early researchers have presented the mutual reinforcement principle (MR) between sentence and term for simultaneous key phrase and salient sentence extraction in generic single-document summarization. In this work, we extend the MR to the mutual reinforcement chain (MRC) of three different text granularities, i.e., document, sentence and terms. The aim is to provide a general reinforcement framework and a formal mathematical modeling for the MRC. Going one step further, we incorporate the query influence into the MRC to cope with the need for query-oriented multi-document summarization. While the previous summarization approaches often calculate the similarity regardless of the query, we develop a query-sensitive similarity to measure the affinity between the pair of texts. When evaluated on the DUC 2005 dataset, the experimental results suggest that the proposed query-sensitive MRC (Qs-MRC) is a promising approach for summarization.
1390385	Comments-oriented document summarization: understanding documents with readers' feedback Comments left by readers on Web documents contain valuable information that can be utilized in different information retrieval tasks including document search, visualization, and summarization. In this paper, we study the problem of comments-oriented document summarization and aim to summarize a Web document (e.g., a blog post) by considering not only its content, but also the comments left by its readers. We identify three relations (namely, topic, quotation, and mention ) by which comments can be linked to one another, and model the relations in three graphs. The importance of each comment is then scored by: (i) graph-based method , where the three graphs are merged into a multi-relation graph; (ii) tensor-based method , where the three graphs are used to construct a 3rd-order tensor. To generate a comments-oriented summary, we extract sentences from the given Web document using either feature-biased approach or uniform-document approach . The former scores sentences to bias keywords derived from comments; while the latter scores sentences uniformly with comments. In our experiments using a set of blog posts with manually labeled sentences, our proposed summarization methods utilizing comments showed significant improvement over those not using comments. The methods using feature-biased sentence extraction approach were observed to outperform that using uniform-document approach.
1390386	Multi-document summarization using cluster-based link analysis The Markov Random Walk model has been recently exploited for multi-document summarization by making use of the link relationships between sentences in the document set, under the assumption that all the sentences are indistinguishable from each other. However, a given document set usually covers a few topic themes with each theme represented by a cluster of sentences. The topic themes are usually not equally important and the sentences in an important theme cluster are deemed more salient than the sentences in a trivial theme cluster. This paper proposes the Cluster-based Conditional Markov Random Walk Model (ClusterCMRW) and the Cluster-based HITS Model (ClusterHITS) to fully leverage the cluster-level information. Experimental results on the DUC2001 and DUC2002 datasets demonstrate the good effectiveness of our proposed summarization models. The results also demonstrate that the ClusterCMRW model is more robust than the ClusterHITS model, with respect to different cluster numbers.
1390387	Multi-document summarization via sentence-level semantic analysis and symmetric matrix factorization Multi-document summarization aims to create a compressed summary while retaining the main characteristics of the original set of documents. Many approaches use statistics and machine learning techniques to extract sentences from documents. In this paper, we propose a new multi-document summarization framework based on sentence-level semantic analysis and symmetric non-negative matrix factorization. We first calculate sentence-sentence similarities using semantic analysis and construct the similarity matrix. Then symmetric matrix factorization, which has been shown to be equivalent to normalized spectral clustering, is used to group sentences into clusters. Finally, the most informative sentences are selected from each group to form the summary. Experimental results on DUC2005 and DUC2006 data sets demonstrate the improvement of our proposed framework over the implemented existing summarization systems. A further study on the factors that benefit the high performance is also conducted.
1390389	Algorithmic mediation for collaborative exploratory search We describe a new approach to information retrieval: algorithmic mediation for intentional, synchronous collaborative exploratory search. Using our system, two or more users with a common information need search together, simultaneously. The collaborative system provides tools, user interfaces and, most importantly, algorithmically-mediated retrieval to focus, enhance and augment the team's search and communication activities. Collaborative search outperformed post hoc merging of similarly instrumented single user runs. Algorithmic mediation improved both collaborative search (allowing a team of searchers to find relevant information more efficiently and effectively), and exploratory search (allowing the searchers to find relevant information that cannot be found while working individually).
1390390	Exploiting correlated keywords to improve approximate information filtering Information filtering, also referred to as publish/subscribe, complements one-time searching since users are able to subscribe to information sources and be notified whenever new documents of interest are published. In approximate information filtering only selected information sources, that are likely to publish documents relevant to the user interests in the future, are monitored. To achieve this functionality, a subscriber exploits statistical metadata to identify promising publishers and index its continuous query only in those publishers. The statistics are maintained in a directory, usually on a per-keyword basis, thus disregarding possible correlations among keywords. Using this coarse information, poor publisher selection may lead to poor filtering performance and thus loss of interesting documents. 1 Based on the above observation, this work extends query routing techniques from the domain of distributed information retrieval in peer-to-peer (P2P) networks, and provides new algorithms for exploiting the correlation among keywords in a filtering setting. We develop and evaluate two algorithms based on single-key and multi-key statistics and utilize two different synopses (Hash Sketches and KMV synopses) to compactly represent publishers. Our experimental evaluation using two real-life corpora with web and blog data demonstrates the filtering effectiveness of both approaches and highlights the different tradeoffs.
1390392	A user browsing model to predict search engine click data from past observations. Search engine click logs provide an invaluable source of relevance information but this information is biased because we ignore which documents from the result list the users have actually seen before and after they clicked. Otherwise, we could estimate document relevance by simple counting. In this paper, we propose a set of assumptions on user browsing behavior that allows the estimation of the probability that a document is seen, thereby providing an unbiased estimate of document relevance. To train, test and compare our model to the best alternatives described in the Literature, we gather a large set of real data and proceed to an extensive cross-validation experiment. Our solution outperforms very significantly all previous models. As a side effect, we gain insight into the browsing behavior of users and we can compare it to the conclusions of an eye-tracking experiments by Joachims et al. [12]. In particular, our findings confirm that a user almost always see the document directly after a clicked document. They also explain why documents situated just after a very relevant document are clicked more often.
1390393	Learning query intent from regularized click graphs This work presents the use of click graphs in improving query intent classifiers, which are critical if vertical search and general-purpose search services are to be offered in a unified user interface. Previous works on query classification have primarily focused on improving feature representation of queries, e.g. , by augmenting queries with search engine results. In this work, we investigate a completely orthogonal approach --- instead of enriching feature representation, we aim at drastically increasing the amounts of training data by semi-supervised learning with click graphs. Specifically, we infer class memberships of unlabeled queries from those of labeled ones according to their proximities in a click graph. Moreover, we regularize the learning with click graphs by content-based classification to avoid propagating erroneous labels. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms in two different applications, product intent and job intent classification. In both cases, we expand the training data with automatically labeled queries by over two orders of magnitude, leading to significant improvements in classification performance. An additional finding is that with a large amount of training data obtained in this fashion, classifiers using only query words/phrases as features can work remarkably well.
1390394	Retrieval and feedback models for blog feed search Blog feed search poses different and interesting challenges from traditional ad hoc document retrieval. The units of retrieval, the blogs, are collections of documents, the blog posts. In this work we adapt a state-of-the-art federated search model to the feed retrieval task, showing a significant improvement over algorithms based on the best performing submissions in the TREC 2007 Blog Distillation task[12]. We also show that typical query expansion techniques such as pseudo-relevance feedback using the blog corpus do not provide any significant performance improvement and in many cases dramatically hurt performance. We perform an in-depth analysis of the behavior of pseudo-relevance feedback for this task and develop a novel query expansion technique using the link structure in Wikipedia. This query expansion technique provides significant and consistent performance improvements for this task, yielding a 22% and 14% improvement in MAP over the unexpanded query for our baseline and federated algorithms respectively.
1390396	Learning to reduce the semantic gap in web image retrieval and annotation We study in this paper the problem of bridging the semantic gap between low-level image features and high-level semantic concepts, which is the key hindrance in content-based image retrieval. Piloted by the rich textual information of Web images, the proposed framework tries to learn a new distance measure in the visual space, which can be used to retrieve more semantically relevant images for any unseen query image. The framework differentiates with traditional distance metric learning methods in the following ways. 1) A ranking-based distance metric learning method is proposed for image retrieval problem, by optimizing the leave-one-out retrieval performance on the training data. 2) To be scalable, millions of images together with rich textual information have been crawled from the Web to learn the similarity measure, and the learning framework particularly considers the indexing problem to ensure the retrieval efficiency. 3) To alleviate the noises in the unbalanced labels of images and fully utilize the textual information, a Latent Dirichlet Allocation based topic-level text model is introduced to define pairwise semantic similarity between any two images. The learnt distance measure can be directly applied to applications such as content-based image retrieval and search-based image annotation. Experimental results on the two applications in a two million Web image database show both the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed framework.
1390397	A lattice-based approach to query-by-example spoken document retrieval Recent efforts on the task of spoken document retrieval (SDR) have made use of speech lattices: speech lattices contain information about alternative speech transcription hypotheses other than the 1-best transcripts, and this information can improve retrieval accuracy by overcoming recognition errors present in the 1-best transcription. In this paper, we look at using lattices for the query-by-example spoken document retrieval task - retrieving documents from a speech corpus, where the queries are themselves in the form of complete spoken documents (query exemplars). We extend a previously proposed method for SDR with short queries to the query-by-example task. Specifically, we use a retrieval method based on statistical modeling: we compute expected word counts from document and query lattices, estimate statistical models from these counts, and compute relevance scores as divergences between these models. Experimental results on a speech corpus of conversational English show that the use of statistics from lattices for both documents and query exemplars results in better retrieval accuracy than using only 1-best transcripts for either documents, or queries, or both. In addition, we investigate the effect of stop word removal which further improves retrieval accuracy. To our knowledge, our work is the first to have used a lattice-based approach to query-by-example spoken document retrieval.
1390399	A few examples go a long way: constructing query models from elaborate query formulations We address a specific enterprise document search scenario, where the information need is expressed in an elaborate manner. In our scenario, information needs are expressed using a short query (of a few keywords) together with examples of key reference pages. Given this setup, we investigate how the examples can be utilized to improve the end-to-end performance on the document retrieval task. Our approach is based on a language modeling framework, where the query model is modified to resemble the example pages. We compare several methods for sampling expansion terms from the example pages to support query-dependent and query-independent query expansion; the latter is motivated by the wish to increase "aspect recall", and attempts to uncover aspects of the information need not captured by the query. For evaluation purposes we use the CSIRO data set created for the TREC 2007 Enterprise track. The best performance is achieved by query models based on query-independent sampling of expansion terms from the example documents.
1390400	A unified and discriminative model for query refinement This paper addresses the issue of query refinement, which involves reformulating ill-formed search queries in order to enhance relevance of search results. Query refinement typically includes a number of tasks such as spelling error correction, word splitting, word merging, phrase segmentation, word stemming, and acronym expansion. In previous research, such tasks were addressed separately or through employing generative models. This paper proposes employing a unified and discriminative model for query refinement. Specifically, it proposes a Conditional Random Field (CRF) model suitable for the problem, referred to as Conditional Random Field for Query Refinement (CRF-QR). Given a sequence of query words, CRF-QR predicts a sequence of refined query words as well as corresponding refinement operations. In that sense, CRF-QR differs greatly from conventional CRF models. Two types of CRF-QR models, namely a basic model and an extended model are introduced. One merit of employing CRF-QR is that different refinement tasks can be performed simultaneously and thus the accuracy of refinement can be enhanced. Furthermore, the advantages of discriminative models over generative models can be fully leveraged. Experimental results demonstrate that CRF-QR can significantly outperform baseline methods. Furthermore, when CRF-QR is used in web search, a significant improvement of relevance can be obtained.
1390401	Query expansion using gaze-based feedback on the subdocument level We examine the effect of incorporating gaze-based attention feedback from the user on personalizing the search process. Employing eye tracking data, we keep track of document parts the user read in some way. We use this information on the subdocument level as implicit feedback for query expansion and reranking. We evaluated three different variants incorporating gaze data on the subdocument level and compared them against a baseline based on context on the document level. Our results show that considering reading behavior as feedback yields powerful improvements of the search result accuracy of ca. 32% in the general case. However, the extent of the improvements varies depending on the internal structure of the viewed documents and the type of the current information need.
1390403	Affective feedback: an investigation into the role of emotions in the information seeking process User feedback is considered to be a critical element in the information seeking process, especially in relation to relevance assessment. Current feedback techniques determine content relevance with respect to the cognitive and situational levels of interaction that occurs between the user and the retrieval system. However, apart from real-life problems and information objects, users interact with intentions, motivations and feelings, which can be seen as critical aspects of cognition and decision-making. The study presented in this paper serves as a starting point to the exploration of the role of emotions in the information seeking process. Results show that the latter not only interweave with different physiological, psychological and cognitive processes, but also form distinctive patterns, according to specific task, and according to specific user.
1390404	Optimizing relevance and revenue in ad search: a query substitution approach The primary business model behind Web search is based on textual advertising, where contextually relevant ads are displayed alongside search results. We address the problem of selecting these ads so that they are both relevant to the queries and profitable to the search engine, showing that optimizing ad relevance and revenue is not equivalent. Selecting the best ads that satisfy these constraints also naturally incurs high computational costs, and time constraints can lead to reduced relevance and profitability. We propose a novel two-stage approach, which conducts most of the analysis ahead of time. An offine preprocessing phase leverages additional knowledge that is impractical to use in real time, and rewrites frequent queries in a way that subsequently facilitates fast and accurate online matching. Empirical evaluation shows that our method optimized for relevance matches a state-of-the-art method while improving expected revenue. When optimizing for revenue, we see even more substantial improvements in expected revenue.
1390405	A generation model to unify topic relevance and lexicon-based sentiment for opinion retrieval Opinion retrieval is a task of growing interest in social life and academic research, which is to find relevant and opinionate documents according to a user's query. One of the key issues is how to combine a document's opinionate score (the ranking score of to what extent it is subjective or objective) and topic relevance score. Current solutions to document ranking in opinion retrieval are generally ad-hoc linear combination, which is short of theoretical foundation and careful analysis. In this paper, we focus on lexicon-based opinion retrieval. A novel generation model that unifies topic-relevance and opinion generation by a quadratic combination is proposed in this paper. With this model, the relevance-based ranking serves as the weighting factor of the lexicon-based sentiment ranking function, which is essentially different from the popular heuristic linear combination approaches. The effect of different sentiment dictionaries is also discussed. Experimental results on TREC blog datasets show the significant effectiveness of the proposed unified model. Improvements of 28.1% and 40.3% have been obtained in terms of MAP and p@10 respectively. The conclusion is not limited to blog environment. Besides the unified generation model, another contribution is that our work demonstrates that in the opinion retrieval task, a Bayesian approach to combining multiple ranking functions is superior to using a linear combination. It is also applicable to other result re-ranking applications in similar scenario.
1390407	Discriminative probabilistic models for passage based retrieval The approach of using passage-level evidence for document retrieval has shown mixed results when it is applied to a variety of test beds with different characteristics. One main reason of the inconsistent performance is that there exists no unified framework to model the evidence of individual passages within a document. This paper proposes two probabilistic models to formally model the evidence of a set of top ranked passages in a document. The first probabilistic model follows the retrieval criterion that a document is relevant if any passage in the document is relevant, and models each passage independently. The second probabilistic model goes a step further and incorporates the similarity correlations among the passages. Both models are trained in a discriminative manner. Furthermore, we present a combination approach to combine the ranked lists of document retrieval and passage-based retrieval. An extensive set of experiments have been conducted on four different TREC test beds to show the effectiveness of the proposed discriminative probabilistic models for passage-based retrieval. The proposed algorithms are compared with a state-of-the-art document retrieval algorithm and a language model approach for passage-based retrieval. Furthermore, our combined approach has been shown to provide better results than both document retrieval and passage-based retrieval approaches.
1390408	A new probabilistic retrieval model based on the dirichlet compound multinomial distribution The classical probabilistic models attempt to capture the Ad hoc information retrieval problem within a rigorous probabilistic framework. It has long been recognized that the primary obstacle to effective performance of the probabilistic models is the need to estimate a relevance model. The Dirichlet compound multinomial (DCM) distribution, which relies on hierarchical Bayesian modeling techniques, or the Polya Urn scheme, is a more appropriate generative model than the traditional multinomial distribution for text documents. We explore a new probabilistic model based on the DCM distribution, which enables efficient retrieval and accurate ranking. Because the DCM distribution captures the dependency of repetitive word occurrences, the new probabilistic model is able to model the concavity of the score function more effectively. To avoid the empirical tuning of retrieval parameters, we design several parameter estimation algorithms to automatically set model parameters. Additionally, we propose a pseudo-relevance feedback algorithm based on the latent mixture modeling of the Dirichlet compound multinomial distribution to further improve retrieval accuracy. Finally, our experiments show that both the baseline probabilistic retrieval algorithm based on the DCM distribution and the corresponding pseudo-relevance feedback algorithm outperform the existing language modeling systems on several TREC retrieval tasks.
1390409	TF-IDF uncovered: a study of theories and probabilities Interpretations of TF-IDF are based on binary independence retrieval, Poisson, information theory, and language modelling. This paper contributes a review of existing interpretations, and then, TF-IDF is systematically related to the probabilities P ( q | d ) and P ( d | q ). Two approaches are explored: a space of independent , and a space of disjoint terms. For independent terms, an "extreme" query/non-query term assumption uncovers TF-IDF, and an analogy of P ( d | q ) and the probabilistic odds O ( r | d , q ) mirrors relevance feedback. For disjoint terms, a relationship between probability theory and TF-IDF is established through the integral + 1/ x d x = log x . This study uncovers components such as divergence from randomness and pivoted document length to be inherent parts of a document-query independence (DQI) measure, and interestingly, an integral of the DQI over the term occurrence probability leads to TF-IDF.
1390411	Separate and inequal: preserving heterogeneity in topical authority flows Web pages, like people, are often known by others in a variety of contexts. When those contexts are sufficiently distinct, a page's importance may be better represented by multiple domains of authority, rather than by one that indiscriminately mixes reputations. In this work we determine domains of authority by examining the contexts in which a page is cited. However, we find that it is not enough to determine separate domains of authority; our model additionally determines the local flow of authority based upon the relative similarity of the source and target authority domains. In this way, we differentiate both incoming and outgoing hyperlinks by topicality and importance rather than treating them indiscriminately. We find that this approach compares favorably to other topical ranking methods on two real-world datasets and produces an approximately 10% improvement in precision and quality of the top ten results over PageRank.
1390412	BrowseRank: letting web users vote for page importance This paper proposes a new method for computing page importance, referred to as BrowseRank. The conventional approach to compute page importance is to exploit the link graph of the web and to build a model based on that graph. For instance, PageRank is such an algorithm, which employs a discrete-time Markov process as the model. Unfortunately, the link graph might be incomplete and inaccurate with respect to data for determining page importance, because links can be easily added and deleted by web content creators. In this paper, we propose computing page importance by using a 'user browsing graph' created from user behavior data. In this graph, vertices represent pages and directed edges represent transitions between pages in the users' web browsing history. Furthermore, the lengths of staying time spent on the pages by users are also included. The user browsing graph is more reliable than the link graph for inferring page importance. This paper further proposes using the continuous-time Markov process on the user browsing graph as a model and computing the stationary probability distribution of the process as page importance. An efficient algorithm for this computation has also been devised. In this way, we can leverage hundreds of millions of users' implicit voting on page importance. Experimental results show that BrowseRank indeed outperforms the baseline methods such as PageRank and TrustRank in several tasks.
1390413	Exploring traversal strategy for web forum crawling In this paper, we study the problem of Web forum crawling. Web forum has now become an important data source of many Web applications; while forum crawling is still a challenging task due to complex in-site link structures and login controls of most forum sites. Without carefully selecting the traversal path, a generic crawler usually downloads many duplicate and invalid pages from forums, and thus wastes both the precious bandwidth and the limited storage space. To crawl forum data more effectively and efficiently, in this paper, we propose an automatic approach to exploring an appropriate traversal strategy to direct the crawling of a given target forum. In detail, the traversal strategy consists of the identification of the skeleton links and the detection of the page-flipping links . The skeleton links instruct the crawler to only crawl valuable pages and meanwhile avoid duplicate and uninformative ones; and the page-flipping links tell the crawler how to completely download a long discussion thread which is usually shown in multiple pages in Web forums. The extensive experimental results on several forums show encouraging performance of our approach. Following the discovered traversal strategy, our forum crawler can archive more informative pages in comparison with previous related work and a commercial generic crawler.
1390415	Finding question-answer pairs from online forums Online forums contain a huge amount of valuable user generated content. In this paper we address the problem of extracting question-answer pairs from forums. Question-answer pairs extracted from forums can be used to help Question Answering services (e.g. Yahoo! Answers) among other applications. We propose a sequential patterns based classification method to detect questions in a forum thread, and a graph based propagation method to detect answers for questions in the same thread. Experimental results show that our techniques are very promising.
1390416	Retrieval models for question and answer archives Retrieval in a question and answer archive involves finding good answers for a user's question. In contrast to typical document retrieval, a retrieval model for this task can exploit question similarity as well as ranking the associated answers. In this paper, we propose a retrieval model that combines a translation-based language model for the question part with a query likelihood approach for the answer part. The proposed model incorporates word-to-word translation probabilities learned through exploiting different sources of information. Experiments show that the proposed translation based language model for the question part outperforms baseline methods significantly. By combining with the query likelihood language model for the answer part, substantial additional effectiveness improvements are obtained.
1390417	Predicting information seeker satisfaction in community question answering Question answering communities such as Naver and Yahoo! Answers have emerged as popular, and often effective, means of information seeking on the web. By posting questions for other participants to answer, information seekers can obtain specific answers to their questions. Users of popular portals such as Yahoo! Answers already have submitted millions of questions and received hundreds of millions of answers from other participants. However, it may also take hours --and sometime days-- until a satisfactory answer is posted. In this paper we introduce the problem of predicting information seeker satisfaction in collaborative question answering communities, where we attempt to predict whether a question author will be satisfied with the answers submitted by the community participants. We present a general prediction model, and develop a variety of content, structure, and community-focused features for this task. Our experimental results, obtained from a largescale evaluation over thousands of real questions and user ratings, demonstrate the feasibility of modeling and predicting asker satisfaction. We complement our results with a thorough investigation of the interactions and information seeking patterns in question answering communities that correlate with information seeker satisfaction. Our models and predictions could be useful for a variety of applications such as user intent inference, answer ranking, interface design, and query suggestion and routing.
1390419	Discovering key concepts in verbose queries Current search engines do not, in general, perform well with longer, more verbose queries. One of the main issues in processing these queries is identifying the key concepts that will have the most impact on effectiveness. In this paper, we develop and evaluate a technique that uses query-dependent, corpus-dependent, and corpus-independent features for automatic extraction of key concepts from verbose queries. We show that our method achieves higher accuracy in the identification of key concepts than standard weighting methods such as inverse document frequency. Finally, we propose a probabilistic model for integrating the weighted key concepts identified by our method into a query, and demonstrate that this integration significantly improves retrieval effectiveness for a large set of natural language description queries derived from TREC topics on several newswire and web collections.
1390420	Ambiguous queries: test collections need more sense Although there are many papers examining ambiguity in Information Retrieval, this paper shows that there is a whole class of ambiguous word that past research has barely explored. It is shown that the class is more ambiguous than other word types and is commonly used in queries. The lack of test collections containing ambiguous queries is highlighted and a method for creating collections from existing resources is described. Tests using the new collection show the impact of query ambiguity on an IR system: it is shown that conventional systems are incapable of dealing effectively with such queries and that current assumptions about how to improve search effectiveness do not hold when searching on this common query type.
1390421	Automatically identifying localizable queries Personalization of web search results as a technique for improving user satisfaction has received notable attention in the research community over the past decade. Much of this work focuses on modeling and establishing a profile for each user to aid in personalization. Our work takes a more query-centric approach. In this paper, we present a method for efficient, automatic identification of a class of queries we define as localizable from a web search engine query log. We determine a set of relevant features and use conventional machine learning techniques to classify queries. Our experiments find that our technique is able to identify localizable queries with 94% accuracy.
1390423	Real-time automatic tag recommendation Tags are user-generated labels for entities. Existing research on tag recommendation either focuses on improving its accuracy or on automating the process, while ignoring the efficiency issue. We propose a highly-automated novel framework for real-time tag recommendation. The tagged training documents are treated as triplets of (words, docs, tags), and represented in two bipartite graphs, which are partitioned into clusters by Spectral Recursive Embedding (SRE). Tags in each topical cluster are ranked by our novel ranking algorithm. A two-way Poisson Mixture Model (PMM) is proposed to model the document distribution into mixture components within each cluster and aggregate words into word clusters simultaneously. A new document is classified by the mixture model based on its posterior probabilities so that tags are recommended according to their ranks. Experiments on large-scale tagging datasets of scientific documents (CiteULike) and web pages del.icio.us) indicate that our framework is capable of making tag recommendation efficiently and effectively. The average tagging time for testing a document is around 1 second, with over 88% test documents correctly labeled with the top nine tags we suggested.
1390424	Efficient top-k querying over social-tagging networks Online communities have become popular for publishing and searching content, as well as for finding and connecting to other users. User-generated content includes, for example, personal blogs, bookmarks, and digital photos. These items can be annotated and rated by different users, and these social tags and derived user-specific scores can be leveraged for searching relevant content and discovering subjectively interesting items. Moreover, the relationships among users can also be taken into consideration for ranking search results, the intuition being that you trust the recommendations of your close friends more than those of your casual acquaintances. Queries for tag or keyword combinations that compute and rank the top-k results thus face a large variety of options that complicate the query processing and pose efficiency challenges. This paper addresses these issues by developing an incremental top-k algorithm with two-dimensional expansions: social expansion considers the strength of relations among users, and semantic expansion considers the relatedness of different tags. It presents a new algorithm, based on principles of threshold algorithms, by folding friends and related tags into the search space in an incremental on-demand manner. The excellent performance of the method is demonstrated by an experimental evaluation on three real-world datasets, crawled from deli.cio.us, Flickr, and LibraryThing.
1390425	Social tag prediction In this paper, we look at the "social tag prediction" problem. Given a set of objects, and a set of tags applied to those objects by users, can we predict whether a given tag could/should be applied to a particular object? We investigated this question using one of the largest crawls of the social bookmarking system del.icio.us gathered to date. For URLs in del.icio.us, we predicted tags based on page text, anchor text, surrounding hosts, and other tags applied to the URL. We found an entropy-based metric which captures the generality of a particular tag and informs an analysis of how well that tag can be predicted. We also found that tag-based association rules can produce very high-precision predictions as well as giving deeper understanding into the relationships between tags. Our results have implications for both the study of tagging systems as potential information retrieval tools, and for the design of such systems.
1390427	Spectral geometry for simultaneously clustering and ranking query search results How best to present query search results is an important problem in search engines and information retrieval systems. When a single query retrieves many results, simply showing them as a long list will provide users with poor overview. Nowadays, ranking and clustering query search results have been two useful separate post-processing techniques to organize retrieved documents. In this paper, we proposed a spectral analysis method based on the content similarity networks to integrate the clustering and ranking techniques for improving literature search. The new approach organizes all these search results into categories intelligently and simultaneously rank the results in each category. A variety of theoretical and empirical studies have demonstrated that the presented method performs well in real applications, especially in biomedical literature retrieval. Moreover, any free text information can be analyzed with the new method, i.e., the proposed approach can be applied to various information systems, such as Web search engines and literature search service.
1390428	A rank-aggregation approach to searching for optimal query-specific clusters To improve the precision at the very top ranks of a document list presented in response to a query, researchers suggested to exploit information induced from clustering of documents highly ranked by some initial search. We propose a novel model for ranking such ( query-specific ) clusters by the presumed percentage of relevant documents that they contain. The model is based on (i) proposing a palette of "witness" cluster properties that purportedly correlate with this percentage, (ii) devising concrete quantitative measures for these properties, and (iii) ordering the clusters via aggregation of rankings induced by these individual measures. Empirical evaluation shows that our model is consistently more effective than previously suggested methods in detecting clusters containing a high relevant-document percentage. Furthermore, the precision-at-top-ranks performance of this model transcends that of standard document-based retrieval, and competes with that of a state-of-the-art document-based retrieval approach.
1390429	A comparative evaluation of different link types on enhancing document clustering With a growing number of works utilizing link information in enhancing document clustering, it becomes necessary to make a comparative evaluation of the impacts of different link types on document clustering. Various types of links between text documents, including explicit links such as citation links and hyperlinks, implicit links such as co-authorship links, and pseudo links such as content similarity links, convey topic similarity or topic transferring patterns, which is very useful for document clustering. In this study, we adopt a Relaxation Labeling (RL)-based clustering algorithm, which employs both content and linkage information, to evaluate the effectiveness of the aforementioned types of links for document clustering on eight datasets. The experimental results show that linkage is quite effective in improving content-based document clustering. Furthermore, a series of interesting findings regarding the impacts of different link types on document clustering are discovered through our experiments.
1390431	SpotSigs: robust and efficient near duplicate detection in large web collections Motivated by our work with political scientists who need to manually analyze large Web archives of news sites, we present SpotSigs , a new algorithm for extracting and matching signatures for near duplicate detection in large Web crawls. Our spot signatures are designed to favor natural-language portions of Web pages over advertisements and navigational bars. The contributions of SpotSigs are twofold: 1) by combining stopword antecedents with short chains of adjacent content terms, we create robust document signatures with a natural ability to filter out noisy components of Web pages that would otherwise distract pure n-gram-based approaches such as Shingling; 2) we provide an exact and efficient , self-tuning matching algorithm that exploits a novel combination of collection partitioning and inverted index pruning for high-dimensional similarity search. Experiments confirm an increase in combined precision and recall of more than 24 percent over state-of-the-art approaches such as Shingling or I-Match and up to a factor of 3 faster execution times than Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH), over a demonstrative "Gold Set" of manually assessed near-duplicate news articles as well as the TREC WT10g Web collection.
1390432	Local text reuse detection Text reuse occurs in many different types of documents and for many different reasons. One form of reuse, duplicate or near-duplicate documents, has been a focus of researchers because of its importance in Web search. Local text reuse occurs when sentences, facts or passages, rather than whole documents, are reused and modified. Detecting this type of reuse can be the basis of new tools for text analysis. In this paper, we introduce a new approach to detecting local text reuse and compare it to other approaches. This comparison involves a study of the amount and type of reuse that occurs in real documents, including TREC newswire and blog collections.
1390433	TSCAN: a novel method for topic summarization and content anatomy A topic is defined as a seminal event or activity along with all directly related events and activities. It is represented as a chronological sequence of documents by different authors published on the Internet. In this paper, we define a task called topic anatomy, which summarizes and associates core parts of a topic graphically so that readers can understand the content easily. The proposed topic anatomy model, called TSCAN, derives the major themes of a topic from the eigenvectors of a temporal block association matrix. Then, the significant events of the themes and their summaries are extracted by examining the constitution of the eigenvectors. Finally, the extracted events are associated through their temporal closeness and context similarity to form the evolution graph of the topic. Experiments based on the official TDT4 corpus demonstrate that the generated evolution graphs comprehensibly describe the storylines of topics. Moreover, in terms of content coverage and consistency, the produced summaries are superior to those of other summarization methods based on human composed reference summaries.
1390435	A new rank correlation coefficient for information retrieval In the field of information retrieval, one is often faced with the problem of computing the correlation between two ranked lists. The most commonly used statistic that quantifies this correlation is Kendall's ?. Often times, in the information retrieval community, discrepancies among those items having high rankings are more important than those among items having low rankings. The Kendall's ? statistic, however, does not make such distinctions and equally penalizes errors both at high and low rankings. In this paper, we propose a new rank correlation coefficient, AP correlation (? ap ), that is based on average precision and has a probabilistic interpretation. We show that the proposed statistic gives more weight to the errors at high rankings and has nice mathematical properties which make it easy to interpret. We further validate the applicability of the statistic using experimental data.
1390436	Learning from labeled features using generalized expectation criteria It is difficult to apply machine learning to new domains because often we lack labeled problem instances. In this paper, we provide a solution to this problem that leverages domain knowledge in the form of affinities between input features and classes. For example, in a baseball vs. hockey text classification problem, even without any labeled data, we know that the presence of the word puck is a strong indicator of hockey . We refer to this type of domain knowledge as a labeled feature . In this paper, we propose a method for training discriminative probabilistic models with labeled features and unlabeled instances. Unlike previous approaches that use labeled features to create labeled pseudo-instances, we use labeled features directly to constrain the model's predictions on unlabeled instances. We express these soft constraints using generalized expectation (GE) criteria --- terms in a parameter estimation objective function that express preferences on values of a model expectation. In this paper we train multinomial logistic regression models using GE criteria, but the method we develop is applicable to other discriminative probabilistic models. The complete objective function also includes a Gaussian prior on parameters, which encourages generalization by spreading parameter weight to unlabeled features. Experimental results on text classification data sets show that this method outperforms heuristic approaches to training classifiers with labeled features. Experiments with human annotators show that it is more beneficial to spend limited annotation time labeling features rather than labeling instances. For example, after only one minute of labeling features, we can achieve 80% accuracy on the ibm vs. mac text classification problem using GE-FL, whereas ten minutes labeling documents results in an accuracy of only 77%
1390437	A simple and efficient sampling method for estimating AP and NDCG We consider the problem of large scale retrieval evaluation. Recently two methods based on random sampling were proposed as a solution to the extensive effort required to judge tens of thousands of documents. While the first method proposed by Aslam et al. [1] is quite accurate and efficient, it is overly complex, making it difficult to be used by the community, and while the second method proposed by Yilmaz et al., infAP [14], is relatively simple, it is less efficient than the former since it employs uniform random sampling from the set of complete judgments. Further, none of these methods provide confidence intervals on the estimated values. The contribution of this paper is threefold: (1) we derive confidence intervals for infAP, (2) we extend infAP to incorporate nonrandom relevance judgments by employing stratified random sampling, hence combining the efficiency of stratification with the simplicity of random sampling, (3) we describe how this approach can be utilized to estimate nDCG from incomplete judgments. We validate the proposed methods using TREC data and demonstrate that these new methods can be used to incorporate nonrandom samples, as were available in TREC Terabyte track '06.
1390438	A general optimization framework for smoothing language models on graph structures Recent work on language models for information retrieval has shown that smoothing language models is crucial for achieving good retrieval performance. Many different effective smoothing methods have been proposed, which mostly implement various heuristics to exploit corpus structures. In this paper, we propose a general and unified optimization framework for smoothing language models on graph structures. This framework not only provides a unified formulation of the existing smoothing heuristics, but also serves as a road map for systematically exploring smoothing methods for language models. We follow this road map and derive several different instantiations of the framework. Some of the instantiations lead to novel smoothing methods. Empirical results show that all such instantiations are effective with some outperforming the state of the art smoothing methods.
1390440	Deep classification in large-scale text hierarchies Most classification algorithms are best at categorizing the Web documents into a few categories, such as the top two levels in the Open Directory Project. Such a classification method does not give very detailed topic-related class information for the user because the first two levels are often too coarse. However, classification on a large-scale hierarchy is known to be intractable for many target categories with cross-link relationships among them. In this paper, we propose a novel deep-classification approach to categorize Web documents into categories in a large-scale taxonomy. The approach consists of two stages: a search stage and a classification stage. In the first stage, a category-search algorithm is used to acquire the category candidates for a given document. Based on the category candidates, we prune the large-scale hierarchy to focus our classification effort on a small subset of the original hierarchy. As a result, the classification model is trained on the small subset before being applied to assign the category for a new document. Since the category candidates are sufficiently close to each other in the hierarchy, a statistical-language-model based classifier using n-gram features is exploited. Furthermore, the structure of the taxonomy can be utilized in this stage to improve the performance of classification. We demonstrate the performance of our proposed algorithms on the Open Directory Project with over 130,000 categories. Experimental results show that our proposed approach can reach 51.8% on the measure of Mi-F1 at the 5th level, which is 77.7% improvement over top-down based SVM classification algorithms.
1390441	Topic-bridged PLSA for cross-domain text classification In many Web applications, such as blog classification and new-sgroup classification, labeled data are in short supply. It often happens that obtaining labeled data in a new domain is expensive and time consuming, while there may be plenty of labeled data in a related but different domain. Traditional text classification ap-proaches are not able to cope well with learning across different domains. In this paper, we propose a novel cross-domain text classification algorithm which extends the traditional probabilistic latent semantic analysis (PLSA) algorithm to integrate labeled and unlabeled data, which come from different but related domains, into a unified probabilistic model. We call this new model Topic-bridged PLSA , or TPLSA. By exploiting the common topics between two domains, we transfer knowledge across different domains through a topic-bridge to help the text classification in the target domain. A unique advantage of our method is its ability to maximally mine knowledge that can be transferred between domains, resulting in superior performance when compared to other state-of-the-art text classification approaches. Experimental eval-uation on different kinds of datasets shows that our proposed algorithm can improve the performance of cross-domain text classification significantly.
1390442	trNon-greedy active learning for text categorization using convex ansductive experimental design In this paper we propose a non-greedy active learning method for text categorization using least-squares support vector machines (LSSVM). Our work is based on transductive experimental design (TED), an active learning formulation that effectively explores the information of unlabeled data. Despite its appealing properties, the optimization problem is however NP-hard and thus--like most of other active learning methods--a greedy sequential strategy to select one data example after another was suggested to find a suboptimum. In this paper we formulate the problem into a continuous optimization problem and prove its convexity, meaning that a set of data examples can be selected with a guarantee of global optimum. We also develop an iterative algorithm to efficiently solve the optimization problem, which turns out to be very easy-to-implement. Our text categorization experiments on two text corpora empirically demonstrated that the new active learning algorithm outperforms the sequential greedy algorithm, and is promising for active text categorization applications.
1390443	Classifiers without borders: incorporating fielded text from neighboring web pages Accurate web page classification often depends crucially on information gained from neighboring pages in the local web graph. Prior work has exploited the class labels of nearby pages to improve performance. In contrast, in this work we utilize a weighted combination of the contents of neighbors to generate a better virtual document for classification. In addition, we break pages into fields, finding that a weighted combination of text from the target and fields of neighboring pages is able to reduce classification error by more than a third. We demonstrate performance on a large dataset of pages from the Open Directory Project and validate the approach using pages from a crawl from the Stanford WebBase. Interestingly, we find no value in anchor text and unexpected value in page titles (and especially titles of parent pages) in the virtual document.
1390445	Evaluation over thousands of queries Information retrieval evaluation has typically been performed over several dozen queries, each judged to near-completeness. There has been a great deal of recent work on evaluation over much smaller judgment sets: how to select the best set of documents to judge and how to estimate evaluation measures when few judgments are available. In light of this, it should be possible to evaluate over many more queries without much more total judging effort. The Million Query Track at TREC 2007 used two document selection algorithms to acquire relevance judgments for more than 1,800 queries. We present results of the track, along with deeper analysis: investigating tradeoffs between the number of queries and number of judgments shows that, up to a point, evaluation over more queries with fewer judgments is more cost-effective and as reliable as fewer queries with more judgments. Total assessor effort can be reduced by 95% with no appreciable increase in evaluation errors.
1390446	Novelty and diversity in information retrieval evaluation Evaluation measures act as objective functions to be optimized by information retrieval systems. Such objective functions must accurately reflect user requirements, particularly when tuning IR systems and learning ranking functions. Ambiguity in queries and redundancy in retrieved documents are poorly reflected by current evaluation measures. In this paper, we present a framework for evaluation that systematically rewards novelty and diversity. We develop this framework into a specific evaluation measure, based on cumulative gain. We demonstrate the feasibility of our approach using a test collection based on the TREC question answering track.
1390447	Relevance assessment: are judges exchangeable and does it matter We investigate to what extent people making relevance judgements for a reusable IR test collection are exchangeable. We consider three classes of judge: "gold standard" judges, who are topic originators and are experts in a particular information seeking task; "silver standard" judges, who are task experts but did not create topics; and "bronze standard" judges, who are those who did not define topics and are not experts in the task. Analysis shows low levels of agreement in relevance judgements between these three groups. We report on experiments to determine if this is sufficient to invalidate the use of a test collection for measuring system performance when relevance assessments have been created by silver standard or bronze standard judges. We find that both system scores and system rankings are subject to consistent but small differences across the three assessment sets. It appears that test collections are not completely robust to changes of judge when these judges vary widely in task and topic expertise. Bronze standard judges may not be able to substitute for topic and task experts, due to changes in the relative performance of assessed systems, and gold standard judges are preferred.
1390448	Intuition-supporting visualization of user's performance based on explicit negative higher-order relevance Modeling the beyond-topical aspects of relevance are currently gaining popularity in IR evaluation. For example, the discounted cumulated gain (DCG) measure implicitly models some aspects of higher-order relevance via diminishing the value of relevant documents seen later during retrieval (e.g., due to information cumulated, redundancy, and effort). In this paper, we focus on the concept of negative higher-order relevance (NHOR) made explicit via negative gain values in IR evaluation. We extend the computation of DCG to allow negative gain values, perform an experiment in a laboratory setting, and demonstrate the characteristics of NHOR in evaluation. The approach leads to intuitively reasonable performance curves emphasizing, from the user's point of view, the progression of retrieval towards success or failure. We discuss normalization issues when both positive and negative gain values are allowed and conclude by discussing the usage of NHOR to characterize test collections.
1390450	Relevance judgments between TREC and Non-TREC assessors This paper investigates the agreement of relevance assessments between official TREC judgments and those generated from an interactive IR experiment. Results show that 63% of documents judged relevant by our users matched official TREC judgments. Several factors contributed to differences in the agreements: the number of retrieved relevant documents; the number of relevant documents judged; system effectiveness per topic and the ranking of relevant documents.
1390451	Evaluation measures for preference judgments There has been recent interest in collecting user or assessor preferences, rather than absolute judgments of relevance, for the evaluation or learning of ranking algorithms. Since measures like precision, recall, and DCG are defined over absolute judgments, evaluation over preferences will require new evaluation measures that explicitly model them. We describe a class of such measures and compare absolute and preference measures over a large TREC collection.
1390452	Exploring evaluation metrics: GMAP versus MAP In retrieval experiments, an effectiveness metrics is used to generate a score for each system-topic pair being tested. It is then usual to average the system-topic scores to obtain a system score, which is used for the purpose of system comparison. In this paper we explore the ramifications of using the geometric mean (GMAP), rather than the arithmetic mean (MAP) when computing an aggregate system score from a set of system-topic scores. We find that GMAP does indeed handle variability in topic difficulty more consistently than does the usual MAP aggregation method.
1390453	A new interpretation of average precision We consider the question of whether Average Precision, as a measure of retrieval effectiveness, can be regarded as deriving from a model of user searching behaviour. It turns out that indeed it can be so regarded, under a very simple stochastic model of user behaviour.
1390454	Comparing metrics across TREC and NTCIR:: the robustness to pool depth bias An abstract is not available.
1390455	Relevance thresholds in system evaluations We introduce and explore the concept of an individual's relevance threshold as a way of reconciling differences in outcomes between batch and user experiments.
1390456	Precision-at-ten considered redundant Information retrieval systems are compared using evaluation metrics, with researchers commonly reporting results for simple metrics such as precision-at-10 or reciprocal rank together with more complex ones such as average precision or discounted cumulative gain. In this paper, we demonstrate that complex metrics are as good as or better than simple metrics at predicting the performance of the simple metrics on other topics. Therefore, reporting of results from simple metrics alongside complex ones is redundant.
1390457	Structuring collections with Scatter/Gather extensions A major component of sense-making is organizing--grouping, labeling, and summarizing--the data at hand in order to form a useful mental model, a necessary precursor to identifying missing information and to reasoning about the data. Previous work has shown the Scatter/Gather model to be useful in exploratory activities that occur when users encounter unknown document collections. However, the topic structure communicated by Scatter/Gather is closely tied to the behavior of the underlying clustering algorithm; this structure may not reflect the mental model most applicable to the information need. In this paper we describe the initial design of a mixed-initiative information structuring tool that leverages aspects of the well-studied Scatter/Gather model but permits the user to impose their own desired structure when necessary.
1390458	Text collections for FIRE The aim of the Forum for Information Retrieval Evaluation (FIRE) is to create a Cranfield-like evaluation framework in the spirit of TREC, CLEF and NTCIR, for Indian Language Information Retrieval. For the first year, six Indian languages have been selected: Bengali, Hindi, Marathi, Punjabi, Tamil, and Telugu. This poster describes the tasks as well as the document and topic collections that are to be used at the FIRE workshop.
1390459	A longitudinal study of real-time search assistance adoption We present findings from a log based study designed to track the adoption of features of a new real-time query refinement interface deployed on the Yahoo search engine. Several trends from the first four months are noted and discussed.
1390460	TopicRank: bringing insight to users An abstract is not available.
1390461	Talking the talk vs. walking the walk: salience of information needs in querying vs. browsing Traditional information retrieval models assume that users express their information needs via text queries ( i.e. , their "talk"). In this poster, we consider Web browsing behavior outside of interactions with retrieval systems ( i.e. , users' "walk") as an alternative source of signal describing users' information needs, and compare it to the query-expressed information needs on a large dataset. Our findings demonstrate that information needs expressed in different behavior modalities are largely non-overlapping, and that past behavior in each modality is the most accurate predictor of future behavior in that modality. Results also show that browsing data provides a stronger source of signal than search queries due to its greater volume, which explains previous work that has found implicit behavioral data to be a valuable source of information for user modeling and personalization.
1390462	Exploring mouse movements for inferring query intent Clickthrough on search results have been successfully used to infer user interest and preferences, but are often noisy and potentially ambiguous. We explore the potential of a complementary, more sensitive signal -mouse movements- in providing insights into the intent behind a web search query. We report preliminary results of studying user mouse movements on search result pages, with the goal of inferring user intent - in particular, to explore whether we can automatically distinguish the different query classes such as navigational vs. informational. Our preliminary exploration confirms the value of studying mouse movements for user intent inference, and suggests interesting avenues for future exploration.
1390463	Emulating query-biased summaries using document titles Generating query-biased summaries can take up a large part of the response time of interactive information retrieval (IIR) systems. This paper proposes to use document titles as an alternative to queries in the generation of summaries. The use of document titles allows us to pre-generate summaries statically, and thus, improve the response speed of IIR systems. Our experiments suggest that title-biased summaries are a promising alternative to query-biased summaries.
1390464	Hierarchical naive bayes models for representing user profiles In this paper, we show how a user profile can be enhanced when a more detailed description of the products is included. Two main assumptions have been considered: the first implies that the set of features used to describe an item can be organized into a well-defined set of components or categories, and the second is that the user's rating for a given item is obtained by combining user opinions of the relevance of each component.
1390465	A topical PageRank based algorithm for recommender systems In this paper, we propose a Topical PageRank based algorithm for recommender systems, which aim to rank products by analyzing previous user-item relationships, and recommend top-rank items to potentially interested users. We evaluate our algorithm on MovieLens dataset and empirical experiments demonstrate that it outperforms other state-of-the-art recommending algorithms.
1390466	The impact of history length on personalized search Personalized search is a promising way to better serve different users' information needs. Search history is one of the major information sources for search personalization. We investigated the impact of history length on the effectiveness of personalized ranking. We carried out task-based user study for Web search, and obtained ranked relevance judgments for all queries. Query contexts derived from previous queries in the same task are used to re-rank results for the current query. Experimental results show that the performance of personalization generally improves as more queries are accumulated, but most of the benefits come from a few immediately preceding queries.
1390467	User preference choices for complex question answering Question answering systems increasingly need to deal with complex information needs that require more than simple factoid answers. The evaluation of such systems is usually carried out using precision- or recall-based system performance metrics. Previous work has demonstrated that when users are shown two search result lists side-by-side, they can reliably differentiate between the qualities of the lists. We investigate the consistency between this user-based approach and system-oriented metrics in the question answering environment. Our initial results indicate that the two methodologies show a high level of disagreement.
1390468	Towards personalized distributed information retrieval Our aim is to investigate if and how the performance of Distributed Information Retrieval (DIR) systems can be improved through personalization. Toward this aim we are building a testbed of document collections and corresponding personalized relevance judgments. In this paper we discuss our intended approach for personalizing the three different phases of the DIR process. We also describe the test collection we are building and discuss our methodology for evaluating personalized DIR using relevance information taken from social bookmarking data.
1390469	Task-aware search personalization Search personalization has been pursued in many ways, in order to provide better result rankings and better overall search experience to individual users [5]. However, blindly applying personalization to all user queries, for example, by a background model derived from the user's long-term query-and-click history, is not always appropriate for aiding the user in accomplishing her actual task. User interests change over time, a user sometimes works on very different categories of tasks within a short timespan, and history-based personalization may impede a user's desire of discovering new topics. In this paper we propose a personalization framework that is selective in a twofold sense. First, it selectively employs personalization techniques for queries that are expected to benefit from prior history information, while refraining from undue actions otherwise. Second, we introduce the notion of tasks representing different granularity levels of a user profile, ranging from very specific search goals to broad topics, and base our reasoning selectively on query-relevant user tasks. These considerations are cast into a statistical language model for tasks, queries, and documents, supporting both judicious query expansion and result re-ranking. The effectiveness of our method is demonstrated by an empirical user study.
1390471	Personal vs non-personal blogs: initial classification experiments We address the task of separating personal from non-personal blogs, and report on a set of baseline experiments where we compare the performance on a small set of features across a set of five classifiers. We show that with a limited set of features a performance of up to 90% can be obtained.
1390472	Exploiting subjectivity analysis in blogs to improve political leaning categorization In this paper, we address a relatively new and interesting text categorization problem: classify a political blog as either liberal or conservative , based on its political leaning. Our subjectivity analysis based method is twofold: 1) we identify subjective sentences that contain at least two strong subjective clues based on the General Inquirer dictionary; 2) from subjective sentences identified, we extract opinion expressions and other features to build political leaning classifiers. Experimental results with a political blog corpus we built show that by using features from subjective sentences can significantly improve the classification performance. In addition, by extracting opinion expressions from subjective sentences, we are able to reveal opinions that are characteristic of a specific political leaning to some extent.
1390473	Ranking opinionated blog posts using OpinionFinder The aim of an opinion finding system is not just to retrieve relevant documents, but to also retrieve documents that express an opinion towards the query target entity. In this work, we propose a way to use and integrate an opinion-identification toolkit, OpinionFinder, into the retrieval process of an Information Retrieval (IR) system, such that opinionated, relevant documents are retrieved in response to a query. In our experiments, we vary the number of top-ranked documents that must be parsed in response to a query, and investigate the effect on opinion retrieval performance and required parsing time. We find that opinion finding retrieval performance is improved by integrating OpinionFinder into the retrieval system, and that retrieval performance grows as more posts are parsed by OpinionFinder. However, the benefit eventually tails off at a deep rank, suggesting that an optimal setting for the system has been achieved.
1390474	Searching blogs and news: a study on popular queries Blog/news search engines are very important channels to reach information about the real-time happenings. In this paper, we study the popular queries collected over one year period and compare their search results returned by a blog search engine (i.e., Technorati) and a news search engine (i.e., Google News). We observed that the numbers of hits returned by the two search engines for the same set of queries were highly correlated, suggesting that blogs often provide commentary to current events reported in news. As many popular queries are related to some events, we further observed a high cohesiveness among the returned search results for these queries.
1390475	Aggregated click-through data in a homogeneous user community There are many proposed methods for using clickthrough data for common queries to improve the quality of search results returned for that query. In this study we examine the search behaviour of users in a close-knit community on such queries. We argue that the benefit of using aggregated clickthrough data varies from task to task: it may improve document rankings for navigational or specific informational queries, but is less likely to be of value to users issuing a broad informational query.
1390476	To tag or not to tag -: harvesting adjacent metadata in large-scale tagging systems We present HAMLET, a suite of principles, scoring models and algorithms to automatically propagate metadata along edges in a document neighborhood. As a showcase scenario we consider tag prediction in community-based Web 2.0 tagging applications. Experiments using real-world data demonstrate the viability of our approach in large-scale environments where tags are scarce. To the best of our knowledge, HAMLET is the first system to promote an efficient and precise reuse of shared metadata in highly dynamic, large-scale Web 2.0 tagging systems.
1390477	Exploring question subjectivity prediction in community QA In this paper we begin to investigate how to automatically determine the subjectivity orientation of questions posted by real users in community question answering (CQA) portals. Subjective questions seek answers containing private states, such as personal opinion and experience. In contrast, objective questions request objective, verifiable information, often with support from reliable sources. Knowing the question orientation would be helpful not only for evaluating answers provided by users, but also for guiding the CQA engine to process questions more intelligently. Our experiments on Yahoo! Answers data show that our method exhibits promising performance.
1390478	On the evolution of the yahoo! answers QA community While question answering communities have been gaining popularity for several years, we wonder if the increased popularity actually improves or degrades the user experience. In addition, automatic QA systems, which utilize different sources such as search engines and social media, are emerging rapidly. QA communities have already created abundant resources of millions of questions and hundreds of millions of answers. The question whether they will continue to serve as an effective source is of information for web search and question answering is of vital importance. In this poster, we investigate the temporal evolution of a popular QA community - Yahoo! Answers, with respect to its effectiveness in answering three basic types of questions: factoid, opinion and complex questions. Our experiments show that Yahoo! Answers keeps growing rapidly, while its overall quality as an information source for factoid question-answering degrades. However, instead of answering factoid questions, it might be more effective to answer opinion and complex questions.
1390479	Detecting synonyms in social tagging systems to improve content retrieval Collaborative tagging used in online social content systems is naturally characterized by many synonyms, causing low precision retrieval. We propose a mechanism based on user preference profiles to identify synonyms that can be used to retrieve more relevant documents by expanding the user's query. Using a popular online book catalog we discuss the effectiveness of our method over usual similarity based expansion methods.
1390480	SOPING: a Chinese customer review mining system With the booming development of the Web, popular Chinese forums enable people to find experienced customers' reviews for products. In order to get an all-around opinion about one product, users need to go through plenty of web pages, which is time-consuming and inefficient. Consequently, automatic review mining and summarization has become a hot research topic recently. However, previous approaches are not applicable for mining Chinese customer reviews. In this paper, we introduce SOPING, a Chinese customer review mining system that mines reviews from forums. Specifically, we propose a novel search-based approach to extract product features and a feature-oriented sentence orientation determination method. Our experimental results show that our proposed techniques are highly effective.
1390481	Combining learn-based and lexicon-based techniques for sentiment detection without using labeled examples In this work, we propose a novel scheme for sentiment classification (without labeled examples) which combines the strengths of both "learn-based" and "lexicon-based" approaches as follows: we first use a lexicon-based technique to label a portion of informative examples from given task (or domain); then learn a new supervised classifier based on these labeled ones; finally apply this classifier to the task. The experimental results indicate that proposed scheme could dramatically outperform "learn-based" and "lexicon-based" techniques.
1390482	Semi-supervised spam filtering: does it work? The results of the 2006 ECML/PKDD Discovery Challenge suggest that semi-supervised learning methods work well for spam filtering when the source of available labeled examples differs from those to be classified. We have attempted to reproduce these results using data from the 2005 and 2007 TREC Spam Track, and have found the opposite effect: methods like self-training and transductive support vector machines yield inferior classifiers to those constructed using supervised learning on the labeled data alone. We investigate differences between the ECML/PKDD and TREC data sets and methodologies that may account for the opposite results.
1390483	Limits of opinion-finding baseline systems In opinion-finding, the retrieval system is tasked with retrieving not just relevant documents, but which also express an opinion towards the query target entity. Most opinion-finding systems are based on a two-stage approach, where initially the system aims to retrieve relevant documents, which are then re-ranked according to the extent to which they are detected to be of an opinionated nature. In this work, we investigate how the underlying 'baseline' retrieval system performance affects the overall opinion-finding performance. We apply two effective opinion-finding techniques to all the baseline runs submitted to the TREC 2007 Blog track, and draw new insights and conclusions.
1390484	Web query translation via web log mining This paper describes a method to automatically acquire query translation pairs by mining web click-through data. The extraction requires no crawling or Chinese words segmentation, and can capture popular translations. Experimental results on a real click-through data show that only 17.4% of the extracted queries are in the dictionary, and our method can achieve 62.2% (in top-1) to 80.0% (in top-5) precision in translating web queries. Moreover, the extracted translations are semantically relevant to the source query, which is particularly useful for Cross-Lingual Information Retrieval (CLIR).
1390485	Analyzing web text association to disambiguate abbreviation in queries We introduce a statistical model for abbreviation disambiguation in Web search, based on analysis of Web data resources, including anchor text, click log and query log. By combining evidence from multiple sources, we are able to accurately disambiguate the abbreviation in queries. Experiments on real Web search queries show promising results.
1390486	Bloggers as experts: feed distillation using expert retrieval models We address the task of (blog) feed distillation: to find blogs that are principally devoted to a given topic. The task may be viewed as an association finding task, between topics and bloggers. Under this view, it resembles the expert finding task, for which a range of models have been proposed. We adopt two language modeling-based approaches to expert finding, and determine their effectiveness as feed distillation strategies. The two models capture the idea that a human will often search for key blogs by spotting highly relevant posts (the Posting model) or by taking global aspects of the blog into account (the Blogger model). Results show the Blogger model outperforms the Posting model and delivers state-of-the art performance, out-of-the-box.
1390487	Search effectiveness with a breadth-first crawl Previous scalability experiments found that early precision improves as collection size increases. However, that was under the assumption that a collection's documents are all sampled with uniform probability from the same population. We contrast this to a large breadth-first web crawl, an important scenario in real-world Web search, where the early documents have quite different characteristics from the later documents.
1390488	Guide focused crawler efficiently and effectively using on-line topical importance estimation Focused crawling is a critical technique for topical resource discovery on the Web. We propose a new frontier prioritizing algorithm, namely, the OTIE (On-line Topical Importance Estimation) algorithm, which efficiently and effectively combines link-based and content-based analysis to evaluate the priority of an uncrawled URL in the frontier. We then demonstrate OTIE's advantages over traditional prioritizing algorithms by real crawling experiments.
1390489	Web page retrieval in ubiquitous sensor environments This paper proposes new concept of query free web search for daily living. We ordinarily benefit from additional information about our daily activities that we are currently engaged in. When washing a coffee maker, for example, we receive the benefit if we obtain such information as 'cleaning a coffee maker with vinegar removes its stain well.' Our proposed method automatically searches for a web page including such information relates to an activity of daily living when the activity is performed. We assume that wireless sensor nodes are attached to daily objects to detect object use; our method makes a query from the names of objects which are used. Then, the method retrieves a web page relates to the activity of daily living by using the query.
1390490	Automatic document prior feature selection for web retrieval Document prior features, such as Pagerank and URL depth, can improve the retrieval effectiveness of Web Information Retrieval (IR) systems. However, not all queries equally benefit from the application of a document prior feature. This paper aims to investigate whether the retrieval performance can be further enhanced by selecting the best document prior feature on a per-query basis. We present a novel method for selecting the best document prior feature on a per-query basis. We evaluate our technique on the TREC .GOV Web test collection and its associated TREC 2003 Web search tasks. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of our proposed selection method.
1390491	Using parsimonious language models on web data In this paper we explore the use of parsimonious language models for web retrieval. These models are smaller thus more efficient than the standard language models and are therefore well suited for large-scale web retrieval. We have conducted experiments on four TREC topic sets, and found that the parsimonious language model results in improvement of retrieval effectiveness over the standard language model for all data-sets and measures. In all cases the improvement is significant, and more substantial than in earlier experiments on newspaper/newswire data.
1390492	Query preprocessing: improving web search through a Vietnamese word tokenization approach In this poster paper, we propose a novel approach to improve web search relevancy by tokenizing a Vietnamese query text prior submitting it to a search engine. Evaluations demonstrate its effectiveness and practical value.
1390494	AdImage: video advertising by image matching and ad scheduling optimization With the prevalence of recording devices and the ease of media sharing, consumers are embracing huge amounts of Internet videos. There arise the needs for effective video advertisement systems following their phenomenal success in text. We propose a novel advertising system, AdImage , which automatically associates relevant ads by matching characteristic images, referred to as adImages (analogous to adWords) here. The proposed image matching method is invariant to certain distortions commonly observed in shared videos. AdImage also avoids the pitfalls of poor tagging qualities in shared videos and provides a brand-new venue to specify ad targets by image objects. Moreover, we formulate the image matching scores and the parameterized bidding information as a nonlinear optimization problem for maximizing the system revenues and user perception.
1390495	Bag-of-visual-words expansion using visual relatedness for video indexing Bag-of-visual-words (BoW) has been popular for visual classification in recent years. In this paper, we propose a novel BoW expansion method to alleviate the effect of visual word correlation problem. We achieve this by diffusing the weights of visual words in BoW based on visual word relatedness, which is rigorously defined within a visual ontology. The proposed method is tested in video indexing experiment on TRECVID-2006 video retrieval benchmark, and an improvement of 7% over the traditional BoW is reported.
1390496	A word shape coding method for camera-based document images This paper reports a word shape coding method to facilitate retrieval of camera-based document images without OCR. Due to perspective distortion, many reported word shape coding methods fail on camera-based images. In this paper, the problem is addressed by approximating the perspective transformation with an affine transformation, and employing an affine invariant, namely length ratio, to represent the connected components. Components in a document image are classified into a few clusters, each of which is assigned with a representative symbol. Retrieval are based on "words" comprising of symbols. The experiment results showed that the proposed method achieved an average retrieval precision of 93.43% and recall of 94.22%.
1390497	Term clouds as surrogates for user generated speech User generated spoken audio remains a challenge for Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) technology and content-based audio surrogates derived from ASR-transcripts must be error robust. An investigation of the use of term clouds as surrogates for podcasts demonstrates that ASR term clouds closely approximate term clouds derived from human-generated transcripts across a range of cloud sizes. A user study confirms the conclusion that ASR-clouds are viable surrogates for depicting the content of podcasts.
1390498	A faceted interface for multimedia search With the rapid increase in online video services, video retrieval systems are becoming increasingly important search tools to many users in many different fields. In this poster we present a novel video retrieval interface, which supports the creation of multiple search "facets", to aid users carrying out complex, multi-faceted search tasks. The interface allows multiple searches to be executed and viewed simultaneously, and allows material to be reorganized between the facets. An experiment is presented which compares the faceted interface to a tabbed interface similar to that on modern web browsers, and some preliminary results are given.
1390499	WISA: a novel web image semantic analysis system We present a novel Web Image Semantic Analysis (WISA) system, which explores the problem of adaptively modeling the distributions of the semantic labels of the web image on its surrounding text. To deal with this problem, we employ a new piecewise penalty weighted regression model to learn the weights of the contributions of the different parts of the surrounding text to the semantic labels of images. Experimental results on a real web image data set show that it can improve the performance of web image semantic annotation significantly.
1390500	One-button search extracts wider interests: an empirical study with video bookmarking search This poster presents an overview of the characteristics of a one-button information retrieval interface with closed captions from TV watching activities, which is intended to lighten the burden of remembering and entering query terms while watching TV. We investigated this interface with an experimental system named Video Bookmarking Search , which estimates query terms from closed captions with named-entity recognition and sentence labeling techniques. According to an empirical evaluation for 1,138 search queries from 206 bookmarks using seven actual TV shows on city life, travel, health, and cuisine, we found wider queries and search results are acceptable through the query-input-free interface, despite the fact that the number of queries and search results that are directly relevant to the users' original intentions is not high. The main reason is a watching user's interest is wider than what is expressed with query terms.
1390501	Product retrieval for grocery stores We introduce a grocery retrieval system that maps shopping lists written in natural language into actual products in a grocery store. We have developed the system using nine months of shopping basket data from a large Finnish supermarket. To evaluate the system, we used 70 real shopping lists gathered from customers of the supermarket. Our system achieves over 80% precision for products at rank one, and the precision is around 70% for products at rank 5.
1390502	A reranking model for genomics aspect search In this paper, we propose a reranking model to improve the aspect-level performance in the biomedical domain. This model iteratively computes the maximum hidden aspect for every retrieved passage and then reranks these passages from aspect subsets. The experimental results show the improvements of the aspect-level performance up to 27.14% for 2006 Genomics topics and 27.09% for 2007 Genomics topics.
1390503	Improving biomedical document retrieval using domain knowledge Research articles typically introduce new results or findings and relate them to knowledge entities of immediate relevance. However, a large body of context knowledge related to the results is often not explicitly mentioned in the article. To overcome this limitation the state-of-the-art information retrieval approaches rely on the latent semantic analysis in which terms in articles are projected to a lower dimensional latent space and best possible matches in this space are identified. However, this approach may not perform well enough if the number of explicit knowledge entities in the articles is too small compared to the amount of knowledge in the domain. We address the problem by exploiting a domain knowledge layer, a rich network of relations among knowledge entities in the domain extracted from a large corpus of documents. The knowledge layer supplies the context knowledge that lets us relate different knowledge entities and hence improve the information retrieval performance. We develop and study a new framework for i) learning and aggregating the relations in the knowledge layer from the literature corpus; ii) and for exploiting these relations to improve the information-retrieval of relevant documents.
1390504	Kleio: a knowledge-enriched information retrieval system for biology Kleio is an advanced information retrieval (IR) system developed at the UK National Centre for Text Mining (NaCTeM) 1 . The system offers textual and metadata searches across MEDLINE and provides enhanced searching functionality by leveraging terminology management technologies.
1390505	Enhancing keyword-based botanical information retrieval with information extraction Keyword-based retrieval matches search terms and documents via term co-occurrence. Such an approach does not allow matching based on the specific plant characteristic descriptions that are often used in botanical text retrieval. This study applies information extraction techniques to automatically extract plant characteristic information from text and allows users to search using such information in combination with keywords. An evaluation experiment was conducted using actual users. The results indicate that this approach enhances task-based retrieval performance.
1390506	How medical expertise influences web search interaction Domain expertise can have an important influence on how people search. In this poster we present findings from a log-based study into how medical domain experts search the Web for information related to their expertise, as compared with non-experts. We find differences in sites visited, query vocabulary, and search behavior. The findings have implications for the automatic identification of domain experts from interaction logs, and the use of domain knowledge in applications such as query suggestion or page recommendation to support non-experts.
1390507	Generating diverse katakana variants based on phonemic mapping In Japanese, it is quite common for the same word to be written in several different ways. This is especially true for katakana words which are typically used for transliterating foreign languages. This ambiguity becomes critical for automatic processing such as information retrieval (IR). To tackle this problem, we propose a simple but effective approach to generating katakana variants by considering phonemic representation of the original language for a given word. The proposed approach is evaluated through an assessment of the variants it generates. Also, the impact of the generated variants on IR is studied in comparison to an existing approach using katakana rewriting rules.
1390508	Exploiting sequential dependencies for expert finding We propose an expert finding method based on assumption of sequential dependence between a candidate expert and the query terms in the scope of a document. We assume that the strength of relation of a candidate to the document's content depends on its position in this document with respect to the positions of the query terms. The experiments on the official Enterprise TREC data demonstrate the advantage of our method over the method based on independence of query terms and persons in a document.
1390509	Modeling expert finding as an absorbing random walk We introduce a novel approach to expert finding based on multi-step relevance propagation from documents to related candidates. Relevance propagation is modeled with an absorbing random walk. The evaluation on the two official Enterprise TREC data sets demonstrates the advantage of our method over the state-of-the-art method based on one-step propagation.
1390510	A scalable assistant librarian: hierarchical subject classification of books In this paper, we discuss our work in progress towards a scalable hierarchical classification system for books using the Library of Congress subject hierarchy. We examine the characteristics of this domain which make the problem very challenging, and we look at several appropriate performance measurements. We show that both Hieron and Hierarchical Support Vector Machines perform moderately well.
1390511	Information retrieval on bug locations by learning co-located bug report clusters Bug locating usually involves intensive search activities and incurs unpredictable cost of labor and time. An issue of information retrieval on bug locations is particularly addressed to facilitate identifying bugs from software code. In this paper, a novel bug retrieval approach with co-location shrinkage (CS) is proposed. The proposed approach has been implemented in open-source software projects collected from real-world repositories, and consistently improves the retrieval accuracy of a state-of-the-art Support Vector Machine (SVM) model.
1390512	Summarization of compressed text images: an experience on Indic script documents Automatic summarization of JBIG2 coded textual images is discussed. Compressed images are partially decompressed to compute relevant features. The feature extraction method is free from using any character recognition module. Summary sentences are ranked. Experiment considers documents in Indic scripts that lack in having any efficient OCR systems. Script independent aspect of the approach is highlighted through use of two most popular Indic scripts. Sentence selection efficiency of about 61% is achieved when judged against man-made summarization. A nonparametric (distribution-free) rank statistic shows a correlation coefficient of 0.33 as a measure of the (minimum) strength of the associations between sentence ranking by machine and human.
1390514	A method for transferring retrieval scores between collections with non-overlapping vocabularies We present a method for projecting retrieval scores across two corpora with a shared, parallel corpus.
1390515	Improving relevance feedback in language modeling with score regularization We demonstrate that regularization can improve feedback in a language modeling framework.
1390516	Theoretical bounds on and empirical robustness of score regularization to different similarity measures We present theoretical bounds and empirical robustness of score regularization given changes in the similarity measure.
1390517	A study of query length We analyse query length, and fit power-law and Poisson distributions to four different query sets. We provide a practical model for query length, based on the truncation of a Poisson distribution for short queries and a power-law distribution for longer queries, that better fits real query length distributions than earlier proposals.
1390518	Don't have a stemmer?: be un+concern+ed The choice of indexing terms used to represent documents crucially determines how e ective subsequent retrieval will be. IR systems commonly use rule-based stemmers to normalize surface word forms to combat the problem of not finding documents that contain words related to query terms by inflectional or derivational morphology. But such stemmers are not available in all languages. In this paper we explore the effectiveness of unsupervised morphological segmentation as an alternative to stemming using test sets in thirteen European languages. We find that unsupervised segmentation is significantly better than unnormalized words, in several cases by more than 20%. However, rule-based stemming, if available, is better in low complexity languages. We also compare these methods to the use of character n-grams, finding that on average n-grams yield the best performance.
1390519	Parsimonious concept modeling An abstract is not available.
1390520	Parsimonious relevance models We describe a method for applying parsimonious language models to re-estimate the term probabilities assigned by relevance models. We apply our method to six topic sets from test collections in five different genres. Our parsimonious relevance models (i) improve retrieval effectiveness in terms of MAP on all collections, (ii) significantly outperform their non-parsimonious counterparts on most measures, and (iii) have a precision enhancing effect, unlike other blind relevance feedback methods.
1390521	Author-topic evolution analysis using three-way non-negative Paratucker Analyzing three-way data has attracted a lot of attention recently due to the intrinsic rich structures in real-world datasets. The PARATUCKER model has been proposed to combine the axis capabilities of the Parafac model and the structural generality of the Tucker model. However, no algorithms have been developed for fitting the PARATUCKER model. In this paper, we propose TANPT algorithm to solve the PARATUCKER model. We apply the algorithm for temporal relation co-clustering on author-topic evolution. Experiments on DBLP datasets demonstrate its effectiveness.
1390522	Exploiting proximity feature in bigram language model for information retrieval Language modeling approaches have been effectively dealing with the dependency among query terms based on N-gram such as bigram or trigram models. However, bigram language models suffer from adjacency-sparseness problem which means that dependent terms are not always adjacent in documents, but can be far from each other, sometimes with distance of a few sentences in a document. To resolve the adjacency-sparseness problem, this paper proposes a new type of bigram language model by explicitly incorporating the proximity feature between two adjacent terms in a query. Experimental results on three test collections show that the proposed bigram language model significantly improves previous bigram model as well as Tao's approach, the state-of-art method for proximity-based method.
1390523	Measuring concept relatedness using language models Over the years, the notion of concept relatedness has attracted considerable attention. A variety of approaches, based on ontology structure, information content, association, or context have been proposed to indicate the relatedness of abstract ideas. We propose a method based on the cross entropy reduction between language models of concepts which are estimated based on document-concept assignments. The approach shows improved or competitive results compared to state-of-the-art methods on two test sets in the biomedical domain.
1390524	Query-drift prevention for robust query expansion Pseudo-feedback-based automatic query expansion yields effective retrieval performance on average, but results in performance inferior to that of using the original query for many information needs. We address an important cause of this robustness issue, namely, the query drift problem , by fusing the results retrieved in response to the original query and to its expanded form. Our approach posts performance that is significantly better than that of retrieval based only on the original query and more robust than that of retrieval using the expanded query.
1390525	Adaptive label-driven scaling for latent semantic indexing This paper targets on enhancing Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) by exploiting category labels. Specifically, in the term-document matrix, the vector for each term either appearing in labels or semantically close to labels is scaled before performing Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) to boost its impact on the generated left singular vectors. As a result, the similarities among documents in the same category are increased. Furthermore, an adaptive scaling strategy is designed to better utilize the hierarchical structure of categories. Experimental results show that the proposed approach is able to significantly improve the performance of hierarchical text categorization.
1390526	Fixed-threshold SMO for Joint Constraint Learning Algorithm of Structural SVM In this paper, we describe a fixed-threshold sequential minimal optimization (FSMO) for a joint constraint learning algorithm of structural classification SVM problems. Because FSMO uses the fact that the joint constraint formulation of structural SVM has b =0, FSMO breaks down the quadratic programming (QP) problems of structural SVM into a series of smallest QP problems, each involving only one variable. By using only one variable, FSMO is advantageous in that each QP sub-problem does not need subset selection.
1390527	Posterior probabilistic clustering using NMF We introduce the posterior probabilistic clustering (PPC), which provides a rigorous posterior probability interpretation for Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) and removes the uncertainty in clustering assignment. Furthermore, PPC is closely related to probabilistic latent semantic indexing (PLSI).
1390528	On document splitting in passage detection Passages can be hidden within a text to circumvent their disallowed transfer. Such release of compartmentalized information is of concern to all corporate and governmental organization. We explore the methodology to detect such hidden passages within a document. A document is divided into passages using various document splitting techniques, and a text classifier is used to categorize such passages. We present a novel document splitting technique called dynamic windowing, which significantly improves precision, recall and F1 measure.
1390529	Learning with support vector machines for query-by-multiple-examples We explore an alternative Information Retrieval paradigm called Query-By-Multiple-Examples (QBME) where the information need is described not by a set of terms but by a set of documents. Intuitive ideas for QBME include using the centroid of these documents or the well-known Rocchio algorithm to construct the query vector. We consider this problem from the perspective of text classification , and find that a better query vector can be obtained through learning with Support Vector Machines (SVMs). For online queries, we show how SVMs can be learned from one-class examples in linear time. For offline queries, we show how SVMs can be learned from positive and unlabeled examples together in linear or polynomial time. The effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed approaches have been confirmed by our experiments on four real-world datasets.
1390530	Question classification with semantic tree kernel Question Classification plays an important role in most Question Answering systems. In this paper, we exploit semantic features in Support Vector Machines (SVMs) for Question Classification. We propose a semantic tree kernel to incorporate semantic similarity information. A diverse set of semantic features is evaluated. Experimental results show that SVMs with semantic features, especially semantic classes, can significantly outperform the state-of-the-art systems.
1390531	Generalising multiple capture-recapture to non-uniform sample sizes Algorithms in distributed information retrieval often rely on accurate knowledge of the size of a collection. The "multiple capture-recapture" method of Shokouhi et al. is one of the more reliable algorithms for determining collection size, but it relies on samples with a uniform number of documents. Such uniform samples are often hard to obtain in a working system. A simple generalisation of multiple capture-recapture does not rely on uniform sample sizes. Simulations show it is as accurate as the original method even when sample sizes vary considerably, making it a useful technique in real tools.
1390532	Predicting when browsing context is relevant to search We investigate a representative case of sudden information need change of Web users. By analyzing search engine query logs, we show that the majority of queries submitted by users after browsing documents in the news domain are related to the most recently browsed document. We investigate ways of identifying whether a query is a good candidate for contextualization conditioned on the most recently browsed document by a user. We build a successful classifier for this task, which achieves 96% precision at 90% recall.
1390534	XML-aided phrase indexing for hypertext documents We combine techniques of XML Mining and Text Mining for the benefit of Information Retrieval. By manipulating the word sequence according to the XML structure of the marked-up text, we strengthen phrase boundaries so that they are more obvious to the algorithms that extract multiword sequences from text. Consequently, the quality of the indexed phrases improves, which has a positive effect on the average precision measured by the INEX 2007 standards.
1390535	Proximity-aware scoring for XML retrieval Proximity-aware scoring functions lead to significant effectiveness improvements for text retrieval. For XML IR, we can sometimes enhance the retrieval quality by exploiting knowledge about the document structure combined with established text IR methods. This paper introduces modified proximity scores that take the document structure into account and demonstrates the effect for the INEX benchmark.
1390536	Locating relevant text within XML documents Traditional document retrieval has shown to be a competitive approach in XML element retrieval, which is counter-intuitive since the element retrieval task requests all and only relevant document parts to be retrieved. This paper conducts a comparative analysis of document and element retrieval, highlights the relative strengths and weaknesses of both approaches, and explains the relative effectiveness of document retrieval approaches at element retrieval tasks.
1390537	A flexible extension of XPath to improve XML querying This work presents a flexible XML selection language, FleXPath which allows the formulation of flexible constraints on both structure and content of XML documents. Some experimental results, obtained with a preliminary prototype, are described in order to show that the idea promises good results.
1390538	Combining document- and paragraph-based entity ranking We study entity ranking on the INEX entity track and propose a simple graph-based ranking approach that enables to combine scores on document and paragraph level. The combined approach improves the retrieval results not only on the INEX testset, but similarly on TREC's expert finding task.
1390539	Re-ranking search results using document-passage graphs We present a novel passage -based approach to re-ranking documents in an initially retrieved list so as to improve precision at top ranks. While most work on passage-based document retrieval ranks a document based on the query similarity of its constituent passages, our approach leverages information about the centrality of the document passages with respect to the initial document list. Passage centrality is induced over a bipartite document-passage graph, wherein edge weights represent document-passage similarities. Empirical evaluation shows that our approach yields effective re-ranking performance. Furthermore, the performance is superior to that of previously proposed passage-based document ranking methods.
1390540	Utilizing phrase based semantic information for term dependency Previous work on term dependency has not taken into account semantic information underlying query phrases. In this work, we study the impact of utilizing phrase based concepts for term dependency. We use Wikipedia to separate important and less important term dependencies, and treat them accordingly as features in a linear feature-based retrieval model. We compare our method with a Markov Random Field (MRF) model on four TREC document collections. Our experimental results show that utilizing phrase based concepts improves the retrieval effectiveness of term dependency, and reduces the size of the feature set to large extent.
1390541	Inferring the most important types of a query: a semantic approach In this paper we present a technique for ranking the most important types or categories for a given query. Rather than trying to find the category of the query, known as query categorization, our approach seeks to find the most important types related to the query results. Not necessarily the query category falls into this ranking of types and therefore our approach can be complementary.
1390542	On multiword entity ranking in peer-to-peer search Previously [2], we postulated the advantage of using entity extraction to implement a new Peer-to-Peer (P2P) search framework for reducing network traffic and providing a trade off between precision and recall. We now propose an entity ranking method designed for the 'short documents' characteristic of P2P, which significantly improves both precision and recall in 'top results' P2P search. We construct a dynamic entity corpus using n-grams statistics and metadata, study its reliability, and use it to identify correlations between user query terms.
1390543	Site-based dynamic pruning for query processing in search engines Web search engines typically index and retrieve at the page level. In this study, we investigate a dynamic pruning strategy that allows the query processor to first determine the most promising websites and then proceed with the similarity computations for those pages only within these sites.
1390544	Exploiting MDS Projections for Cross-language IR In this paper, we describe some preliminary work on using monolingual projections of document collections for performing cross-language information retrieval tasks. The proposed methodology uses multidimensional scaling for projecting the vector-space representations of a given multilingual document collection into spaces of lower dimensionality. An independent projection is computed for each different language, and the structural similarities of the resulting projections are exploited for information retrieval tasks.
1390545	Local approximation of PageRank and reverse PageRank We consider the problem of approximating the PageRank of a target node using only local information provided by a link server. We prove that local approximation of PageRank is feasible if and only if the graph has low in-degree and admits fast PageRank convergence. While natural graphs, such as the web graph, are abundant with high in-degree nodes, making local PageRank approximation too costly, we show that reverse natural graphs tend to have low indegree while maintaining fast PageRank convergence. It follows that calculating Reverse PageRank locally is frequently more feasible than computing PageRank locally. Finally, we demonstrate the usefulness of Reverse PageRank in five different applications.
1390546	Improving text classification accuracy using topic modeling over an additional corpus The World Wide Web has many document repositories that can act as valuable sources of additional data for various machine learning tasks. In this paper, we propose a method of improving text classification accuracy by using such an additional corpus that can easily be obtained from the web. This additional corpus can be unlabeled and independent of the given classification task. The method proposed here uses topic modeling to extract a set of topics from the additional corpus. Those extracted topics then act as additional features of the data of the given classification task. An evaluation on the RCV1 dataset shows significant improvement over a baseline method.
1390547	An algorithm for text categorization A novel and efficient learning algorithm is proposed for the binary linear classification problem. The algorithm is trained using the Rocchio's relevance feedback technique and builds a classifier by the intermediate hyperplane of two common tangent hyperplanes for the given category and its complement. Experimental results presented are very encouraging and justify the need for further research.
1390548	Hypergraph partitioning for document clustering: a unified clique perspective Hypergraph partitioning has been considered as a promising method to address the challenges of high dimensionality in document clustering. With documents modeled as vertices and the relationship among documents captured by the hyperedges, the goal of graph partitioning is to minimize the edge cut. Therefore, the definition of hyperedges is vital to the clustering performance. While several definitions of hyperedges have been proposed, a systematic understanding of desired characteristics of hyperedges is still missing. To that end, in this paper, we first provide a unified clique perspective of the definition of hyperedges, which serves as a guide to define hyperedges. With this perspective, based on the concepts of hypercliques and shared (reverse) nearest neighbors, we propose three new types of clique hyperedges and analyze their properties regarding purity and size issues. Finally, we present an extensive evaluation using real-world document datasets. The experimental results show that, with shared (reverse) nearest neighbor based hyperedges, the clustering performance can be improved significantly in terms of various external validation measures without the need for fine tuning of parameters.
1390549	Pagerank based clustering of hypertext document collections Clustering hypertext document collection is an important task in Information Retrieval. Most clustering methods are based on document content and do not take into account the hyper-text links. Here we propose a novel PageRank based clustering (PRC) algorithm which uses the hypertext structure. The PRC algorithm produces graph partitioning with high modularity and coverage. The comparison of the PRC algorithm with two content based clustering algorithms shows that there is a good match between PRC clustering and content based clustering.
1390550	An alignment-based pattern representation model for information extraction An abstract is not available.
1390551	Relational distance-based collaborative filtering In this paper, we present a novel hybrid recommender system called RelationalCF , which integrate content and demographic information into a collaborative filtering framework by using relational distance computation approaches without the effort of form transformation and feature construction. Our experiments suggest that the effective combination of various kinds of information based on relational distance approaches provides improved accurate recommendations than other approaches.
1390553	Minexml: bridging unstructured query with structured resources via mediated query An abstract is not available.
1390554	Clustering search results for mobile terminals Mobile terminals such as cell phones are much more restricted in terms of input/output functionality and, therefore, some special techniques must be incorporated to enable them to be easily used for Web searching. Further, searching for a location name is related to a dazzling variety of topics. We relate these two factors to each other to yield a new search system for map and text information. Presenting search results as clusters is helpful for users, especially in a mobile environment. The system makes mobile web searching easier and more efficient.
1390555	Refining search results with facet landscapes An abstract is not available.
1390556	Ice-tea: an interactive cross-language search engine with translation enhancement An abstract is not available.
1390557	Cross-lingual search over 22 european languages In this paper we present a system for cross-lingual information retrieval, which can handle tens of languages and millions of documents. Functioning of the system is demonstrated on corpus of European Legislation (22 languages, more than 400,000 documents per language). The system uses an interactive web-interface, which can take advantage of a predefined thesaurus allowing the user to dynamically re-rank the retrieval results based on the mapping onto a predefined thesaurus.
1390558	Social recommendations at work Online communities have become popular for publishing and searching content, and also for connecting to other users. User-generated content includes, for example, personal blogs, bookmarks, and digital photos. Items can be annotated and rated by different users, and users can connect to others that are usually friends and/or share common interests. We demonstrate a social recommendation system that takes advantages of users connections and tagging behavior to compute recommendations of items in such communities. The advantages can be verified via comparison to a standard IR technique.
1390559	Bilkent news portal: a personalizable system with new event detection and tracking capabilities An abstract is not available.
1390560	Geographic IR and visualization in time and space This demonstration will show how graphical geospatial query specifications can be used to obtain sets of georeferenced data ranked by probability of relevance, and displayed geographically and temporally in a geospatial browser with temporal support.
1390561	Fine-grained relevance feedback for XML retrieval This demonstration presents an XML IR system that allows users to give feedback of different granularities and types, using Dempster-Shafer theory of evidence to compute expanded and reweighted queries.
1390562	Dynamic visualization of music classification systems An abstract is not available.
1390563	From concepts to implementation and visualization: tools from a team-based approach to ir Researchers have been studying and developing teaching materials for information retrieval (IR), such as [3]. Toolkits also have been built that provide hands-on experience to students. For example, IR-Toolbox [4] is an effort to close the gap between the students' understanding of IR concepts and real-life indexing and search systems. Such tools might be good for helping students in non-technical areas such as in the Library and Information Science field to develop their conceptual model of search engines. However, they do not cover emerging topics and skills, such as content-based image retrieval (CBIR) and fusion search. Although there is open source software (such as those in http://www.searchtools.com/tools/tools-opensource.html) that can be used to teach basic and advanced IR topics, they require a student to have high-level technical knowledge and to spend a long time to gain a practical understanding of these topics. We present a new and rapid approach to teach basic and advanced IR topics, such as text retrieval, web-based IR, CBIR, and fusion search, to Computer Science (CS) graduate students. We designed projects that would help students grasp the abovementioned IR topics. Students, working in teams, were given a practical application to start with -- the Superimposed Application for Image Description and Retrieval [5]. SAIDR (earlier, SIERRA) allows users to associate parts of images with multimedia information such as text annotations. Also, users may retrieve information in one of two 2 ways: (1) Perform text-based retrieval on annotations; (2) Perform CBIR on images and parts of images that look like a query image (or part of a query image). Each team was asked to build an enhancement for this application, involving text retrieval and/or CBIR, in three weeks time. The sub-projects are described in Table 1. The outcome of this activity was that students learned about IR concepts while being able to relate their applicability to a real world problem (Figure 1). Details of these projects may be found at http://collab.dlib.vt.edu/runwiki/wiki.pl?TabletPcImageRetrievalSuperimposedInformation. We will demonstrate the tools developed along with the IR concepts they illustrate (Table 1). We believe these tools may aid others to learn about basic and advanced topics in IR.
1390565	Exploiting XML structure to improve information retrieval in peer-to-peer systems With the advent of XML as a standard for representation and exchange of structured documents, a growing amount of XML-documents are being stored in Peer-to-Peer (P2P) networks. Cur¬rent research on P2P search engines proposes the use of Informa¬tion Retrieval (IR) techniques to perform content-based search, but does not take into account structural features of documents. P2P systems typically have no central index, thus avoiding single-points-of-failures, but distribute all information among participating peers. Accordingly, a querying peer has only limited access to the index information and should select carefully which peers can help answering a given query by contributing resources such as local index information or CPU time for ranking computations. Bandwidth consumption is a major issue. To guarantee scalability, P2P systems have to reduce the number of peers involved in the retrieval process. As a result, the retrieval quality in terms of recall and precision may suffer substantially. In the proposed thesis, document structure is considered as an extra source of information to improve the retrieval quality of XML-documents in a P2P environment. The thesis centres on the following questions: how can structural information help to improve the retrieval of XML-documents in terms of result quality such as precision, recall, and specificity? Can XML structure support the routing of queries in distributed environments, especially the selection of promising peers? How can XML IR techniques be used in a P2P network while minimizing bandwidth consumption and considering performance aspects? To answer these questions and to analyze possible achievements, a search engine is proposed that exploits structural hints expressed explicitly by the user or implicitly by the self-describing structure of XML-documents. Additionally, more focused and specific results are obtained by providing ranked retrieval units that can be either XML-documents as a whole or the most relevant passages of theses documents. XML information retrieval techniques are applied in two ways: to select those peers participating in the retrieval process, and to compute the relevance of documents. The indexing approach includes both content and structural information of documents. To support efficient execution of multi term queries, index keys consist of rare combinations of (content, structure)-tuples. Performance is increased by using only fixedsized posting lists: frequent index keys are combined with each other iteratively until the new combination is rare, with a posting list size under a pre-set threshold. All posting lists are sorted by taking into account classical IR measures such as term frequency and inverted term frequency as well as weights for potential retrieval units of a document, with a slight bias towards documents on peers with good collections regarding the current index key and with good peer characteristics such as online times, available bandwidth, and latency. When extracting the posting list for a specific query, a re-ordering on the posting list is performed that takes into account the structural similarity between key and query. According to this preranking, peers are selected that are expected to hold information about potentially relevant documents and retrieval units The final ranking is computed in parallel on those selected peers. The computation is based on an extension of the vector space model and distinguishes between weights for different structures of the same content. This allows weighting XML elements with respect to their discriminative power, e.g. a title will be weighted much higher than a footnote. Additionally, relevance is computed as a mixture of content relevance and structural similarity between a given query and a potential retrieval unit. Currently, a first prototype for P2P Information Retrieval of XML-documents called SPIRIX is being implemented. Experiments to evaluate the proposed techniques and use of structural hints will be performed on a distributed version of the INEX Wikipedia Collection.
1390566	Affective feedback: an investigation into the role of emotions in the information seeking process User feedback is considered to be a critical element in the information seeking process. An important aspect of the feedback cycle is relevance assessment that has progressively become a popular practice in web searching activities and interactive information retrieval (IR). The value of relevance assessment lies in the disambiguation of the user's information need, which is achieved by applying various feedback techniques. Such techniques vary from explicit to implicit and help determine the relevance of the retrieved documents. The former type of feedback is usually obtained through the explicit and intended indication of documents as relevant (positive feedback) or irrelevant (negative feedback). Explicit feedback is a robust method for improving a system's overall retrieval performance and producing better query reformulations [1], at the expense of users' cognitive resources. On the other hand, implicit feedback techniques tend to collect information on search behavior in a more intelligent and unobtrusive manner. By doing so, they disengage the users from the cognitive burden of document rating and relevance judgments. Information-seeking activities such as reading time, saving, printing, selecting and referencing have been all treated as indicators of relevance, despite the lack of sufficient evidence to support their effectiveness [2]. Besides their apparent differences, both categories of feedback techniques determine document relevance with respect to the cognitive and situational levels of the interactive dialogue that occurs between the user and the retrieval system [5]. However, this approach does not account for the dynamic interplay and adaptation that takes place between the different dialogue levels, but most importantly it does not consider the affective dimension of interaction. Users interact with intentions, motivations and feelings apart from real-life problems and information objects, which are all critical aspects of cognition and decision-making [3][4]. By evaluating users' affective response towards an information object (e.g. a document), prior and post to their exposure to it, a more accurate understanding of the object's properties and degree of relevance to the current information need may be facilitated. Furthermore, systems that can detect and respond accordingly to user emotions could potentially improve the naturalness of human-computer interaction and progressively optimize their retrieval strategy. The current study investigates the role of emotions in the information seeking process, as the latter are communicated through multi-modal interaction, and reconsiders relevance feedback with respect to what occurs on the affective level of interaction as well.
1390567	Exploring and measuring dependency trees for informationretrieval Natural language processing techniques are believed to hold a tremendous potential to supplement the purely quantitative methods of text information retrieval. This has led to the emergence of a large number of NLP-based IR research projects over the last few years, even though the empirical evidence to support this has often been inadequate. Most contributions of NLP to IR mainly concentrate on document representation and compound term matching strategies. Researchers have noted that the simple term-based representation of document content such as vector representation is usually inadequate for accurate discrimination. The "bag of words" representation does not invoke linguistic considerations and allow modelling of relationships between subsets of words. However, even though a variety of content indicator such as syntactic phrase have been tried and investigated for representing documents rather than single terms in IR systems, the matching strategy over those representation still cannot go beyond traditional statistical techniques that measure term co-occurrence characteristics and proximity in analyzing text structure. In this paper, we propose a novel IR strategy (SIR) with NLP techniques involved at the syntactic level. Within SIR, documents and query representation are built on the basis of a syntactic data structure of the natural language text - the dependency tree, in which syntactic relationships between words are identified and structured in the form of a tree. In order to capture the syntactic relations between words in their hierarchical structural representation, the matching strategy in SIR upgrades from the traditional statistical techniques by introducing a similarity measure method executing on the graph representation level as the key determiner. A basic IR experiment is designed and implemented on the TREC data to evaluate if this novel IR model is feasible. Experimental results indicate that this approach has the potential to outperform the standard bag of words IR model, especially in response to syntactical structured queries.
1390568	The search for expertise: to the documents and beyond An abstract is not available.
1390569	Task detection for activity-based desktop search The desktop search tools provide powerful query capabilities and result presentation techniques. However, they do not take the user context into account. We propose to exploit collected information about user activities with desktop files and applications for activity-based desktop search. When I prepare for a project review and type in a search box the name of a colleague, I expect to find her last deliverable draft, but not her email with a paper review or our joint conference presentation. Ideally, the desktop search system should be able to infer my current task from the logs of my previous activities and present task-specific search results.
1390570	Using a mediated query approach for matching unstructured query with structured resources An abstract is not available.
1390571	Understanding system implementation and user behavior in a collaborative information seeking environment An abstract is not available.
1390572	Biomedical cross-language information retrieval An abstract is not available.
1390573	Towards a combined model for search and navigation of annotated documents An abstract is not available.
1390574	Context and linking in retrieval from personal digital archives Advances in digital capture and storage technologies mean that it is now possible to capture and store one's entire life experiences in personal digital archives. These vast personal archives (or Human Digital Memories (HDMs)) pose new challenges and opportunities for the research community, not the least of which is developing effective means of retrieval from HDMs. Personal archive retrieval research is still in its infancy and there is much scope for novel research. My PhD proposes to develop effective HDM retrieval algorithms by combining rich sources of context associated with items, such as location and people present data, with information obtained by linking HDM items in novel ways.
1390575	Extending language modeling techniques to models of search and browsing activity in a digital library Users searching for information in a digital library or on the WWW can be modeled as individuals moving through a semantic space by issuing queries and clicking on hyperlinks. As they go, they emit a stream of interaction data. Most of it is linguistic data. Lots of it is captured in logs. Some of it is used to guess what the user is searching for. But to most information retrieval systems, each user interaction is a stateless point in this space. There is a timeline connecting each of these points, but systems seldom make use of this as sequence data, in part because there is no clear way to systematically characterize the meaningful relations within a sequence of user activity. It is a problem of pragmatics as much as it is of semantics--the fact that a user clicked on a particular link, or added a particular term to their query, has meaning primarily in relation to the preceding actions. A remaining challenge in IR is to extract features of the user interaction data that will give meaning to those relations. Meanwhile, from the user's perspective each of these points in time and semantic space are just part of a path of exploration. To the user, the exact terms in a query, or the specific words surrounding a hypertext link, may be less important than the trajectory those terms establish in relation to the user's path. Identifying the meaningful relations between queries and page views within a sequence of activity increases our understanding of users and their information needs. Formally, we can model query and browsing behaviors as surface forms of a hidden process. What is missing is a layer of abstraction for mapping sequences of interaction in a way that is both descriptive of users' needs and useful to automation. The work I describe is an effort to identify features of data in logs of query and browsing activity that are highly predictive of certain types of behavior. Sequences of interaction data from individual users are modeled as sequences of expression. Statistical modeling techniques that are effective for modeling sequences in natural language processing and bioinformatics are examined for their ability to model sequences of interaction between an information searcher and an information retrieval system. Queries and click-throughs in this stream of interaction can be tagged with features such as semantic coordinates, timing, frequency of use, type of action, etc. By analyzing large collections of interaction sequences it is possible to identify frequent patterns of user behavior. From these patterns we can make predictions about future interactions. For example, certain patterns of link following in a digital library are highly predictive of users' next steps while other patterns are not. General models of user interaction are useful for design and evaluation of search interfaces. Individual models of user interaction are useful for personalized search and customized content. Yet very little research has been done to investigate which features are optimal for modeling user queries and browsing as interaction sequences. An important first step is to identify informative features and the relationships between features. I propose to construct models of user behavior based on user data in logs of query and browsing activity and to identify features that are highly predictive of certain types of user behaviors. I examine activity within search sessions on a digital library as a microcosm of larger systems. I expect to find features that are useful in predictive models of user behavior both at an individual and aggregate level. Where possible, I hope to identify meaningful relationships between those features. The work has implications beyond the scope of digital libraries, to larger systems and broader search domains.
564377	Landmarks in information retrieval: the message out of the bottle For many years I have wanted to give a talk like this: look back on our subject, identify the high (and perhaps low) points, consider what worked, what did not work, and speculate a little about the future. Now that I at last have the opportunity to give such a talk the realisation has dawned just how difficult it is to do justice to the topic. The only way out of this difficulty for me is to emphasise that this is a personal account, based on my involvement with the field since 1968, and that errors of omission and commission are not deliberate but simply due to lack of knowledge and time on my part. To talk of landmarks is easy but to say what they are in IR is not. They come in various shapes and sizes: events, publications, experiment, ideas, etc. In the course of this presentation I shall be judiciously mixing all of these. However, the emphasis will be on ideas and their subsequent modelling and testing through experimentation. The interaction between theory and experiment will be a recurring theme. I will try and associate these developments with key individuals, thereby running the risk of ignoring some; I apologise for this in advance. The pre-history of our subject can be traced back to the work in the 19th century, perhaps even further, but I will pick it up at the middle of the last century (20th) starting with the work of Robert Fairthorne and Vannevar Bush. This early work emphasised the possibility of using mechanical devices to store and retrieve information. Of course the foundations of modern information retrieval were properly laid after 1945 with the pioneering work of Cleverdon, Salton, Sparck Jones, and others. This work gave rise to a strong experimental methodology for the evaluation of theoretical ideas, which has been sustained to this day. It has been a hallmark of IR research that theory is developed in the context of experimentation. There is no doubt that many disciplines are jealous of the success of TREC. IR research has thrown up a number of successful models. These models have been based on some, often unstated, assumptions (or hypotheses). I will attempt to identify some of the underlying ideas, giving credit where is due, that led to the fruitful exploration of retrieval models. This will include system-oriented as well as user-oriented ideas, especially those concerned with the measurement of retrieval performance. IR has been fortunate in that the subject has grown through the active collaboration between computer scientists and information scientists. This has meant that traditional approaches to the storage and retrieval of information emanating from the library world, for example, have always strongly influenced new developments. This tension between manual (human) processes and automatic computer-based processes in IR has always been fruitful. Even now with the evolution of ideas about meta-data and ontologies needed to enhance web retrieval, the debate about controlled vocabularies versus automatic indexing is relevant. Issues of scalability are particularly important here. One of the strengths that have emerged in our subject is that many of our models can be deployed independently of medium or modality. For example, retrieving images or audio sequences can be handled in ways similar to those used to retrieve text data. This has proved to be great boon to IR. The development of web retrieval through the deployment of various kinds of search engines has been based on the considerable early work in IR although detailing the specific influences is not easy. It is clear that the underlying mathematical and statistical models in IR have been ubiquitous in application. The extreme difficulty encountered in making NLP work for IR forced researchers to develop powerful statistical, probabilistic, geometrical, and logical techniques to complement linguistic ones. This is now paying off because of the similar difficulties encountered in other media. Having given some account of how we got here I will spend a little time talking about where we go from here, how do we extract the message from the bottle?
564378	Is natural language an inconvenience or an opportunity for IR? Natural language (NL) has evolved to facilitate human communication. It enables the speaker to make the listener's mind wander among her experiences and mental associations roughly according to the intentions of the speaker. The speaker and the listener usually share experiences and expectations, and they use mostly the same units and rules of a shared NL. Written language functions similarly, but in a less interactive way, with fewer possibilities for feedback.Both the symbols of NL (i.e. words or morphemes), and their arrangements are meaningful. Not with universal and precise meanings, but similar enough among different speakers and accurate enough for the communication mostly to succeed.NLs are mostly very large systems. Hundreds of thousands of words and infinitely many possible utterances. Even inflection alone might produce huge numbers of forms, e.g. more than ten thousand distinct forms out of every Finnish verb entry.NL processing (for IR or any other purpose) must cope with phenomena like (1) inflection and compounding, (2) synonymy, (3) polysemy, (4) ambiguity, (5) anaphora and (6) head-modifier relations among words and phrases.Language technology can neutralize much of the effect of these 'inconveniences' inherent with NL, but what kinds of advantages could NL have? Redundant use of synonymous expressions can effectively identify new concepts. Multilingual parallel documents may help in identifying their exact content. NLs typically carry connotations, i.e. what is implied but not explicitly said (e.g. attitudes, politeness). Vague associations are easy to express in NL, but not always in formal systems (e.g. "a few years ago there was an article about the rival of Yeltsin - I don't remember his name but - he then went over to some region in Siberia - but what did the guy promise?") Jokes and humor belong to NLs, not to formal systems. .Are there any alternatives for NL? Not really, because any artificial and more precise formalisms fail to adapt to new concepts and they do not easily allow restructuring of previous ideas.One challenge for language technology is to find better solutions for the above 'inconveniences' in order to provide various IR, document classification, indexing and summarizing methods with more accurate and adequate input data. With more accurate input some of the more demanding tasks of IR can perhaps be solved.
564380	Impact transformation: effective and efficient web retrieval We extend the applicability of impact transformation, which is a technique for adjusting the term weights assigned to documents so as to boost the effectiveness of retrieval when short queries are applied to large document collections. In conjunction with techniques called quantization and thresholding, impact transformation allows improved query execution rates compared to traditional vector-space similarity computations, as the number of arithmetic operations can be reduced. The transformation also facilitates a new dynamic query pruning heuristic. We give results based upon the trec web data that show the combination of these various techniques to yield highly competitive retrieval, in terms of both effectiveness and efficiency, for both short and long queries.
564381	Analysis of lexical signatures for finding lost or related documents A lexical signature of a web page is often sufficient for finding the page, even if its URL has changed. We conduct a large-scale empirical study of eight methods for generating lexical signatures, including Phelps and Wilensky's [14] original proposal (PW) and seven of our own variations. We examine their performance on the web and on a TREC data set, evaluating their ability both to uniquely identify the original document and to locate other relevant documents if the original is lost. Lexical signatures chosen to minimize document frequency (DF) are good at unique identification but poor at finding relevant documents. PW works well on the relatively small TREC data set, but acts almost identically to DF on the web, which contains billions of documents. Term-frequency-based lexical signatures (TF) are very easy to compute and often perform well, but are highly dependent on the ranking system of the search engine used. In general, TFIDF-based method and hybrid methods (which combine DF with TF or TFIDF) seem to be the most promising candidates for generating effective lexical signatures.
564382	Using sampled data and regression to merge search engine results This paper addresses the problem of merging results obtained from different databases and search engines in a distributed information retrieval environment. The prior research on this problem either assumed the exchange of statistics necessary for normalizing scores (cooperative solutions) or is heuristic. Both approaches have disadvantages. We show that the problem in uncooperative environments is simpler when viewed as a component of a distributed IR system that uses query-based sampling to create resource descriptions. Documents sampled for creating resource descriptions can also be used to create a sample centralized index, and this index is a source of training data for adaptive results merging algorithms. A variety of experiments demonstrate that this new approach is more effective than a well-known alternative, and that it allows query-by-query tuning of the results merging function.
564383	The Importance of Prior Probabilities for Entry Page Search An important class of searches on the world-wide-web has the goal to find an entry page (homepage) of an organisation. Entry page search is quite different from Ad Hoc search. Indeed a plain Ad Hoc system performs disappointingly. We explored three non-content features of web pages: page length, number of incoming links and URL form. Especially the URL form proved to be a good predictor. Using URL form priors we found over 70% of all entry pages at rank 1, and up to 89% in the top 10. Non-content features can easily be embedded in a language model framework as a prior probability.
564385	Term-specific smoothing for the language modeling approach to information retrieval: the importance of a query term This paper follows a formal approach to information retrieval based on statistical language models. By introducing some simple reformulations of the basic language modeling approach we introduce the notion of importance of a query term. The importance of a query term is an unknown parameter that explicitly models which of the query terms are generated from the relevant documents (the important terms), and which are not (the unimportant terms). The new language modeling approach is shown to explain a number of practical facts of today's information retrieval systems that are not very well explained by the current state of information retrieval theory, including stop words, mandatory terms, coordination level ranking and retrieval using phrases.
564386	Title language model for information retrieval In this paper, we propose a new language model, namely, a title language model, for information retrieval. Different from the traditional language model used for retrieval, we define the conditional probability P(Q|D) as the probability of using query Q as the title for document D. We adopted the statistical translation model learned from the title and document pairs in the collection to compute the probability P(Q|D). To avoid the sparse data problem, we propose two new smoothing methods. In the experiments with four different TREC document collections, the title language model for information retrieval with the new smoothing method outperforms both the traditional language model and the vector space model for IR significantly.
564387	Two-stage language models for information retrieval The optimal settings of retrieval parameters often depend on both the document collection and the query, and are usually found through empirical tuning. In this paper, we propose a family of two-stage language models for information retrieval that explicitly captures the different influences of the query and document collection on the optimal settings of retrieval parameters. As a special case, we present a two-stage smoothing method that allows us to estimate the smoothing parameters completely automatically. In the first stage, the document language model is smoothed using a Dirichlet prior with the collection language model as the reference model. In the second stage, the smoothed document language model is further interpolated with a query background language model. We propose a leave-one-out method for estimating the Dirichlet parameter of the first stage, and the use of document mixture models for estimating the interpolation parameter of the second stage. Evaluation on five different databases and four types of queries indicates that the two-stage smoothing method with the proposed parameter estimation methods consistently gives retrieval performance that is close to---or better than---the best results achieved using a single smoothing method and exhaustive parameter search on the test data.
564389	Finding relevant documents using top ranking sentences: an evaluation of two alternative schemes In this paper we present an evaluation of techniques that are designed to encourage web searchers to interact more with the results of a web search. Two specific techniques are examined: the presentation of sentences that highly match the searcher's query and the use of implicit evidence. Implicit evidence is evidence captured from the searcher's interaction with the retrieval results and is used to automatically update the display. Our evaluation concentrates on the effectiveness and subject perception of these techniques. The results show, with statistical significance, that the techniques are effective and efficient for information seeking.
564390	Predicting category accesses for a user in a structured information space In a categorized information space, predicting users' information needs at the category level can facilitate personalization, caching and other topic-oriented services. This paper presents a two-phase model to predict the category of a user's next access based on previous accesses. Phase 1 generates a snapshot of a user's preferences among categories based on a temporal and frequency analysis of the user's access history. Phase 2 uses the computed preferences to make predictions at different category granularities. Several alternatives for each phase are evaluated, using the rating behaviors of on-line raters as the form of access considered. The results show that a method based on re-access pattern and frequency analysis of a user's whole history has the best prediction quality, even over a path-based method (Markov model) that uses the combined history of all users.
564391	Detecting and Browsing Events in Unstructured text Previews and overviews of large, heterogeneous information resources help users comprehend the scope of collections and focus on particular subsets of interest. For narrative documents, questions of "what happened? where? and when?" are natural points of entry. Building on our earlier work at the Perseus Project with detecting terms, place names, and dates, we have exploited co-occurrences of dates and place names to detect and describe likely events in document collections. We compare statistical measures for determining the relative significance of various events. We have built interfaces that help users preview likely regions of interest for a given range of space and time by plotting the distribution and relevance of various collocations. Users can also control the amount of collocation information in each view. Once particular collocations are selected, the system can identify key phrases associated with each possible event to organize browsing of the documents themselves.
564393	Novelty and redundancy detection in adaptive filtering This paper addresses the problem of extending an adaptive information filtering system to make decisions about the novelty and redundancy of relevant documents. It argues that relevance and redundance should each be modelled explicitly and separately. A set of five redundancy measures are proposed and evaluated in experiments with and without redundancy thresholds. The experimental results demonstrate that the cosine similarity metric and a redundancy measure based on a mixture of language models are both effective for identifying redundant documents.
564394	Improving realism of topic tracking evaluation Topic tracking and information filtering are models of interactive tasks, but their evaluations are generally done in a way that does not reflect likely usage. The models either force frequent judgments or disallow any at all, assume the user is always available to make a judgment, and do not allow for user fatigue. In this study we extend the evaluation framework for topic tracking to incorporate those more realistic issues. We demonstrate that tracking can be done in a realistic interactive setting with minimal impact on tracking cost and with substantial reduction in required interaction.
564395	Bayesian online classifiers for text classification and filtering This paper explores the use of Bayesian online classifiers to classify text documents. Empirical results indicate that these classifiers are comparable with the best text classification systems. Furthermore, the online approach offers the advantage of continuous learning in the batch-adaptive text filtering task.
564397	The use of unlabeled data to improve supervised learning for text summarization With the huge amount of information available electronically, there is an increasing demand for automatic text summarization systems. The use of machine learning techniques for this task allows one to adapt summaries to the user needs and to the corpus characteristics. These desirable properties have motivated an increasing amount of work in this field over the last few years. Most approaches attempt to generate summaries by extracting sentence segments and adopt the supervised learning paradigm which requires to label documents at the text span level. This is a costly process, which puts strong limitations on the applicability of these methods. We investigate here the use of semi-supervised algorithms for summarization. These techniques make use of few labeled data together with a larger amount of unlabeled data. We propose new semi-supervised algorithms for training classification models for text summarization. We analyze their performances on two data sets - the Reuters news-wire corpus and the Computation and Language (cmp_lg) collection of TIPSTER SUMMAC. We perform comparisons with a baseline - non learning - system, and a reference trainable summarizer system.
564398	Generic summarization and keyphrase extraction using mutual reinforcement principle and sentence clustering A novel method for simultaneous keyphrase extraction and generic text summarization is proposed by modeling text documents as weighted undirected and weighted bipartite graphs. Spectral graph clustering algorithms are useed for partitioning sentences of the documents into topical groups with sentence link priors being exploited to enhance clustering quality. Within each topical group, saliency scores for keyphrases and sentences are generated based on a mutual reinforcement principle. The keyphrases and sentences are then ranked according to their saliency scores and selected for inclusion in the top keyphrase list and summaries of the document. The idea of building a hierarchy of summaries for documents capturing different levels of granularity is also briefly discussed. Our method is illustrated using several examples from news articles, news broadcast transcripts and web documents.
564399	Cross-document summarization by concept classification In this paper we describe a Cross Document Summarizer XDoX designed specifically to summarize large document sets (50-500 documents and more). Such sets of documents are typically obtained from routing or filtering systems run against a continuous stream of data, such as a newswire. XDoX works by identifying the most salient themes within the set (at the granularity level that is regulated by the user) and composing an extraction summary, which reflects these main themes. In the current version, XDoX is not optimized to produce a summary based on a few unrelated documents; indeed, such summaries are best obtained simply by concatenating summaries of individual documents. We show examples of summaries obtained in our tests as well as from our participation in the first Document Understanding Conference (DUC).
564401	Unsupervised document classification using sequential information maximization We present a novel sequential clustering algorithm which is motivated by the Information Bottleneck (IB) method. In contrast to the agglomerative IB algorithm, the new sequential ( sIB ) approach is guaranteed to converge to a local maximum of the information with time and space complexity typically linear in the data size. information, as required by the original IB principle. Moreover, the time and space complexity are significantly improved. We apply this algorithm to unsupervised document classification. In our evaluation, on small and medium size corpora, the sIB is found to be consistently superior to all the other clustering methods we examine, typically by a significant margin. Moreover, the sIB results are comparable to those obtained by a supervised Naive Bayes classifier. Finally, we propose a simple procedure for trading cluster's recall to gain higher precision, and show how this approach can extract clusters which match the existing topics of the corpus almost perfectly.
564402	Topic difference factor extraction between two document sets and its application to text categorization To improve performance in text categorization, it is important to extract distinctive features for each class. This paper proposes topic difference factor analysis (TDFA) as a method to extract projection axes that reflect topic differences between two document sets. Suppose all sentence vectors that compose each document are projected onto projection axes. TDFA obtains the axes that maximize the ratio between the document sets as to the sum of squared projections by solving a generalized eigenvalue problem. The axes are called topic difference factors (TDF's). By applying TDFA to the document set that belongs to a given class and a set of documents that is misclassified as belonging to that class by an existent classifier, we can obtain features that take large values in the given class but small ones in other classes, as well as features that take large values in other classes but small ones in the given class. A classifier was constructed applying the above features to complement the kNN classifier. As the results, the micro averaged F 1 measure for Reuters-21578 improved from 83.69 to 87.27%.
564403	Text genre classification with genre-revealing and subject-revealing features Subject or prepositional content has been the focus of most classification research. Genre or style, on the other hand, is a different and important property of text, and automatic text genre classification is becoming important for classification and retrieval purposes as well as for some natural language processing research. In this paper, we present a method for automatic genre classification that is based on statistically selected features obtained from both subject-classified and genre classified training data. The experimental results show that the proposed method outperforms a direct application of a statistical learner often used for subject classification. We also observe that the deviation formula and discrimination formula using document frequency ratios also work as expected. We conjecture that this dual feature set approach can be generalized to improve the performance of subject classification as well.
564404	A new family of online algorithms for category ranking We describe a new family of topic-ranking algorithms for multi-labeled documents. The motivation for the algorithms stems from recent advances in online learning algorithms. The algorithms we present are simple to implement and are time and memory efficient. We evaluate the algorithms on the Reuters-21578 corpus and the new corpus released by Reuters in 2000. On both corpora the algorithms we present outperform adaptations to topic-ranking of Rocchio's algorithm and the Perceptron algorithm. We also outline the formal analysis of the algorithm in the mistake bound model. To our knowledge, this work is the first to report performance results with the entire new Reuters corpus.
564406	Comparing cross-language query expansion techniques by degrading translation resources The quality of translation resources is arguably the most important factor affecting the performance of a cross-language information retrieval system. While many investigations have explored the use of query expansion techniques to combat errors induced by translation, no study has yet examined the effectiveness of these techniques across resources of varying quality. This paper presents results using parallel corpora and bilingual wordlists that have been deliberately degraded prior to query translation. Across different languages, translingual resources, and degrees of resource degradation, pre-translation query expansion is tremendously effective. In several instances, pre-translation expansion results in better performance when no translations are available, than when an uncompromised resource is used without pre-translation expansion. We also demonstrate that post-translation expansion using relevance feedback can confer modest performance gains. Measuring the efficacy of these techniques with resources of different quality suggests an explanation for the conflicting reports that have appeared in the literature.
564407	Statistical cross-language information retrieval using n-best query translations This paper presents a novel statistical model for cross-language information retrieval. Given a written query in the source language, documents in the target language are ranked by integrating probabilities computed by two statistical models: a query-translation model, which generates most probable term-by-term translations of the query, and a query-document model, which evaluates the likelihood of each document and translation. Integration of the two scores is performed over the set of N most probable translations of the query. Experimental results with values N =1, 5, 10 are presented on the Italian-English bilingual track data used in the CLEF 2000 and 2001 evaluation campaigns.
564408	Cross-lingual relevance models We propose a formal model of Cross-Language Information Retrieval that does not rely on either query translation or document translation. Our approach leverages recent advances in language modeling to directly estimate an accurate topic model in the target language, starting with a query in the source language. The model integrates popular techniques of disambiguation and query expansion in a unified formal framework. We describe how the topic model can be estimated with either a parallel corpus or a dictionary. We test the framework by constructing Chinese topic models from English queries and using them in the CLIR task of TREC9. The model achieves performance around 95% of the strong mono-lingual baseline in terms of average precision. In initial precision, our model outperforms the mono-lingual baseline by 20%. The main contribution of this work is the unified formal model which integrates techniques that are essential for effective Cross-Language Retrieval.
564409	Resolving query translation ambiguity using a decaying co-occurrence model and syntactic dependence relations Bilingual dictionaries have been commonly used for query translation in cross-language information retrieval (CLIR). However, we are faced with the problem of translation selection. Several recent studies suggested the utilization of term co-occurrences in this selection. This paper presents two extensions to improve them. First, we extend the basic co-occurrence model by adding a decaying factor that decreases the mutual information when the distance between the terms increases. Second, we incorporate a triple translation model, in which syntactic dependence relations (represented as triples) are integrated. Our evaluation on translation accuracy shows that translating triples as units is more precise than a word-by-word translation. Our CLIR experiments show that the addition of the decaying factor leads to substantial improvements of the basic co-occurrence model; and the triple translation model brings further improvements.
564411	Document clustering with cluster refinement and model selection capabilities In this paper, we propose a document clustering method that strives to achieve: (1) a high accuracy of document clustering, and (2) the capability of estimating the number of clusters in the document corpus (i.e. the model selection capability). To accurately cluster the given document corpus, we employ a richer feature set to represent each document, and use the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) together with the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm to conduct an initial document clustering. From this initial result, we identify a set of discriminative featuresfor each cluster, and refine the initially obtained document clusters by voting on the cluster label of each document using this discriminative feature set. This self-refinement process of discriminative feature identification and cluster label voting is iteratively applied until the convergence of document clusters. On the other hand, the model selection capability is achieved by introducing randomness in the cluster initialization stage, and then discovering a value C for the number of clusters N by which running the document clustering process for a fixed number of times yields sufficiently similar results. Performance evaluations exhibit clear superiority of the proposed method with its improved document clustering and model selection accuracies. The evaluations also demonstrate how each feature as well as the cluster refinement process contribute to the document clustering accuracy.
564412	Document clustering with committees Document clustering is useful in many information retrieval tasks: document browsing, organization and viewing of retrieval results, generation of Yahoo-like hierarchies of documents, etc. The general goal of clustering is to group data elements such that the intra-group similarities are high and the inter-group similarities are low. We present a clustering algorithm called CBC (Clustering By Committee) that is shown to produce higher quality clusters in document clustering tasks as compared to several well known clustering algorithms. It initially discovers a set of tight clusters (high intra-group similarity), called committees, that are well scattered in the similarity space (low inter-group similarity). The union of the committees is but a subset of all elements. The algorithm proceeds by assigning elements to their most similar committee. Evaluating cluster quality has always been a difficult task. We present a new evaluation methodology that is based on the editing distance between output clusters and manually constructed classes (the answer key). This evaluation measure is more intuitive and easier to interpret than previous evaluation measures.
564413	Probabilistic combination of text classifiers using reliability indicators: models and results The intuition that different text classifiers behave in qualitatively different ways has long motivated attempts to build a better metaclassifier via some combination of classifiers. We introduce a probabilistic method for combining classifiers that considers the context-sensitive reliabilities of contributing classifiers. The method harnesses reliability indicators ---variables that provide a valuable signal about the performance of classifiers in different situations. We provide background, present procedures for building metaclassifiers that take into consideration both reliability indicators and classifier outputs, and review a set of comparative studies undertaken to evaluate the methodology.
564415	Efficient phrase querying with an auxiliary index Search engines need to evaluate queries extremely fast, a challenging task given the vast quantities of data being indexed. A significant proportion of the queries posed to search engines involve phrases. In this paper we consider how phrase queries can be efficiently supported with low disk overheads. Previous research has shown that phrase queries can be rapidly evaluated using nextword indexes, but these indexes are twice as large as conventional inverted files. We propose a combination of nextword indexes with inverted files as a solution to this problem. Our experiments show that combined use of an auxiliary nextword index and a conventional inverted file allow evaluation of phrase queries in half the time required to evaluate such queries with an inverted file alone, and the space overhead is only 10% of the size of the inverted file. Further time savings are available with only slight increases in disk requirements.
564416	Compression of inverted indexes For fast query evaluation Compression reduces both the size of indexes and the time needed to evaluate queries. In this paper, we revisit the compression of inverted lists of document postings that store the position and frequency of indexed terms, considering two approaches to improving retrieval efficiency: better implementation and better choice of integer compression schemes. First, we propose several simple optimisations to well-known integer compression schemes, and show experimentally that these lead to significant reductions in time. Second, we explore the impact of choice of compression scheme on retrieval efficiency.In experiments on large collections of data, we show two surprising results: use of simple byte-aligned codes halves the query evaluation time compared to the most compact Golomb-Rice bitwise compression schemes; and, even when an index fits entirely in memory, byte-aligned codes result in faster query evaluation than does an uncompressed index, emphasising that the cost of transferring data from memory to the CPU cache is less for an appropriately compressed index than for an uncompressed index. Moreover, byte-aligned schemes have only a modest space overhead: the most compact schemes result in indexes that are around 10% of the size of the collection, while a byte-aligned scheme is around 13%. We conclude that fast byte-aligned codes should be used to store integers in inverted lists.
564417	Set-based model: a new approach for information retrieval The objective of this paper is to present a new technique for computing term weights for index terms, which leads to a new ranking mechanism, referred to as set-based model. The components in our model are no longer terms, but termsets. The novelty is that we compute term weights using a data mining technique called association rules, which is time efficient and yet yields nice improvements in retrieval effectiveness. The set-based model function for computing the similarity between a document and a query considers the termset frequency in the document and its scarcity in the document collection. Experimental results show that our model improves the average precision of the answer set for all three collections evaluated. For the TReC-3 collection, our set-based model led to a gain, relative to the standard vector space model, of 37% in average precision curves and of 57% in average precision for the top 10 documents. Like the vector space model, the set-based model has time complexity that is linear in the number of documents in the collection.
564419	Collaborative filtering with privacy via factor analysis Collaborative filtering (CF) is valuable in e-commerce, and for direct recommendations for music, movies, news etc. But today's systems have several disadvantages, including privacy risks. As we move toward ubiquitous computing, there is a great potential for individuals to share all kinds of information about places and things to do, see and buy, but the privacy risks are severe. In this paper we describe a new method for collaborative filtering which protects the privacy of individual data. The method is based on a probabilistic factor analysis model. Privacy protection is provided by a peer-to-peer protocol which is described elsewhere, but outlined in this paper. The factor analysis approach handles missing data without requiring default values for them. We give several experiments that suggest that this is most accurate method for CF to date. The new algorithm has other advantages in speed and storage over previous algorithms. Finally, we suggest applications of the approach to other kinds of statistical analyses of survey or questionaire data.
564420	Inverted file search algorithms for collaborative filtering This paper explores the possibility of using a disk based inverted file structure for collaborative filtering. Our hypothesis is that this allows for faster calculation of predictions and also that early termination heuristics may be used to further speed up the filtering process and perhaps even improve the quality of the predictions. In an experiment on the EachMovie dataset this was tested. Our results indicate that searching the inverted file structure is many times faster than general in-memory vector search, even for very large profiles. The Continue termination heuristics produces the best ranked predictions in our experiments, and Quit is the top performer in terms of speed.
564421	Methods and metrics for cold-start recommendations We have developed a method for recommending items that combines content and collaborative data under a single probabilistic framework. We benchmark our algorithm against a naïve Bayes classifier on the cold-start problem, where we wish to recommend items that no one in the community has yet rated. We systematically explore three testing methodologies using a publicly available data set, and explain how these methods apply to specific real-world applications. We advocate heuristic recommenders when benchmarking to give competent baseline performance. We introduce a new performance metric, the CROC curve, and demonstrate empirically that the various components of our testing strategy combine to obtain deeper understanding of the performance characteristics of recommender systems. Though the emphasis of our testing is on cold-start recommending, our methods for recommending and evaluation are general.
564423	Term selection for searching printed Arabic Since many Arabic documents are available only in print, automating retrieval from collections of scanned Arabic document images using Optical Character Recognition (OCR) is an interesting problem. Arabic combines rich morphology with a writing system that presents unique challenges to OCR systems. These factors must be considered when selecting terms for automatic indexing. In this paper, alternative choices of indexing terms are explored using both an existing electronic text collection and a newly developed collection built from images of actual printed Arabic documents. Character n-grams or lightly stemmed words were found to typically yield near-optimal retrieval effectiveness, and combining both types of terms resulted in robust performance across a broad range of conditions.
564424	Empirical studies in strategies for Arabic retrieval This work evaluates a few search strategies for Arabic monolingual and cross-lingual retrieval, using the TREC Arabic corpus as the test-bed. The release by NIST in 2001 of an Arabic corpus of nearly 400k documents with both monolingual and cross-lingual queries and relevance judgments has been a new enabler for empirical studies. Experimental results show that spelling normalization and stemming can significantly improve Arabic monolingual retrieval. Character tri-grams from stems improved retrieval modestly on the test corpus, but the improvement is not statistically significant. To further improve retrieval, we propose a novel thesaurus-based technique. Different from existing approaches to thesaurus-based retrieval, ours formulates word synonyms as probabilistic term translations that can be automatically derived from a parallel corpus. Retrieval results show that the thesaurus can significantly improve Arabic monolingual retrieval. For cross-lingual retrieval (CLIR), we found that spelling normalization and stemming have little impact.
564425	Improving stemming for Arabic information retrieval: light stemming and co-occurrence analysis Arabic, a highly inflected language, requires good stemming for effective information retrieval, yet no standard approach to stemÂ¿ming has emerged. We developed several light stemmers based on heuristics and a statistical stemmer based on co-occurrence for Arabic retrieval. We compared the retrieval effectiveness of our stemmers and of a morphological analyzer on the TREC-2001 data. The best light stemmer was more effective for cross-lanÂ¿guage retrieval than a morphological stemmer which tried to find the root for each word. A repartitioning process consisting of vowel removal followed by clustering using co-occurrence analyÂ¿sis proÂ¿duced stem classes which were better than no stemming or very light stemming, but still inferior to good light stemming or morÂ¿phological analysis.
564427	Automatic query wefinement using lexical affinities with maximal information gain This work describes an automatic query refinement technique, which focuses on improving precision of the top ranked documents. The terms used for refinement are lexical affinities (LAs), pairs of closely related words which contain exactly one of the original query terms. Adding these terms to the query is equivalent to re-ranking search results, thus, precision is improved while recall is preserved. We describe a novel method that selects the most "informative" LAs for refinement, namely, those LAs that best separate relevant documents from irrelevant documents in the set of results. The information gain of candidate LAs is determined using unsupervised estimation that is based on the scoring function of the search engine. This method is thus fully automatic and its quality depends on the quality of the scoring function. Experiments we conducted with TREC data clearly show a significant improvement in the precision of the top ranked documents.
564428	Web question answering: is more always better? This paper describes a question answering system that is designed to capitalize on the tremendous amount of data that is now available online. Most question answering systems use a wide variety of linguistic resources. We focus instead on the redundancy available in large corpora as an important resource. We use this redundancy to simplify the query rewrites that we need to use, and to support answer mining from returned snippets. Our system performs quite well given the simplicity of the techniques being utilized. Experimental results show that question answering accuracy can be greatly improved by analyzing more and more matching passages. Simple passage ranking and n-gram extraction techniques work well in our system making it efficient to use with many backend retrieval engines.
564429	Predicting query performance We develop a method for predicting query performance by computing the relative entropy between a query language model and the corresponding collection language model. The resulting clarity score measures the coherence of the language usage in documents whose models are likely to generate the query. We suggest that clarity scores measure the ambiguity of a query with respect to a collection of documents and show that they correlate positively with average precision in a variety of TREC test sets. Thus, the clarity score may be used to identify ineffective queries, on average, without relevance information. We develop an algorithm for automatically setting the clarity score threshold between predicted poorly-performing queries and acceptable queries and validate it using TREC data. In particular, we compare the automatic thresholds to optimum thresholds and also check how frequently results as good are achieved in sampling experiments that randomly assign queries to the two classes.
564430	Using part-of-speech patterns to reduce query ambiguity Query ambiguity is a generally recognized problem, particularly in Web environments where queries are commonly only one or two words in length. In this study, we explore one technique that finds commonly occurring patterns of parts of speech near a one-word query and allows them to be transformed into clarification questions. We use a technique derived from statistical language modeling to show that the clarification queries will reduce ambiguity much of the time, and often quite substantially.
564432	The effect of topic set size on retrieval experiment error Retrieval mechanisms are frequently compared by computing the respective average scores for some effectiveness metric across a common set of information needs or topics, with researchers concluding one method is superior based on those averages. Since comparative retrieval system behavior is known to be highly variable across topics, good experimental design requires that a "sufficient" number of topics be used in the test. This paper uses TREC results to empirically derive error rates based on the number of topics used in a test and the observed difference in the average scores. The error rates quantify the likelihood that a different set of topics of the same size would lead to a different conclusion. We directly compute error rates for topic sets up to size 25, and extrapolate those rates for larger topic set sizes. The error rates found are larger than anticipated, indicating researchers need to take care when concluding one method is better than another, especially if few topics are used.
564433	Liberal relevance criteria of TREC -: counting on negligible documents? Most test collections (like TREC and CLEF) for experimental research in information retrieval apply binary relevance assessments. This paper introduces a four-point relevance scale and reports the findings of a project in which TREC-7 and TREC-8 document pools on 38 topics were reassessed. The goal of the reassessment was to build a subcollection of TREC for experiments on highly relevant documents and to learn about the assessment process as well as the characteristics of a multigraded relevance corpus.Relevance criteria were defined so that a distinction was made between documents rich in topical information (relevant and highly relevant documents) and poor in topical information (marginally relevant documents). It turned out that about 50% of documents assessed as relevant were regarded as marginal. The characteristics of the relevance corpus and lessons learned from the reassessment project are discussed. The need to develop more elaborated relevance assessment schemes is emphasized.
564435	Robust temporal and spectral modeling for query By melody Query by melody is the problem of retrieving musical performances from melodies. Retrieval of real performances is complicated due to the large number of variations in performing a melody and the presence of colored accompaniment noise. We describe a simple yet effective probabilistic model for this task. We describe a generative model that is rich enough to capture the spectral and temporal variations of musical performances and allows for tractable melody retrieval. While most of previous studies on music retrieval from melodies were performed with either symbolic (e.g. MIDI) data or with monophonic (single instrument) performances, we performed experiments in retrieving live and studio recordings of operas that contain a leading vocalist and rich instrumental accompaniment. Our results show that the probabilistic approach we propose is effective and can be scaled to massive datasets.
564436	Video retrieval using an MPEG-7 based inference network This work proposes a model for video retrieval based upon the inference network model. The document network is constructed using video metadata encoded using MPEG-7 and captures information pertaining to the structural aspects (video breakdown into shots and scenes), conceptual aspects (video, scene and shot content) and contextual aspects (context information about the position of conceptual content within the document). The retrieval process a) exploits the distribution of evidence among the shots to perform ranking of different levels of granularity, b) addresses the idea that evidence may be inherited during evaluation, and c) exploits the contextual information to perform constrained queries.
564438	Using self-supervised word segmentation in Chinese information retrieval We propose a self-supervised word-segmentation technique for Chinese information retrieval. This method combines the advantages of traditional dictionary based approaches with character based approaches, while overcoming many of their shortcomings. Experiments on TREC data show comparable performance to both the dictionary based and the character based approaches. However, our method is language independent and unsupervised, which provides a promising avenue for constructing accurate multilingual information retrieval systems that are flexible and adaptive.
564439	Automatic classification in product catalogs In this paper, we present the AutoCat system for product classification. AutoCat uses a vector space model, modified to consider product attributes unavailable in traditional document classification. We present key features of our user interface, developed to assist users with evaluating and editing the output of the classification algorithm. Finally, we present observations about the use of this technology in the field.
564440	PageRank, HITS and a unified framework for link analysis Two popular link-based webpage ranking algorithms are (i) PageRank[1] and (ii) HITS (Hypertext Induced Topic Selection)[3]. HITS makes the crucial distinction of hubs and authorities and computes them in a mutually reinforcing way. PageRank considers the hyperlink weight normalization and the equilibrium distribution of random surfers as the citation score. We generalize and combine these key concepts into a unified framework, in which we prove that rankings produced by PageRank and HITS are both highly correlated with the ranking by in-degree and out-degree.
564441	Task orientation in question answering An abstract is not available.
564442	Experiments in high-dimensional text categorization We present results for automated text categorization of the Reuters-810000 collection of news stories. Our experiments use the entire one-year collection of 810,000 stories and the entire subject index. We divide the data into monthly groups and provide an initial benchmark of text categorization performance on the complete collection. Experimental results show that efficient sparse-feature implementations of linear methods and decision trees, using a global unstemmed dictionary, can readily handle applications of this size. Predictive performance is approximately as strong as the best results for the much smaller older Reuters collections. Detailed results are provided over time periods. It is shown that a smaller time horizon does not diminish predictive quality, implying reduced demands for retraining when sample size is large.
564443	The relationship between ASK and relevance criteria An abstract is not available.
564444	ICA and SOM in text document analysis In this study we show experimental results on using Independent Component Analysis (ICA) and the Self-Organizing Map (SOM) in document analysis. Our documents are segments of spoken dialogues carried out over the telephone in a customer service, transcribed into text. The task is to analyze the topics of the discussions, and to group the discussions into meaningful subsets. The quality of the grouping is studied by comparing to a manual topical classification of the documents.
564445	Improving hierarchical text classification using unlabeled data An abstract is not available.
564446	Do thumbnail previews help users make better relevance decisions about web search results? We describe an empirical evaluation of the utility of thumbnail previews in web search results. Results pages were constructed to show text-only summaries, thumbnail previews only, or the combination of text summaries and thumbnail previews. We found that in the combination case, users were able to make more accurate decisions about the potential relevance of results than in either of the other versions, with hardly any increase in speed of processing the page as a whole.
564447	Amilcare: adaptive information extraction for document annotation An abstract is not available.
564448	The impact of corpus size on question answering performance Using our question answering system, questions from the TREC 2001 evaluation were executed over a series of Web data collections, with the sizes of the collections increasing from 25 gigabytes up to nearly a terabyte.
564449	Effective collection metasearch in a hierarchical environment: global vs. localized retrieval performance We compare standard global IR searching with user-centric localized techniques to address the database selection problem . We conduct a series of experiments to compare the retrieval effectiveness of three separate search modes applied to a hierarchically structured data environment of textual database representations. The data environment is represented as a tree-like directory containing over 15,000 unique databases and over 100,000 total leaf nodes. Our search modes consist of varying degrees of browse and search , from a global search at the root node to a refined search at a sub-node using dynamically-calculated inverse document frequencies ( idfs ) to score candidate databases for probable relevance. Our findings indicate that a browse and search approach that relies upon localized searching from sub-nodes is capable of producing the most effective results.
564450	Experimenting with graphical user interfaces for structured document retrieval An abstract is not available.
564451	The web retrieval task and its evaluation in the third NTCIR workshop This paper gives an overview of the evaluation method used for the Web Retrieval Task in the Third NTCIR Workshop, which is currently in progress. In the Web Retrieval Task, we try to assess the retrieval effectiveness of each Web search engine system using a common data set, and attempt to build a re-usable test collection suitable for evaluating Web search engine systems. With these objectives, we have built 100-gigabyte and 10-gigabyte document sets, mainly gathered from the '.jp' domain. Relevance judgment is performed on the retrieved documents, which are written in Japanese or English.
564452	How Many Bits are Needed to Store Term Frequencies? Search algorithms in most current text retrieval systems use index data structures extracted from the original text documents. In this paper we focus on reducing the size of the indices by reducing the amount of space dedicated to store term frequencies. In experiments using TREC Ad Hoc [2, 3] corpora and query sets, we show that it is possible to store the term frequency in only two bits without decreasing retrieval performance.
564453	Non-linear reading for a structured web indexation The growth of the Web has posed new challenges for Information Retrieval (IR). Most of the current systems are based on traditional models, which have been developed for atomic and independents documents and are not adapted to the Web. A promising research orientation consists of studying the impact of the Web structure on indexing. The HyperDocument model presented in this article is based on essential aspects of information comprehension: content, composition and linear/non-linear reading.
564454	Document normalization revisited Cosine Pivoted Document Length Normalization has reached a point of stability where many researchers indiscriminately apply a specific value of 0.2 regardless of the collection. Our efforts, however, demonstrate that applying this specific value without tuning for the document collection degrades average precision by as much as 20%.
564455	User-centered interface design for cross-language information retrieval This paper reports on the user-centered design methodology and techniques used for the elicitation of user requirements and how these requirements informed the first phase of the user interface design for a Cross-Language Information Retrieval System. We describe a set of factors involved in analysis of the data collected and, finally discuss the implications for user interface design based on the findings.
564456	Implementation of relevance feedback for content-based music retrieval based on user prefences An abstract is not available.
564457	Spatial information retrieval and geographical ontologies an overview of the SPIRIT project An abstract is not available.
564458	A visualisation tool for topic tracking analysis and development Topic Detection and Tracking (TDT) research explores the development of algorithms to detect novel events and track their development over time for online reports. Development of these methods requires careful evaluation and analysis. Traditional reductive methods of evaluation only represent some of the available information of algorithm behaviour. We describe a visualisation tool for topic tracking which makes it easy to analysis and compare the temporal behaviour of tracking algorithms.
564459	A new method of parameter estimation for multinomial naive bayes text classifiers Multinomial naive Bayes classifiers have been widely used for the probabilistic text classification. However, their parameter estimation method sometimes generates inappropriate probabilities. In this paper, we propose a topic document model approach for naive Bayes text classification, where their parameters are estimated with an expectation from the training documents. Experiments are conducted on Reuters 21578 and 20 Newsgroup collection, and our proposed approach obtained a significant improvement in performace over the conventional approach.
564460	Study of category score algorithms for k-NN classifier We analyzes category score algorithms for k-NN classifier found in the literature, including majority voting algorithm ( MVA ), simple sum algorithm ( SSA ). MVA and SSA are two mainly used algorithms to estimate score for candidate categories in k-NN classifier systems. Based on the hypothesis that utilization of internal relation between documents and categories could improve system performance, two new weighting score models: concept-based weighting ( CBW ) score model and term independence-based weighting ( IBW ) score model are proposed. Our experimental results confirm our hypothesis and show that in the term of precision average IBW and CBW are better than the other score models, while SSA is higher than MVA . According to macro-average F1 CBW performs best. Rocchio-based algorithm ( RBA ) always performs worst.
564461	Higher precision for two-word queries Queries have specific properties, and may need individualized methods and parameters to optimize retrieval. Length is one property. We look at how two-word queries may attain higher precision by re-ranking using word co-occurrence evidence in retrieved documents. Co-occurrence within document context is not sufficient, but window context including sentence context evidence can provide precision improvements at low recall region of 4 to 10% using initial retrieval results, and positively affects pseudo-relevance feedback.
564462	The boomerang effect: retrieving scientific documents via the network of references and citations An abstract is not available.
564463	A logistic regression approach to distributed IR This poster session examines a probabilistic approach to distributed information retrieval using a Logistic Regression algorithm for estimation of collection relevance. The algorithm is compared to other methods for distributed search using test collections developed for distributed search evaluation.
564464	Automatic metadata generation & evaluation The poster reports on a project in which we are investigating methods for breaking the human metadata-generation bottleneck that plagues Digital Libraries. The research question is whether metadata elements and values can be automatically generated from the content of educational resources, and correctly assigned to mathematics and science educational materials. Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning techniques were implemented to automatically assign values of the GEMgenerate metadata element set tofor learning resources provided by the Gateway for Education (GEM), a service that offers web access to a wide range of educational materials. In a user study, education professionals evaluated the metadata assigned to learning resources by either automatic tagging or manual assignment. Results show minimal difference in the eyes of the evaluators between automatically generated metadata and manually assigned metadata.
564465	A critical examination of TDT's cost function Topic Detection and Tracking (TDT) tasks are evaluated using a cost function. The standard TDT cost function assumes a constant probability of relevance P (rel) across all topics. In practice, P (rel) varies widely across topics. We argue using both theoretical and experimental evidence that the cost function should be modified to account for the varying P (rel).
564466	Converting on-line bilingual dictionaries from human-readable to machine-readable form We describe a language called ABET that allows rapid conversion of on-line human-readable bilingual dictionaries to machine-readable form.
564467	Modeling (in)variability of human judgments for text summarization The paper proposes and empirically motivates an integration of supervised learning with unsupervised learning to deal with human biases in summarization. In particular, we explore the use of probabilistic decision tree within the clustering framework to account for the variation as well as regularity in human created summaries.
564468	Content-based music indexing and organization While electronic music archives are gaining popularity, access to and navigation within these archives is usually limited to text-based queries or manually predefined genre category browsing. We present a system that automatically organizes a music collection according to the perceived sound similarity resembling genres or styles of music. Audio signals are processed according to psychoacoustic models to obtain a time-invariant representation of its characteristics. Subsequent clustering provides an intuitive interface where similar pieces of music are grouped together on a map display.
564469	Relative and absolute term selection criteria: a comparative study for English and Japanese IR An abstract is not available.
564470	Experiments on data fusion using headline information This poster describes initial work exploring a relatively unexamined area of data fusion: fusing the results of retrieval systems whose collections have no overlap between them. Many of the effective meta-search/data fusion strategies gain much of their success from exploiting document overlap across the source systems being merged. When the intersection of the collections is the empty set, the strategies generally degrade to a simpler form. In order to address such situations, two strategies were examined: re-ranking of merged results using a locally run search on the text fragments returned by the source search engines; and re-ranking based on cross document similarity, again using text fragments presented in the retrieved list. Results, from experiments, which go beyond previous work, indicate that both strategies improve fusion effectiveness.
564471	Building thematic lexical resources by term categorization We discuss the automatic generation of thematic lexicons by means of term categorization , a novel task employing techniques from information retrieval (IR) and machine learning (ML). Specifically, we view the generation of such lexicons as an iterative process of learning previously unknown associations between terms and themes (i.e. disciplines, or fields of activity). The process is iterative, in that it generates, for each c i in a set C = {c 1 ,...,c m } of themes, a sequence L i 0 ? L i 1 ? ... ? L i n of lexicons, bootstrapping from an initial lexicon L i 0 and a set of text corpora &THgr; = {&thgr; 0 ,...,&thgr; n-1 } given as input. The method is inspired by text categorization , the discipline concerned with labelling natural language texts with labels from a predefined set of themes, or categories. However, while text categorization deals with documents represented as vectors in a space of terms, term categorization deals (dually) with terms represented as vectors in a space of documents, and labels terms (instead of documents) with themes. As a learning device we adopt boosting , since (a) it has demonstrated state-of-the-art effectiveness in a variety of text categorization applications, and (b) it naturally allows for a form of "data cleaning", thereby making the process of generating a thematic lexicon an iteration of generate-and-test steps.
564472	Topic structure modeling In this paper, we present a method based on document probes to quantify and diagnose topic structure, distinguishing topics as monolithic, structured, or diffuse. The method also yields a structure analysis that can be used directly to optimize filter (classifier) creation. Preliminary results illustrate the predictive value of the approach on TREC/Reuters-96 topics.
564473	Language model for IR using collection information Information retrieval using meta data can be traced back to the early age of IR where documents are represented by the controlled vocabulary. In this paper, we explore the usage of meta-data information under the framework of language model. We present a new language model that is able to take advantage of the category information for documents to improve the retrieval accuracy. We compare the new language model with the traditional language model over the TREC4 dataset where the collection information for documents is obtained using the k-means clustering method. The new language model outperforms the traditional language model, which verifies our statement.
564474	Automatic evaluation of world wide web search services Users of the World-Wide Web are not only confronted by an immense overabundance of information, but also by a plethora of tools for searching for the web pages that suit their information needs. Web search engines differ widely in interface, features, coverage of the web, ranking methods, delivery of advertising, and more. In this paper, we present a method for comparing search engines automatically based on how they rank known item search results. Because the engines perform their search on overlapping (but different) subsets of the web collected at different points in time, evaluation of search engines poses significant challenges to the traditional information retrieval methodology. Our method uses known item searching; comparing the relative ranks of the items in the search engines' rankings. Our approach automatically constructs known item queries using query log analysis and automatically constructs the result via analysis of editor comments from the ODP (Open Directory Project). Additionally, we present our comparison on five (Lycos, Netscape, Fast, Google, HotBot) well-known search services and find that some services perform known item searches better than others, but the majority are statistically equivalent.
564475	Does WT10g look like the web? We measure the WT10g test collection, used in the TREC-9 and TREC 2001 Web Tracks, with common measures used in the web topology community, in order to see if WT10g "looks like" the web. This is not an idle question; characteristics of the web, such as power law relationships, diameter, and connected components have all been observed within the scope of general web crawls, constructed by blindly following links. In contrast, WT10g was carved out from a larger crawl specifically to be a web search test collection within the reach of university researchers. Does such a collection retain the properties of the larger web? In the case of WT10g, yes.
564476	Biterm language models for document retrieval An abstract is not available.
564477	Selecting indexing strings using adaptation It is not easy to tokenize agglutinative languages like Japanese and Chinese into words. Many IR systems start with a dictionary-based morphology program like ChaSen [4]. Unfortunately, dictionaries cannot cover all possible words; unknown words such as proper nouns are important for IR. This paper proposes a statistical dictionary-free method for selecting index strings based on recent work on adaptive language modeling.
564478	Error correction in a Chinese OCR test collection This article proposes a technique for correcting Chinese OCR errors to support retrieval of scanned documents. The technique uses a completely automatic technique (no manually constructed lexicons or confusion resources) to identify both keywords and confusable terms. Improved retrieval effectiveness on a single term query experiment is demonstrated.
564479	User interface effects in past batch versus user experiments An abstract is not available.
564480	K-tree/forest: efficient indexes for boolean queries In Information Retrieval it is well-known that the complexity of processing boolean queries depends on the size of the intermediate results, which could be huge (and are typically on disk) even though the size of the final result may be quite small. In the case of inverted files the most time consuming operation is the merging or intersection of the list of occurrences [1]. We propose, the Keyword tree (K-tree) and forest, efficient structures to handle boolean queries in keyword-based information retrieval. Extensive simulations show that K-tree is orders-of-magnitude faster (i.e., far fewer I/O's) for boolean queries than the usual approach of merging the lists of occurrences and incurs only a small overhead for single keyword queries. The K-tree can be efficiently parallelized as well. The construction cost of K-tree is comparable to the cost of building inverted files.
564481	Example-based phrase translation in Chinese-English CLIR This paper proposes an example-based phrase translation method in a Chinese to English cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) system. The method can generate much more accurate query translations than dictionary-based and common MT-based methods, and then improves the retrieval performance of our CLIR system.
564482	Probabilistic multimedia retrieval We present a framework in which probabilistic models for textual and visual information retrieval can be integrated seamlessly. The framework facilitates searching for imagery using textual descriptions and visual examples simultaneously. The underlying Language Models for text and Gaussian Mixture Models for images have proven successful in various retrieval tasks.
564483	Chinese keyword extraction based on max-duplicated strings of the documents The corpus analysis methods in Chinese keyword extraction look on the corpus as a single sample of language stochastic process. But the distributions of keywords in the whole corpus and in each document are very different from each other. The extraction based on global statistical information only can get significant keywords in the whole corpus. Max-duplicated strings contain the local significant keywords in each document. In this paper, we designed an efficient algorithm to extract the max-duplicated strings by building PAT-tree for the document, so that the keywords can be picked out from the max-duplicated strings by their SIG values in the corpus.
564484	A hierarchical approach: query large music database by acoustic input An abstract is not available.
564485	Correlating multilingual documents via bipartite graph modeling There is enormous amount of multilingual documents from various sources and possibly from different countries describing a single event or a set of related events. It is desirable to construct text mining methods that can compare and highlight similarities and differences of those multilingual documents. We discuss our ongoing research that seeks to model a pair of multilingual documents as a weighted bipartite graph with the edge weights computed by means of machine translation. We use spectral method to identify dense subgraphs of the weighted bipartite graph which can be considered as corresponding to sentences that correlate well in textual contents. We illustrate our approach using English and German texts.
564487	A system using implicit feedback and top ranking sentences to help users find relevant web documents We present a web search interface designed to encourage users to interact more fully with the results of a web search. Wrapping around a major commercial search engine, the system combines three main features; real-time query-biased web document summarisation, the presentation of sentences highly relevant to the searcher's query, and evidence captured from searcher interaction with the retrieval results.
564488	Indexing, searching, and retrieving of recorded live presentations with the AOF (authoring on the fly) search engine The tremendous amount of data resulting from the regular usage of tools for automatic presentation recording demand for elaborate search functionality. A detailed analysis of the according multimedia documents is required to allow search at a very detailed level. Unfortunately, the produced data differs significantly from traditional documents. In this demo, we discuss the problems appearing in the presentation retrieval scenario and introduce aofSE, a search engine to study and illustrate these problems as well as to develop and present according solutions and new approaches for this task.
564489	UTACLIR -: general query translation framework for several language pairs An abstract is not available.
564490	HyREX: hyper-media retrieval engine for XML An abstract is not available.
564491	Query performance analyser -: a web-based tool for IR research and instruction The Interactive Query Performance Analyser (QPA) for information retrieval systems is a Web-based tool for analysing and comparing the performance of individual queries. On top of a standard test collection, it gives an instant visualisation of the performance achieved in a given search topic by any user-generated query. In addition to experimental IR research, QPA can be used in user training to demonstrate the characteristics of and compare differences between IR systems and searching strategies. The first prototype (versions 3.0 and 3.5) of the Query Performance Analyser was developed at the Department of Information Studies, University of Tampere, to serve as a tool for rapid query performance analysis, comparison and visualisation [4,5]. Later, it has been applied to interactive optimisation of queries [2,3]. The analyser has served also in learning environments for IR [1].The demonstration is based on the newest version of the Query Performance Analyser (v. 5.1). It is interfaced to a traditional Boolean IR system (TRIP) and a probabilistic IR system (Inquery) providing access to the TREC collection and two Finnish test collections. Version 5.1 supports multigraded relevance scales, new types of performance visualisations, and query conversions based on mono- and multi-lingual dictionaries. The motivation in developing the analyser is to emphasise the necessity of analysing the behaviour of individual queries. Information retrieval experiments usually measure the average effectiveness of IR methods developed. The analysis of individual queries is neglected although test results may contain individual test topics where general findings do not hold. For the real user of an IR system, the study of variation in results is even more important than averages.
564492	Adaptive information extraction for document annotation in amilcare Amilcare is a tool for Adaptive Information Extraction (IE) designed for supporting active annotation of documents for the Semantic Web (SW). It can be used either for unsupervised document annotation or as a support for human annotation. Amilcare is portable to new applications/domains without any knowledge of IE, as it just requires users to annotate a small training corpus with the information to be extracted. It is based on (LP)2, a supervised learning strategy for IE able to cope with different texts types, from newspaper-like texts, to rigidly formatted Web pages and even a mixture of them[1][5].Adaptation starts with the definition of a tag set for annotation, possibly organized as an ontology. Then users have to manually annotate a small training corpus. Amilcare provides a default mouse-based interface called Melita, where annotations are inserted by first selecting a tag from the ontology and then identifying the text area to annotate with the mouse. Differently from similar annotation tools [4, 5], Melita actively supports training corpus annotation. While users annotate texts, Amilcare runs in the background learning how to reproduce the inserted annotation. Induced rules are silently applied to new texts and their results are compared with the user annotation. When its rules reach a (user-defined) level of accuracy, Melita presents new texts with a preliminary annotation derived by the rule application. In this case users have just to correct mistakes and add missing annotations. User corrections are inputted back to the learner for retraining. This technique focuses the slow and expensive user activity on uncovered cases, avoiding requiring annotating cases where a satisfying effectiveness is already reached. Moreover validating extracted information is a much simpler task than tagging bare texts (and also less error prone), speeding up the process considerably. At the end of the corpus annotation process, the system is trained and the application can be delivered. MnM [6] and Ontomat annotizer [7] are two annotation tools adopting Amilcare's learner.In this demo we simulate the annotation of a small corpus and we show how and when Amilcare is able to support users in the annotation process, focusing on the way the user can control the tool's proactivity and intrusivity. We will also quantify such support with data derived from a number of experiments on corpora. We will focus on training corpus size and correctness of suggestions when the corpus is increased.
564493	ExWrap: semi-automatic wrapper generation by example An abstract is not available.
564494	Souvenir: flexible note-taking tool to pinpoint and share media highlights Digital media audio/video can be difficult to search and share in a personal way. Souvenir is a software system that offers users a flexible and comprehensive way to use their handwritten or text notes to retrieve and share specific media moments. Users can take notes on a variety of devices, such as the paper-based CrossPad, the Palm Pilot and standard keyboard devices. Souvenir segments handwritten notes into an effective media index without the need for handwriting recognition. Users can use their notes to create hyperlinks to random-access media stored in a digital library. Souvenir also has web publishing and email capabilities to enable anyone to access or email media moments directly from a web page. Souvenir annotations capture information that can not be easily inferred by automatic media indexing tools.
564495	Hierarchical approach to term suggestion device Our demonstration shows the hierarchy system working on a locally run search engine. Hierarchies are dynamically generated from the retrieved documents, and visualised on the menus. When a user selects a term from the hierarchy, the documents linked to the term are listed, and the term is then added to the initial query to rerun a search. Through the demonstration we illustrate how hierarchical presentation of expansion terms is achieved, and how our approach supports users to articulate their information needs using the hierarchy.
564496	Translingual vocabulary mappings for multilingual information access An abstract is not available.
564497	GS textplorer -: adaptive framework for information retrieval An abstract is not available.
564498	CuTeX: a system for extracting data from text tables A wealth of information relevant for e-commerce often appears in text form. This includes specification and performance data sheets of products, financial statements, product offerings etc. Typically these types of product and financial data are published in tabular form. The only separators between items in the table are white spaces and line separators. We will refer to such tables as text tables . Due to the lack of structure in such tables, the information present is not readily queriable using traditional database query languages like SQL. One way to make it amenable to standard database querying techniques is to extract the data items in the tables and create a database out of the extracted data. But extraction from text tables poses difficulties due to the irregularity of the data in the column. Existing techniques like [1] and [3] are based on finding fixed separators between successive columns. However, it is not always possible to find fixed separators. Even if fixed separators exist they may not unambiguously separate columns that have multiword items. Another set of techniques are based on regular expressions. The problems here are: (i) they are difficult to construct and (ii) they depend on lexical similarity between column items. Note that, by visual inspection a casual observer can correctly associate every item in a text table to its corresponding column. This is because all the items belonging to a column appear "clustered" more closely to each other than to items in different columns. Whereas such clusters can be clearly discerned by a human observer, making them machine recognizable is the key to robust automated extraction of data items from text-based tables. Clustering enables us to make associations between items in a column based not merely on examining items in adjacent rows but across all the rows in the table. We have designed and implemented the CuteX system for extracting data from irregular text tables. The input is a file containing only text tables. The output produced by CuteX is an association between every items in a column. Note that CuteX does not do table detection in text. The innovative aspect of CuteX is its clustering-based algorithm that drives the extraction process. In CuteX each line is broken down into a set of tokens. Each token is a contiguous sequence of non white-space characters. The center of any token in a cluster is closer to the center of some other token in the same cluster. Inter-cluster gaps are gaps between the extremal tokens in the clusters. Starting with an initial set of clusters, adjacent clusters are merged into bigger clusters based on the inter-cluster gaps. The algorithm terminates when no more clusters can be merged. We have formalized the notion of a correct extraction and developed a syntactic characterization of tables on which this algorithm will always produce a correct extraction. Details appear in [2]. An unique aspect of the algorithm is its robustness in the presence of misalignments. Precision of extraction can be improved by supplying the minimum separation between columns as a parameter. Such a separator is estimated by sampling a few input tables. The clustering algorithm does not merge adjacent clusters if the gap between them is larger than this parameter value. Note though that the minimum column gap cannot be used as a fixed separator since doing so amounts to doing localized determination, making it brittle to misalignments. CuteX is implemented in Java and is approximately about 3000 lines of code. The system automatically partitions the set of input text tables into directories containing correct and incorrect extractions. At the end of an extraction, the user can examine the directory containing incorrectly extracted tables, sample a few of them, identify if it was caused by an erroneous estimate of the minimum column gap, re-adjust the configuration parameter and start a new extraction on all these tables. Successive iterations can generate a higher extraction yield. The primary focus of the demonstration will be on illustrating the robustness and the iterative process of improving the extraction yield of the clustering algorithm.
564499	YellowPager: a tool for ontology-based mining of service directories from web sources The web has established itself as the dominant medium for doing electronic commerce. Realizing that its global reach provides significant market and business opportunities, service providers, both large and small are advertising their services on the web. A number of them operate their own web sites promoting their services at length while others are merely listed in a referral site. Aggregating all of the providers into a queriable service directory makes it easy for customers to locate the one most suited for his/her needs. YellowPager is a tool for creating service directories by mining web sources. Service directories created by YellowPager have several merits compared to those generated by existing practices, which typically require participation by service providers (e.g. Verizon's SuperYellowPages.com). Firstly, the information content will be rich. Secondly since the process is automated and repeatable the content can always be kept current. Finally the same process can be readily adapted to different domains. YellowPager builds service directories by mining the web through a combination of keyword-based search engines,web agents, text classifiers and novel extraction algorithms.The extraction is driven by a services ontology consisting of a taxonomy of service concepts and their associated attributes (such as names and addresses) and type descriptions for the attributes. In addition the ontology also associates an extractor function with each attribute. Applying the function to a web page will identify all the occurrences of the attribute in that page. YellowPager 's mining algorithm consists of a training step followed by classification and extraction steps. In the training step a classifier is trained to identify web pages relevant to the service of interest. The classification step proceeds by doing a search for the particular service of interest using a keyword based web search engine and retrieves all the matching web pages. From these pages the relevant ones are identified using the classifier. The final step is extraction of attribute values, associated with the service, from these pages. Each web page is parsed into a DOM tree and the extractor functions are applied. All of the attributes corresponding to a service provider are then correctly aggregated. This can pose difficulties especially in the presence of multiple service providers in a page. Using a novel concept of scoring and conflict resolution to prevent erroneous associations of attributes with service provider entities in the page, the algorithm aggregates all the attribute occurrences correctly. The extractor function may not be complete in the sense that it cannot always identify all the attributes in a page. By exploiting the regularity of the sequence in which attributes occurr in referral pages, the mining algorithm automatically learns generalized patterns to locate attributes that the extractor function misses. The distinguishing aspects of YellowPager 's extraction algorithm are: (i) it is unsupervised, and (ii) the attribute values in the pages are extracted independent of any page-specific relationships that may exist among the markup tags. YellowPager has been used by a large pet food producer to build a directory of veterinarian service providers in the United States. The resulting database was found to be much larger and richer than that found in Vetquest, Vetworld, and the Super Yellow pages. YellowPager is implemented in JAVA and is interfaced to Rainbow, a library utility in C that is used for classification. The tool will demonstrate the creation of a service directory for any service domain by mining web sources.
860436	Keynote Address - exploring, modeling, and using the web graph The Web graph, meaning the graph induced by Web pages as nodes and their hyperlinks as directed edges, has become a fascinating object of study for many people: physicists, sociologists, mathematicians, computer scientists, and information retrieval specialists.Recent results range from theoretical (e.g.: models for the graph, semi-external algorithms), to experimental (e.g.: new insights regarding the rate of change of pages, new data on the distribution of degrees), to practical (e.g.: improvements in crawling technology).Recent results range from theoretical (e.g.: models for the graph, semi-external algorithms), to experimental (e.g.: new insights regarding the rate of change of pages, new data on the distribution of degrees), to practical (e.g.: improvements in crawling technology).The goal of this talk is to convey an introduction to the state of the art in this area and to sketch the current issues in collecting, representing, analyzing, and modeling this graph. Although graph analytic methods are essential tools in the Web IR arsenal, they are well known to the SIGIR community and will not be discussed here in any detail; instead, we will explore some challenges and opportunities for using IR methods and techniques in the exploration of the Web graph, in particular in dealing with legitimate and "spam" perturbations of the "natural" process of birth and death of nodes and links, and conversely, the challenges and opportunities of using graph methods in support of IR on the Web and in the enterprise.
860437	Salton Award Lecture - Information retrieval and computer science: an evolving relationship Following the tradition of these acceptance talks, I will be giving my thoughts on where our field is going. Any discussion of the future of information retrieval (IR) research, however, needs to be placed in the context of its history and relationship to other fields. Although IR has had a very strong relationship with library and information science, its relationship to computer science (CS) and its relative standing as a sub-discipline of CS has been more dynamic. IR is quite an old field, and when a number of CS departments were forming in the 60s, it was not uncommon for a faculty member to be pursuing research related to IR. Early ACM curriculum recommendations for CS contained courses on information retrieval, and encyclopedias described IR and database systems as different aspects of the same field. By the 70s, there were only a few IR researchers in CS departments in the U.S., database systems was a separate (and thriving) field, and many felt that IR had stagnated and was largely irrelevant. The truth, in fact, was far from that. The IR research community was a small, but dedicated, group of researchers in the U.S. and Europe who were motivated by a desire to understand the process of information retrieval and to build systems that would help people find the right information in text databases. This was (and is) a hard goal and led to different evaluation metrics and methodologies than the database community. Progress in the field was hampered by a lack of large-scale testbeds and tests were limited to databases containing at most a few hundred document abstracts. In the 80s AI boom, IR was still not a mainstream area, despite its focus on a human task involving natural language. IR focused on a statistical approach to language rather than the much more popular knowledge-based approach. The fact that IR conferences mix papers on effectiveness as measured by human judgments with papers measuring performance of file organizations for large-scale systems has meant that IR has always been difficult to classify into simple categories such as "systems" or "AI" that are often used in CS departments. Since the early 90s, just about everything has changed. Large, full-text databases were finally made available for experimentation through DARPA funding and TREC. This has had an enormous positive impact on the quantity and quality of IR research. The advent of the Web search engine has validated the longstanding claims made by IR researchers that simple queries and ranking were the right techniques for information access in a largely unstructured information world. What has not changed is that there are still relatively few IR researchers in CS departments. There are, however, many more people in CS departments doing IR-related research, which is just about the same thing. Conferences in databases, machine learning, computational linguistics, and data mining publish a number of IR papers done by people who would not primarily consider themselves as IR researchers. Given that there is an increasing diffusion of IR ideas into the CS community, it is worth stating what IR, as a field of CS, has accomplished: Search engines have become the infrastructure for much of information access in our society. IR has provided the basic research on the algorithms and data structures for these engines, and continues to develop new capabilities such as cross-lingual search, distributed search, question answering, and topic detection and tracking. IR championed the statistical approach to language long before it was accepted by other researchers working on language technologies. Statistical NLP is now mainstream and results from that field are being used to improve IR systems (in question answering, for example). IR focused on evaluation as a research area, and developed an evaluation methodology based on large, standardized testbeds and comparison with human judgments that has been adopted by researchers in a number of other language technology areas. IR, because of its focus on measuring success based on human judgments, has always acknowledged the importance of the user and interaction as a part of information access. This led to a number of contributions to the design of query and search interfaces and learning techniques based on user feedback. Although these achievements are important, the long-term goals of the IR field have not yet been met. What are those goals? One possibility that is often mentioned is the MEMEX of Vannevar Bush [1]. Another, more recent, statement of long-term challenges was made in the report of the IR Challenges Workshop [2]: Global Information Access: Satisfy human information needs through natural, efficient interaction with an automated system that leverages world-wide structured and unstructured data in any language. Contextual Retrieval; Combine search technologies and knowledge about query and user context into a single framework in order to provide the most appropriate answer for a user's information need. These goals are, in fact, very similar to long-term challenges coming out of other CS fields. For example, Jim Gray, a Turing Award winner from the database area, mentioned in his address a personal and world MEMEX as long-term goals for his field and CS in general [3]. IR's long-term goals are clearly important long-term goals for the whole of CS, and achieving those goals will involve everyone interested in the general area of information management and retrieval. Rather than talking about what IR can do in isolation to progress towards its goals, I would prefer to talk about what IR can do in collaboration with other areas. There are many examples of potential collaborative research areas. Collaborations with researchers from the NLP and information extraction communities have been developing for some time in order to study topics such as advanced question answering. On the other hand, not enough has been done to work with the database community to develop probabilistic retrieval models for unstructured, semi-structured, and structured data. There have been a number of attempts to combine IR and database functionality, none of which has been particularly successful. Most recently, some groups have been working on combining IR search with XML documents, but what is needed is a comprehensive examination of the issues and problems by teams from both areas working together, and the creation of new testbeds that can be used to evaluate proposed models. The time is right for such collaborations. Another example of where database, IR, and networking people can work together is in the development of distributed, heterogeneous information systems. This requires significant new research in areas like peer-to-peer architectures, semantic heterogeneity, automatic metadata generation, and retrieval models. If the information systems described above are extended to include new data types such as video, images, sound, and the whole range of scientific data (such as from the biosciences, geoscience, and astronomy), then a broad range of new challenges are added that need to be tackled in collaboration with people who know about these types of data. There should also be more cooperation between the data mining, IR, and summarization communities to tackle the core problem of defining what is new and interesting in streams of data. These and other similar collaborations will the basis for the future development of the IR field. We will continue to work on research problems that specifically interest us, but this research will increasingly be in the context of larger efforts. IR concepts and IR research will be an important part of the evolving mix of CS expertise that will be used to solve the "grand" challenges.
860439	Bayesian extension to the language model for ad hoc information retrieval We propose a Bayesian extension to the ad-hoc Language Model. Many smoothed estimators used for the multinomial query model in ad-hoc Language Models (including Laplace and Bayes-smoothing) are approximations to the Bayesian predictive distribution. In this paper we derive the full predictive distribution in a form amenable to implementation by classical IR models, and then compare it to other currently used estimators. In our experiments the proposed model outperforms Bayes-smoothing, and its combination with linear interpolation smoothing outperforms all other estimators.
860440	Beyond independent relevance: methods and evaluation metrics for subtopic retrieval We present a non-traditional retrieval problem we call subtopic retrieval . The subtopic retrieval problem is concerned with finding documents that cover many different subtopics of a query topic. In such a problem, the utility of a document in a ranking is dependent on other documents in the ranking, violating the assumption of independent relevance which is assumed in most traditional retrieval methods. Subtopic retrieval poses challenges for evaluating performance, as well as for developing effective algorithms. We propose a framework for evaluating subtopic retrieval which generalizes the traditional precision and recall metrics by accounting for intrinsic topic difficulty as well as redundancy in documents. We propose and systematically evaluate several methods for performing subtopic retrieval using statistical language models and a maximal marginal relevance (MMR) ranking strategy. A mixture model combined with query likelihood relevance ranking is shown to modestly outperform a baseline relevance ranking on a data set used in the TREC interactive track.
860441	Empirical development of an exponential probabilistic model for text retrieval: using textual analysis to build a better model Much work in information retrieval focuses on using a model of documents and queries to derive retrieval algorithms. Model based development is a useful alternative to heuristic development because in a model the assumptions are explicit and can be examined and refined independent of the particular retrieval algorithm. We explore the explicit assumptions underlying the naïve framework by performing computational analysis of actual corpora and queries to devise a generative document model that closely matches text. Our thesis is that a model so developed will be more accurate than existing models, and thus more useful in retrieval, as well as other applications. We test this by learning from a corpus the best document model. We find the learned model better predicts the existence of text data and has improved performance on certain IR tasks.
860443	Question classification using support vector machines Question classification is very important for question answering. This paper presents our research work on automatic question classification through machine learning approaches. We have experimented with five machine learning algorithms: Nearest Neighbors (NN), Naive Bayes (NB), Decision Tree (DT), Sparse Network of Winnows (SNoW), and Support Vector Machines (SVM) using two kinds of features: bag-of-words and bag-of-ngrams. The experiment results show that with only surface text features the SVM outperforms the other four methods for this task. Further, we propose to use a special kernel function called the tree kernel to enable the SVM to take advantage of the syntactic structures of questions. We describe how the tree kernel can be computed efficiently by dynamic programming. The performance of our approach is promising, when tested on the questions from the TREC QA track.
860444	Structured use of external knowledge for event-based open domain question answering One of the major problems in question answering (QA) is that the queries are either too brief or often do not contain most relevant terms in the target corpus. In order to overcome this problem, our earlier work integrates external knowledge extracted from the Web and WordNet to perform Event-based QA on the TREC-11 task. This paper extends our approach to perform event-based QA by uncovering the structure within the external knowledge. The knowledge structure loosely models different facets of QA events, and is used in conjunction with successive constraint relaxation algorithm to achieve effective QA. Our results obtained on TREC-11 QA corpus indicate that the new approach is more effective and able to attain a confidence-weighted score of above 80%.
860445	Quantitative evaluation of passage retrieval algorithms for question answering Passage retrieval is an important component common to many question answering systems. Because most evaluations of question answering systems focus on end-to-end performance, comparison of common components becomes difficult. To address this shortcoming, we present a quantitative evaluation of various passage retrieval algorithms for question answering, implemented in a framework called Pauchok. We present three important findings: Boolean querying schemes perform well in the question answering task. The performance differences between various passage retrieval algorithms vary with the choice of document retriever, which suggests significant interactions between document retrieval and passage retrieval. The best algorithms in our evaluation employ density-based measures for scoring query terms. Our results reveal future directions for passage retrieval and question answering.
860447	Building a web thesaurus from web link structure Thesaurus has been widely used in many applications, including information retrieval, natural language processing, and question answering. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to automatically constructing a domain-specific thesaurus from the Web using link structure information. The proposed approach is able to identify new terms and reflect the latest relationship between terms as the Web evolves. First, a set of high quality and representative websites of a specific domain is selected. After filtering out navigational links, link analysis is applied to each website to obtain its content structure. Finally, the thesaurus is constructed by merging the content structures of the selected websites. The experimental results on automatic query expansion based on our constructed thesaurus show 20% improvement in search precision compared to the baseline.
860448	Implicit link analysis for small web search Current Web search engines generally impose link analysis-based re-ranking on web-page retrieval. However, the same techniques, when applied directly to small web search such as intranet and site search, cannot achieve the same performance because their link structures are different from the global Web. In this paper, we propose an approach to constructing implicit links by mining users' access patterns, and then apply a modified PageRank algorithm to re-rank web-pages for small web search. Our experimental results indicate that the proposed method outperforms content-based method by 16%, explicit link-based PageRank by 20% and DirectHit by 14%, respectively.
860449	Query type classification for web document retrieval The heterogeneous Web exacerbates IR problems and short user queries make them worse. The contents of web documents are not enough to find good answer documents. Link information and URL information compensates for the insufficiencies of content information. However, static combination of multiple evidences may lower the retrieval performance. We need different strategies to find target documents according to a query type. We can classify user queries as three categories, the topic relevance task, the homepage finding task, and the service finding task. In this paper, a user query classification scheme is proposed. This scheme uses the difference of distribution, mutual information, the usage rate as anchor texts, and the POS information for the classification. After we classified a user query, we apply different algorithms and information for the better results. For the topic relevance task, we emphasize the content information, on the other hand, for the homepage finding task, we emphasize the Link information and the URL information. We could get the best performance when our proposed classification method with the OKAPI scoring algorithm was used.
860451	Stuff I've seen: a system for personal information retrieval and re-use Most information retrieval technologies are designed to facilitate information discovery. However, much knowledge work involves finding and re-using previously seen information. We describe the design and evaluation of a system, called Stuff I've Seen (SIS) , that facilitates information re-use. This is accomplished in two ways. First, the system provides a unified index of information that a person has seen, whether it was seen as email, web page, document, appointment, etc. Second, because the information has been seen before, rich contextual cues can be used in the search interface. The system has been used internally by more than 230 employees. We report on both qualitative and quantitative aspects of system use. Initial findings show that time and people are important retrieval cues. Users find information more easily using SIS, and use other search tools less frequently after installation.
860452	Search strategies in content-based image retrieval This paper describes two studies that looked at users' ability to formulate visual queries with a Content-Based Image Retrieval system that uses dominant image colour as the primary indexing key. The first experiment examined users' performance with two visual search tools, a sketch tool and a structured browsing tool, with different types of image query. The results showed that while users were able to successfully search on the basis of colour, and were able to formulate visual queries, their ability to do so was affected by search task type. Search task type was also shown to be related to search tool choice. However, the results of study two showed that while users were able to complete all of the tasks, there was evidence to suggest that a degree of compromise was present in the users' choice of image that was largely due to problems relating to query formulation.
860453	Using terminological feedback for web search refinement: a log-based study Although interactive query reformulation has been actively studied in the laboratory, little is known about the actual behavior of web searchers who are offered terminological feedback along with their search results. We analyze log sessions for two groups of users interacting with variants of the AltaVista search engine - a baseline group given no terminological feedback and a feedback group to whom twelve refinement terms are offered along with the search results. We examine uptake, refinement effectiveness, conditions of use, and refinement type preferences. Although our measure of overall session "success" shows no difference between outcomes for the two groups, we find evidence that a subset of those users presented with terminological feedback do make effective use of it on a continuing basis.
860455	A scalability analysis of classifiers in text categorization Real-world applications of text categorization often require a system to deal with tens of thousands of categories defined over a large taxonomy. This paper addresses the problem with respect to a set of popular algorithms in text categorization, including Support Vector Machines, k-nearest neighbor, ridge regression, linear least square fit and logistic regression. By providing a formal analysis of the computational complexity of each classification method, followed by an investigation on the usage of different classifiers in a hierarchical setting of categorization, we show how the scalability of a method depends on the topology of the hierarchy and the category distributions. In addition, we are able to obtain tight bounds for the complexities by using the power law to approximate category distributions over a hierarchy. Experiments with kNN and SVM classifiers on the OHSUMED corpus are reported on, as concrete examples.
860456	A repetition based measure for verification of text collections and for text categorization We suggest a way for locating duplicates and plagiarisms in a text collection using an R-measure , which is the normalized sum of the lengths of all suffixes of the text repeated in other documents of the collection. The R-measure can be effectively computed using the suffix array data structure. Additionally, the computation procedure can be improved to locate the sets of duplicate or plagiarised documents. We applied the technique to several standard text collections and found that they contained a significant number of duplicate and plagiarised documents. Another reformulation of the method leads to an algorithm that can be applied to supervised multi-class categorization. We illustrate the approach using the recently available Reuters Corpus Volume 1 (RCV1). The results show that the method outperforms SVM at multi-class categorization, and interestingly, that results correlate strongly with compression-based methods.
860457	Using asymmetric distributions to improve text classifier probability estimates Text classifiers that give probability estimates are more readily applicable in a variety of scenarios. For example, rather than choosing one set decision threshold, they can be used in a Bayesian risk model to issue a run-time decision which minimizes a user-specified cost function dynamically chosen at prediction time. However, the quality of the probability estimates is crucial. We review a variety of standard approaches to converting scores (and poor probability estimates) from text classifiers to high quality estimates and introduce new models motivated by the intuition that the empirical score distribution for the "extremely irrelevant", "hard to discriminate", and "obviously relevant" items are often significantly different. Finally, we analyze the experimental performance of these models over the outputs of two text classifiers. The analysis demonstrates that one of these models is theoretically attractive (introducing few new parameters while increasing flexibility), computationally efficient, and empirically preferable.
860459	Automatic image annotation and retrieval using cross-media relevance models Libraries have traditionally used manual image annotation for indexing and then later retrieving their image collections. However, manual image annotation is an expensive and labor intensive procedure and hence there has been great interest in coming up with automatic ways to retrieve images based on content. Here, we propose an automatic approach to annotating and retrieving images based on a training set of images. We assume that regions in an image can be described using a small vocabulary of blobs. Blobs are generated from image features using clustering. Given a training set of images with annotations, we show that probabilistic models allow us to predict the probability of generating a word given the blobs in an image. This may be used to automatically annotate and retrieve images given a word as a query. We show that relevance models allow us to derive these probabilities in a natural way. Experiments show that the annotation performance of this cross-media relevance model is almost six times as good (in terms of mean precision) than a model based on word-blob co-occurrence model and twice as good as a state of the art model derived from machine translation. Our approach shows the usefulness of using formal information retrieval models for the task of image annotation and retrieval.
860460	Modeling annotated data We consider the problem of modeling annotated data---data with multiple types where the instance of one type (such as a caption) serves as a description of the other type (such as an image). We describe three hierarchical probabilistic mixture models which aim to describe such data, culminating in correspondence latent Dirichlet allocation , a latent variable model that is effective at modeling the joint distribution of both types and the conditional distribution of the annotation given the primary type. We conduct experiments on the Corel database of images and captions, assessing performance in terms of held-out likelihood, automatic annotation, and text-based image retrieval.
860461	Experimental result analysis for a generative probabilistic image retrieval model The main conclusion from the metrics-based evaluation of video retrieval systems at TREC's video track is that non-interactive image retrieval from general collections using visual information only is not yet feasible. We show how a detailed analysis of retrieval results -- looking beyond mean average precision (MAP) scores on topical relevance -- gives significant insight in the main problems with the visual part of the retrieval model under study. Such an analytical approach proves an important addition to standard evaluation measures.
860463	Combining document representations for known-item search This paper investigates the pre-conditions for successful combination of document representations formed from structural markup for the task of known-item search. As this task is very similar to work in meta-search and data fusion, we adapt several hypotheses from those research areas and investigate them in this context. To investigate these hypotheses, we present a mixture-based language model and also examine many of the current meta-search algorithms. We find that compatible output from systems is important for successful combination of document representations. We also demonstrate that combining low performing document representations can improve performance, but not consistently. We find that the techniques best suited for this task are robust to the inclusion of poorly performing document representations. We also explore the role of variance of results across systems and its impact on the performance of fusion, with the surprising result that the correct documents have higher variance across document representations than highly ranking incorrect documents.
860464	Searching XML documents via XML fragments Most of the work on XML query and search has stemmed from the publishing and database communities, mostly for the needs of business applications. Recently, the Information Retrieval community began investigating the XML search issue to answer information discovery needs. Following this trend, we present here an approach where information needs can be expressed in an approximate manner as pieces of XML documents or "XML fragments" of the same nature as the documents that are being searched. We present an extension of the vector space model for searching XML collections via XML fragments and ranking results by relevance. We describe how we have extended a full-text search engine to comply with this model. The value of the proposed method is demonstrated by the relative high precision of our system, which was among the top performers in the recent INEX workshop. Our results indicate that certain queries are more appropriate than others for the extended vector space model. Specifically, queries with relatively specific contexts but vague information needs are best situated to reap the benefit of this model. Finally our results show that one method may not fit all types of queries and that it could be worthwhile to use different solutions for different applications.
860466	Word sense disambiguation in information retrieval revisited Word sense ambiguity is recognized as having a detrimental effect on the precision of information retrieval systems in general and web search systems in particular, due to the sparse nature of the queries involved. Despite continued research into the application of automated word sense disambiguation, the question remains as to whether less than 90% accurate automated word sense disambiguation can lead to improvements in retrieval effectiveness. In this study we explore the development and subsequent evaluation of a statistical word sense disambiguation system which demonstrates increased precision from a sense based vector space retrieval model over traditional TF*IDF techniques.
860467	Probabilistic term variant generator for biomedical terms This paper presents an algorithm to generate possible variants for biomedical terms. The algorithm gives each variant its generation probability representing its plausibility, which is potentially useful for query and dictionary expansions. The probabilistic rules for generating variants are automatically learned from raw texts using an existing abbreviation extraction technique. Our method, therefore, requires no linguistic knowledge or labor-intensive natural language resource. We conducted an experiment using 83,142 MEDLINE abstracts for rule induction and 18,930 abstracts for testing. The results indicate that our method will significantly increase the number of retrieved documents for long biomedical terms.
860469	A maximal figure-of-merit learning approach to text categorization A novel maximal figure-of-merit (MFoM) learning approach to text categorization is proposed. Different from the conventional techniques, the proposed MFoM method attempts to integrate any performance metric of interest (e.g. accuracy, recall, precision, or F1 measure) into the design of any classifier. The corresponding classifier parameters are learned by optimizing an overall objective function of interest. To solve this highly nonlinear optimization problem, we use a generalized probabilistic descent algorithm. The MFoM learning framework is evaluated on the Reuters-21578 task with LSI-based feature extraction and a binary tree classifier. Experimental results indicate that the MFoM classifier gives improved F1 and enhanced robustness over the conventional one. It also outperforms the popular SVM method in micro-averaging F1. Other extensions to design discriminative multiple-category MFoM classifiers for application scenarios with new performance metrics could be envisioned too.
860470	Text categorization by boosting automatically extracted concepts Term-based representations of documents have found wide-spread use in information retrieval. However, one of the main shortcomings of such methods is that they largely disregard lexical semantics and, as a consequence, are not sufficiently robust with respect to variations in word usage.In this paper we investigate the use of concept-based document representations to supplement word- or phrase-based features. The utilized concepts are automatically extracted from documents via probabilistic latent semantic analysis. We propose to use AdaBoost to optimally combine weak hypotheses based on both types of features. Experimental results on standard benchmarks confirm the validity of our approach, showing that AdaBoost achieves consistent improvements by including additional semantic features in the learned ensemble.
860471	Robustness of regularized linear classification methods in text categorization Real-world applications often require the classification of documents under situations of small number of features, mis-labeled documents and rare positive examples. This paper investigates the robustness of three regularized linear classification methods (SVM, ridge regression and logistic regression) under above situations. We compare these methods in terms of their loss functions and score distributions, and establish the connection between their optimization problems and generalization error bounds. Several sets of controlled experiments on the Reuters-21578 corpus are conducted to investigate the robustness of these methods. Our results show that ridge regression seems to be the most promising candidate for rare class problems.
860473	Building and applying a concept hierarchy representation of a user profile Term dependence is a natural consequence of language use. Its successful representation has been a long standing goal for Information Retrieval research. We present a methodology for the construction of a concept hierarchy that takes into account the three basic dimensions of term dependence. We also introduce a document evaluation function that allows the use of the concept hierarchy as a user profile for Information Filtering. Initial experimental results indicate that this is a promising approach for incorporating term dependence in the way documents are filtered.
860474	Query length in interactive information retrieval Query length in best-match information retrieval (IR) systems is well known to be positively related to effectiveness in the IR task, when measured in experimental, non-interactive environments. However, in operational, interactive IR systems, query length is quite typically very short, on the order of two to three words. We report on a study which tested the effectiveness of a particular query elicitation technique in increasing initial searcher query length, and which tested the effectiveness of queries elicited using this technique, and the relationship in general between query length and search effectiveness in interactive IR. Results show that the specific technique results in longer queries than a standard query elicitation technique, that this technique is indeed usable, that the technique results in increased user satisfaction with the search, and that query length is positively correlated with user satisfaction with the search.
860475	Re-examining the potential effectiveness of interactive query expansion Much attention has been paid to the relative effectiveness of interactive query expansion versus automatic query expansion. Although interactive query expansion has the potential to be an effective means of improving a search, in this paper we show that, on average, human searchers are less likely than systems to make good expansion decisions. To enable good expansion decisions, searchers must have adequate instructions on how to use interactive query expansion functionalities. We show that simple instructions on using interactive query expansion do not necessarily help searchers make good expansion decisions and discuss difficulties found in making query expansion decisions.
860477	Latent concepts and the number orthogonal factors in latent semantic analysis We seek insight into Latent Semantic Indexing by establishing a method to identify the optimal number of factors in the reduced matrix for representing a keyword. This method is demonstrated empirically by duplicating all documents containing a term t , and inserting new documents in the database that replace t with t' . By examining the number of times term t is identified for a search on term t' (precision) using differing ranges of dimensions, we find that lower ranked dimensions identify related terms and higher-ranked dimensions discriminate between the synonyms.
860478	A frequency-based and a poisson-based definition of the probability of being informative This paper reports on theoretical investigations about the assumptions underlying the inverse document frequency ( idf ). We show that an intuitive idf -based probability function for the probability of a term being informative assumes disjoint document events. By assuming documents to be independent rather than disjoint, we arrive at a Poisson-based probability of being informative. The framework is useful for understanding and deciding the parameter estimation and combination in probabilistic retrieval models.
860479	Table extraction using conditional random fields The ability to find tables and extract information from them is a necessary component of data mining, question answering, and other information retrieval tasks. Documents often contain tables in order to communicate densely packed, multi-dimensional information. Tables do this by employing layout patterns to efficiently indicate fields and records in two-dimensional form.Their rich combination of formatting and content present difficulties for traditional language modeling techniques, however. This paper presents the use of conditional random fields (CRFs) for table extraction, and compares them with hidden Markov models (HMMs). Unlike HMMs, CRFs support the use of many rich and overlapping layout and language features, and as a result, they perform significantly better. We show experimental results on plain-text government statistical reports in which tables are located with 92% F1, and their constituent lines are classified into 12 table-related categories with 94% accuracy. We also discuss future work on undirected graphical models for segmenting columns, finding cells, and classifying them as data cells or label cells.
860481	Building a filtering test collection for TREC 2002 Test collections for the filtering track in TREC have typically used either past sets of relevance judgments, or categorized collections such as Reuters Corpus Volume 1 or OHSUMED, because filtering systems need relevance judgments during the experiment for training and adaptation. For TREC 2002, we constructed an entirely new set of search topics for the Reuters Corpus for measuring filtering systems. Our method for building the topics involved multiple iterations of feedback from assessors, and fusion of results from multiple search systems using different search algorithms. We also developed a second set of "inexpensive" topics based on categories in the document collection. We found that the initial judgments made for the experiment were sufficient; subsequent pooled judging changed system rankings very little. We also found that systems performed very differently on the category topics than on the assessor-built topics.
860482	An empirical study on retrieval models for different document genres: patents and newspaper articles Reflecting the rapid growth in the utilization of large test collections for information retrieval since the 1990s, extensive comparative experiments have been performed to explore the effectiveness of various retrieval models. However, most collections were intended for retrieving newspaper articles and technical abstracts. In this paper, we describe the process of producing a test collection for patent retrieval, the NTCIR-3 Patent Retrieval Collection, which includes two years of Japanese patent applications and 31 topics produced by professional patent searchers. We also report experimental results obtained by using this collection to re-examine the effectiveness of existing retrieval models in the context of patent retrieval. The relative superiority among existing retrieval models did not significantly differ depending on the document genre, that is, patents and newspaper articles. Issues related to patent retrieval are also discussed.
860483	Collaborative filtering via gaussian probabilistic latent semantic analysis Collaborative filtering aims at learning predictive models of user preferences, interests or behavior from community data, i.e. a database of available user preferences. In this paper, we describe a new model-based algorithm designed for this task, which is based on a generalization of probabilistic latent semantic analysis to continuous-valued response variables. More specifically, we assume that the observed user ratings can be modeled as a mixture of user communities or interest groups, where users may participate probabilistically in one or more groups. Each community is characterized by a Gaussian distribution on the normalized ratings for each item. The normalization of ratings is performed in a user-specific manner to account for variations in absolute shift and variance of ratings. Experiments on the EachMovie data set show that the proposed approach compares favorably with other collaborative filtering techniques.
860485	Document clustering based on non-negative matrix factorization In this paper, we propose a novel document clustering method based on the non-negative factorization of the term-document matrix of the given document corpus. In the latent semantic space derived by the non-negative matrix factorization (NMF), each axis captures the base topic of a particular document cluster, and each document is represented as an additive combination of the base topics. The cluster membership of each document can be easily determined by finding the base topic (the axis) with which the document has the largest projection value. Our experimental evaluations show that the proposed document clustering method surpasses the latent semantic indexing and the spectral clustering methods not only in the easy and reliable derivation of document clustering results, but also in document clustering accuracies.
860486	ReCoM: reinforcement clustering of multi-type interrelated data objects Most existing clustering algorithms cluster highly related data objects such as Web pages and Web users separately. The interrelation among different types of data objects is either not considered, or represented by a static feature space and treated in the same ways as other attributes of the objects. In this paper, we propose a novel clustering approach for clustering multi-type interrelated data objects, ReCoM (Reinforcement Clustering of Multi-type Interrelated data objects). Under this approach, relationships among data objects are used to improve the cluster quality of interrelated data objects through an iterative reinforcement clustering process. At the same time, the link structure derived from relationships of the interrelated data objects is used to differentiate the importance of objects and the learned importance is also used in the clustering process to further improve the clustering results. Experimental results show that the proposed approach not only effectively overcomes the problem of data sparseness caused by the high dimensional relationship space but also significantly improves the clustering accuracy.
860487	A comparative study on content-based music genre classification Content-based music genre classification is a fundamental component of music information retrieval systems and has been gaining importance and enjoying a growing amount of attention with the emergence of digital music on the Internet. Currently little work has been done on automatic music genre classification, and in addition, the reported classification accuracies are relatively low. This paper proposes a new feature extraction method for music genre classification, DWCHs . DWCHs stands for Daubechies Wavelet Coefficient Histograms. DWCHs capture the local and global information of music signals simultaneously by computing histograms on their Daubechies wavelet coefficients. Effectiveness of this new feature and of previously studied features are compared using various machine learning classification algorithms, including Support Vector Machines and Linear Discriminant Analysis. It is demonstrated that the use of DWCHs significantly improves the accuracy of music genre classification.
860489	Evaluating different methods of estimating retrieval quality for resource selection In a federated digital library system, it is too expensive to query every accessible library. Resource selection is the task to decide to which libraries a query should be routed. Most existing resource selection algorithms compute a library ranking in a heuristic way. In contrast, the decision-theoretic framework (DTF) follows a different approach on a better theoretic foundation: It computes a selection which minimises the overall costs (e.g. retrieval quality, time, money) of the distributed retrieval. For estimating retrieval quality the recall-precision function is proposed. In this paper, we introduce two new methods: The first one computes the empirical distribution of the probabilities of relevance from a small library sample, and assumes it to be representative for the whole library. The second method assumes that the indexing weights follow a normal distribution, leading to a normal distribution for the document scores. Furthermore, we present the first evaluation of DTF by comparing this theoretical approach with the heuristical state-of-the-art system CORI; here we find that DTF outperforms CORI in most cases.
860490	Relevant document distribution estimation method for resource selection Prior research under a variety of conditions has shown the CORI algorithm to be one of the most effective resource selection algorithms, but the range of database sizes studied was not large. This paper shows that the CORI algorithm does not do well in environments with a mix of "small" and "very large" databases. A new resource selection algorithm is proposed that uses information about database sizes as well as database contents. We also show how to acquire database size estimates in uncooperative environments as an extension of the query-based sampling used to acquire resource descriptions. Experiments demonstrate that the database size estimates are more accurate for large databases than estimates produced by a competing method; the new resource ranking algorithm is always at least as effective as the CORI algorithm; and the new algorithm results in better document rankings than the CORI algorithm.
860491	SETS: search enhanced by topic segmentation We present SETS , an architecture for efficient search in peer-to-peer networks, building upon ideas drawn from machine learning and social network theory. The key idea is to arrange participating sites in a topic-segmented overlay topology in which most connections are short-distance , connecting pairs of sites with similar content. Topically focused sets of sites are then joined together into a single network by long-distance links. Queries are matched and routed to only the topically closest regions. We discuss a variety of design issues and tradeoffs that an implementor of SETS would face. We show that SETS is efficient in network traffic and query processing load.
860493	Retrieval and novelty detection at the sentence level Previous research in novelty detection has focused on the task of finding novel material, given a set or stream of documents on a certain topic. This study investigates the more difficult two-part task defined by the TREC 2002 novelty track: given a topic and a group of documents relevant to that topic, 1) find the relevant sentences from the documents, and 2) find the novel sentences from the collection of relevant sentences. Our research shows that the former step appears to be the more difficult part of this task, and that the performance of novelty measures is very sensitive to the presence of non-relevant sentences.
860494	Domain-independent text segmentation using anisotropic diffusion and dynamic programming This paper presents a novel domain-independent text segmentation method, which identifies the boundaries of topic changes in long text documents and/or text streams. The method consists of three components: As a preprocessing step, we eliminate the document-dependent stop words as well as the generic stop words before the sentence similarity is computed. This step assists in the discrimination of the sentence semantic information. Then the cohesion information of sentences in a document or a text stream is captured with a sentence-distance matrix with each entry corresponding to the similarity between a sentence pair. The distance matrix can be represented with a gray-scale image. Thus, a text segmentation problem is converted into an image segmentation problem. We apply the anisotropic diffusion technique to the image representation of the distance matrix to enhance the semantic cohesion of sentence topical groups as well as sharpen topical boundaries. At last, the dynamic programming technique is adapted to find the optimal topical boundaries and provide a zoom-in and zoom-out mechanism for topics access by segmenting text in variable numbers of sentence topical groups. Our approach involves no domain-specific training, and it can be applied to texts in a variety of domains. The experimental results show that our approach is effective in text segmentation and outperforms several state-of-the-art methods.
860495	A System for new event detection We present a new method and system for performing the New Event Detection task, i.e., in one or multiple streams of news stories, all stories on a previously unseen (new) event are marked. The method is based on an incremental TF-IDF model. Our extensions include: generation of source-specific models, similarity score normalization based on document-specific averages, similarity score normalization based on source-pair specific averages, term reweighting based on inverse event frequencies, and segmentation of the documents. We also report on extensions that did not improve results. The system performs very well on TDT3 and TDT4 test data and scored second in the TDT-2002 evaluation.
860497	Probabilistic structured query methods Structured methods for query term replacement rely on separate estimates of term tes of replacement probabilities. Statistically significantfrequency and document frequency to compute a weight for each query term. This paper reviews prior work on structured query techniques and introduces three new variants that leverage estima improvements in retrieval effectiveness are demonstrated for cross-language retrieval and for retrieval based on optical character recognition when replacement probabilities are used to estimate both term frequency and document frequency.
860498	Fuzzy translation of cross-lingual spelling variants We will present a novel two-step fuzzy translation technique for cross-lingual spelling variants. In the first stage, transformation rules are applied to source words to render them more similar to their target language equivalents. The rules are generated automatically using translation dictionaries as source data. In the second stage, the intermediate forms obtained in the first stage are translated into a target language using fuzzy matching. The effectiveness of the technique was evaluated empirically using five source languages and English as a target language. The target word list contained 189 000 English words with the correct equivalents for the source words among them. The source words were translated using the two-step fuzzy translation technique, and the results were compared with those of plain fuzzy matching based translation. The combined technique performed better, sometimes considerably better, than fuzzy matching alone.
860499	Automatic transliteration for Japanese-to-English text retrieval For cross language information retrieval (CLIR) based on bilingual translation dictionaries, good performance depends upon lexical coverage in the dictionary. This is especially true for languages possessing few inter-language cognates, such as between Japanese and English. In this paper, we describe a method for automatically creating and validating candidate Japanese transliterated terms of English words. A phonetic English dictionary and a set of probabilistic mapping rules are used for automatically generating transliteration candidates. A monolingual Japanese corpus is then used for automatically validating the transliterated terms. We evaluate the usage of the extracted English-Japanese transliteration pairs with Japanese to English retrieval experiments over the CLEF bilingual test collections. The use of our automatically derived extension to a bilingual translation dictionary improves average precision, both before and after pseudo-relevance feedback, with gains ranging from 2.5% to 64.8%.
860501	On the effectiveness of evaluating retrieval systems in the absence of relevance judgments Soboroff, Nicholas and Cahan recently proposed a method for evaluating the performance of retrieval systems without relevance judgments. They demonstrated that the system evaluations produced by their methodology are correlated with actual evaluations using relevance judgments in the TREC competition. In this work, we propose an explanation for this phenomenon. We devise a simple measure for quantifying the similarity of retrieval systems by assessing the similarity of their retrieved results. Then, given a collection of retrieval systems and their retrieved results, we use this measure to assess the average similarity of a system to the other systems in the collection. We demonstrate that evaluating retrieval systems according to average similarity yields results quite similar to the methodology proposed by Soboroff et~al., and we further demonstrate that these two techniques are in fact highly correlated. Thus, the techniques are effectively evaluating and ranking retrieval systems by "popularity" as opposed to "performance.
860502	Resource selection and data fusion in multimedia distributed digital libraries An abstract is not available.
860503	Transliteration of proper names in cross-language applications An abstract is not available.
860504	Toward a unification of text and link analysis This paper presents a simple yet profound idea. By thinking about the relationships between and within terms and documents, we can generate a richer representation that encompasses aspects of Web link analysis as well as text analysis techniques from information retrieval. This paper shows one path to this unified representation, and demonstrates the use of eigenvector calculations from Web link analysis by stepping through a simple example.
860505	Investigating the relationship between language model perplexity and IR precision-recall measures An empirical study has been conducted investigating the relationship between the performance of an aspect based language model in terms of perplexity and the corresponding information retrieval performance obtained. It is observed, on the corpora considered, that the perplexity of the language model has a systematic relationship with the achievable precision recall performance though it is not statistically significant.
860506	Topic distillation using hierarchy concept tree In this paper, we propose a new approach for topic distillation on World Wide Web. Topic distillation is to find quality documents related to the user query topic. Our approach is based on Bharat's topic distillation algorithm [1]. We present the analysis of hyperlink graph structure using hierarchy concept tree to solve the mixed hubs problem that is also remained in the Bharat's algorithm. For assigning better weights to hyperlinks which point to relevant documents among hyperlinks in a document, we try to find the relationship in documents connected by hyperlinks using content analysis and we assign weights to hyperlinks based on the relationship. We evaluated this algorithm using 50 topics on WT10g corpus and obtained improved results.
860507	Using manually-built web directories for automatic evaluation of known-item retrieval Information retrieval system evaluation is complicated by the need for manually assessed relevance judgments. Large manually-built directories on the web open the door to new evaluation procedures. By assuming that web pages are the known relevant items for queries that exactly match their title, we use the ODP (Open Directory Project) and Looksmart directories for system evaluation. We test our approach with a sample from a log of ten million web queries and show that such an evaluation is unbiased in terms of the directory used, stable with respect to the query set selected, and correlated with a reasonably large manual evaluation.
860508	Popular music retrieval by detecting mood An abstract is not available.
860509	Exploiting query history for document ranking in interactive information retrieval In this poster,we incorporate user query history, as context information, to improve the retrieval performance in interactive retrieval. Experiments using the TREC data show that incorporating such context information indeed consistently improves the retrieval performance in both average precision and precision at 20 documents.
860510	Automatic ranking of retrieval systems in imperfect environments The empirical investigation of the effectiveness of information retrieval (IR) systems requires a test collection, a set of query topics, and a set of relevance judgments made by human assessors for each query. Previous experiments show that differences in human relevance assessments do not affect the relative performance of retrieval systems. Based on this observation, we propose and evaluate a new approach to replace the human relevance judgments by an automatic method. Ranking of retrieval systems with our methodology correlates positively and significantly with that of human-based evaluations. In the experiments, we assume a Web-like imperfect environment: the indexing information for all documents is available for ranking, but some documents may not be available for retrieval. Such conditions can be due to document deletions or network problems. Our method of simulating imperfect environments can be used for Web search engine assessment and in estimating the effects of network conditions (e.g., network unreliability) on IR system performance.
860511	An investigation of broad coverage automatic pronoun resolution for information retrieval Term weighting methods have been shown to give significant increases in information retrieval performance. The presence of pronomial references in documents reduces the term frequencies of associated words with a consequent effect on term weights and information retrieval behaviour. This investigation explores the impact on information retrieval performance of broad coverage automatic pronoun resolution. Results indicate that this approach has potential to improve both precision at fixed cutoff levels and average precision.
860512	Syntactic features in question answering Syntactic information potentially plays a much more important role in question answering than it does in information retrieval. Although many people have used syntactic evidence in Question Answering, there haven't been many detailed experiments reported in the literature. The aim of the experiment described in this paper is to study the impact of a particular approach for using syntactic information on question answering effectiveness. Our results indicate that a combination of syntactic information with heuristics for ranking potential answers can perform better than the ranking heuristics on their own.
860513	Searchers' criteria For assessing web pages We investigate the criteria used by online searchers when assessing the relevance of web pages to information-seeking tasks. Twenty four searchers were given three tasks each, and indicated the features of web pages which they employed when deciding about the usefulness of the pages. These tasks were presented within the context of a simulated work-task situation. The results of this study provide a set of criteria used by searchers to decide about the utility of web pages. Such criteria have implications for the design of systems that use or recommend web pages, as well as to authors of web pages.
860514	When query expansion fails The effectiveness of queries in information retrieval can be improved through query expansion. This technique automatically introduces additional query terms that are statistically likely to match documents on the intended topic. However, query expansion techniques rely on fixed parameters. Our investigation of the effect of varying these parameters shows that the strategy of using fixed values is questionable.
860515	Music modeling with random fields An abstract is not available.
860516	Fractal summarization: summarization based on fractal theory In this paper, we introduce the fractal summarization model based on the fractal theory. In fractal summarization, the important information is captured from the source text by exploring the hierarchical structure and salient features of the document. A condensed version of the document that is informatively close to the original is produced iteratively using the contractive transformation in the fractal theory. User evaluation has shown that fractal summarization outperforms traditional summarization.
860517	A unified model for metasearch and the efficient evaluation of retrieval systems via the hedge algorithm We present a unified framework for simultaneously solving both the pooling problem (the construction of efficient document pools for the evaluation of retrieval systems) and metasearch (the fusion of ranked lists returned by retrieval systems in order to increase performance). The implementation is based on the Hedge algorithm for online learning, which has the advantage of convergence to bounded error rates approaching the performance of the best linear combination of the underlying systems. The choice of a loss function closely related to the average precision measure of system performance ensures that the judged document set performs well, both in constructing a metasearch list and as a pool for the accurate evaluation of retrieval systems. Our experimental results on TREC data demonstrate excellent performance in all measures---evaluation of systems, retrieval of relevant documents, and generation of metasearch lists.
860518	Statistical visual feature indexes in video retrieval Four statistical visual feature indexes are proposed: SLM (Shot Length Mean), the average length of each shot in a video; SLD (Shot Length Deviation), the standard deviation of shot lengths for a video; ONM (Object Number Mean), the average number of objects per frame of the video; and OND (Object Number Deviation), the standard deviation of the number of objects per frame across the video. Each of these indexes provides a unique perspective on video content. A novel video retrieval interface has been developed as a platform to examine our assumption that the new indexes facilitate some video retrieval tasks. Initial feedback is promising and formal experiments are planned.
860519	Enhancing cross-language information retrieval by an automatic acquisition of bilingual terminology from comparable corpora This paper presents an approach to bilingual lexicon extraction from comparable corpora and evaluations on Cross-Language Information Retrieval. We explore a bi-directional extraction of bilingual terminology primarily from comparable corpora. A combined statistics-based and linguistics-based model to select best translation candidates to phrasal translation is proposed. Evaluations using a large test collection for Japanese-English revealed the proposed combination of bi-directional comparable corpora, bilingual dictionaries and transliteration, augmented with linguistics-based pruning to be highly effective in Cross-Language Information Retrieval.
860520	Document-self expansion for text categorization Approaches to increase training examples to hopefully improve classification effectiveness are proposed in this work. The approaches were verified by use of two Chinese collections classified by two top-performing classifiers.
860521	An architecture for peer-to-peer information retrieval An abstract is not available.
860522	User-trainable video annotation using multimodal cues This paper describes progress towards a general framework for incorporating multimodal cues into a trainable system for automatically annotating user-defined semantic concepts in broadcast video. Models of arbitrary concepts are constructed by building classifiers in a score space defined by a pre-deployed set of multimodal models. Results show annotation for user-defined concepts both in and outside the pre-deployed set is competitive with our best video-only models on the TREC Video 2002 corpus. An interesting side result shows speech-only models give performance comparable to our best video-only models for detecting visual concepts such as "outdoors", "face" and "cityscape".
860523	Incorporating query term dependencies in language models for document retrieval An abstract is not available.
860524	Error analysis of difficult TREC topics Given the experimental nature of information retrieval, progress critically depends on analyzing the errors made by existing retrieval approaches and understanding their limitations. Our research explores various hypothesized reasons for hard topics in TREC-8 ad hoc task, and shows that the bad performance is partially due to the existence of highly distracting sub-collections that can dominate the overall performance.
860525	XML retrieval: what to retrieve? The fundamental difference between standard information retrieval and XML retrieval is the unit of retrieval. In traditional IR, the unit of retrieval is fixed: it is the complete document. In XML retrieval, every XML element in a document is a retrievable unit. This makes XML retrieval more difficult: besides being relevant, a retrieved unit should be neither too large nor too small. The research presented here, a comparative analysis of two approaches to XML retrieval, aims to shed light on which XML elements should be retrieved. The experimental evaluation uses data from the Initiative for the Evaluation of XML retrieval (INEX 2002).
860526	Discovering and structuring information flow among bioinformatics resources In this poster, we present a model of the flow of information among bioinformatics resources in the context of a specific scientific problem. Combining task analysis with traditional, qualitative research, we determined the extent to which the bioinformatics analysis process could be automated. The model represents a semi-automated process, involving fourteen distinct data processing steps, and forms the framework for an interface to bioinformatics information.
860527	eBizSearch: a niche search engine for e-business Niche Search Engines offer an efficient alternative to traditional search engines when the results returned by general-purpose search engines do not provide a sufficient degree of relevance. By taking advantage of their domain of concentration they achieve higher relevance and offer enhanced features. We discuss a new niche search engine, eBizSearch, based on the technology of CiteSeer and dedicated to e-business and e-business documents. We present the integration of CiteSeer in the framework of eBizSearch and the process necessary to tune the whole system towards the specific area of e-business. We also discuss how using machine learning algorithms we generate metadata to make eBizSearch Open Archives compliant. eBizSearch is a publicly available service and can be reached at [3].
860528	Single n-gram stemming Stemming can improve retrieval accuracy, but stemmers are language-specific. Character n-gram tokenization achieves many of the benefits of stemming in a language independent way, but its use incurs a performance penalty. We demonstrate that selection of a single n-gram as a pseudo-stem for a word can be an effective and efficient language-neutral approach for some languages.
860529	Average gain ratio: a simple retrieval performance measure for evaluation with multiple relevance levels An abstract is not available.
860530	A comparison of various approaches for using probabilistic dependencies in language modeling An abstract is not available.
860531	Topic hierarchy generation via linear discriminant projection An abstract is not available.
860532	A personalised information retrieval tool Industry professionals and everyday users of the Internet have long accepted that due to both the size and growth of this ubiquitous repository, new tools are needed to assist with the finding and extraction of very specific resources relevant to a user's task. Previously, this definition of relevance has been based on the extremely generic matching between resources and query terms, but recently the emphasis is shifting towards a more personalised model based on the relevance of a particular resource for one specific user. We introduce a prototype, tt Fetch, which adopts this concept within an information-seeking environment specifically designed to provide users with the means to better describe a problem (s)he doesn't understand.
860533	Classification of source code archives The World Wide Web contains a number of source code archives. Programs are usually classified into various categories within the archive by hand. We report on experiments for automatic classification of source code into these categories. We examined a number of factors that affect classification accuracy. Weighting features by expected entropy loss makes a significant improvement in classification accuracy. We show a Support Vector Machine can be trained to classify source code with a high degree of accuracy. We feel these results show promise for software reuse.
860534	Passage retrieval vs. document retrieval for factoid question answering An abstract is not available.
860535	Evaluating retrieval performance for Japanese question answering: what are best passages? An abstract is not available.
860536	Image classification using hybrid neural networks Use of semantic content is one of the major issues which needs to be addressed for improving image retrieval effectiveness. We present a new approach to classify images based on the combination of image processing techniques and hybrid neural networks. Multiple keywords are assigned to an image to represent its main contents, i.e. semantic content. Images are divided into a number of regions and colour and texture features are extracted. The first classifier, a self-organising map (SOM) clusters similar images based on the extracted features. Then, regions of the representative images of these clusters were labeled and used to train the second classifier, composed of several support vector machines (SVMs). Initial experiments on the accuracy of keyword assignment for a small vocabulary are reported.
860537	On an equivalence between PLSI and LDA Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) is a fully generative approach to language modelling which overcomes the inconsistent generative semantics of Probabilistic Latent Semantic Indexing (PLSI). This paper shows that PLSI is a maximum a posteriori estimated LDA model under a uniform Dirichlet prior, therefore the perceived shortcomings of PLSI can be resolved and elucidated within the LDA framework.
860538	Query word deletion prediction Web search query logs contain traces of users' search modifications. One strategy users employ is deleting terms, presumably to obtain greater coverage. It is useful to model and automate term deletion when arbitrary searches are conjunctively matched against a small hand constructed collection, such as a hand-built hierarchy, or collection of high-quality pages matched with key phrases. Queries with no matches can have words deleted till a match is obtained. We provide algorithms which perform substantially better than the baseline in predicting which word should be deleted from a reformulated query, for increasing query coverage in the context of web search on small high-quality collections.
860539	Assessing the effectiveness of pen-based input queries In this poster, we describe an experiment exploring the effectiveness of a pen based text input device for use in query construction. Standard TREC queries were written, recognised, and subsequently retrieved upon. Comparisons between retrieval effectiveness based on the recognised writing and a typed text baseline were made. On average, effectiveness was 75% of the baseline. Other statistics on the quality and nature of recognition are also reported. .
860540	A light weight PDA-friendly collection fusion technique This short paper presents a light weight technique to merge results lists obtained from querying different databases. The motivation for such a technique is a general purpose search engine for Palm-OS based PDAs.
860541	Speech-based and video-supported indexing of multimedia broadcast news This paper describes an automatic content indexing system for news programs, with a special emphasis on its segmentation process. The process can successfully segment an entire news program into topic-centered news stories; the primary tool is a linguistic topic segmentation algorithm. Experiments show that the resulting speech-based segments are fairly accurate, and scene change points supplied by an external video processor can be of help in improving segmentation effectiveness.
860542	Summary evaluation and text categorization In general terms the evaluation of a summary depends on how close it is to the chief points in the source text. This begets the question as to what are the chief points in the source text and how is this information used in itself in identifying the source text. This is crucially important when we discuss automatic evaluation of summaries. So the question of main points is the source text. Typically, this would be around a nucleus of keywords. However, the salience, the frequency, and the relationship of the text with other texts in the collection (of these keywords is perhaps) are important. Text categorisation using neural networks explicates these points well and also has a practical impact.
860543	Rule-based word clustering for text classification This paper introduces a rule-based, context-dependent word clustering method, with the rules derived from various domain databases and the word text orthographic properties. Besides significant dimensionality reduction, our experiments show that such rule-based word clustering improves by 8 the overall accuracy of extracting bibliographic fields from references, and by 18.32 on average the class-specific performance on the line classification of document headers.
860544	HAT: a hardware assisted TOP-DOC inverted index component A novel Hardware Assisted Top-Doc (HAT) component is disclosed. HAT is an optimized content indexing device based on a modified inverted index structure. HAT accommodates patterns of different lengths and supports a varied posting list versus term count feature sustaining high reusability and efficiency. The developed component can be used either as an internal slave component or as an external co-processor and is efficient in resource demands as the component controllers take only a minimal percentage of the target device space leaving the majority of the space to term and posting entries. A Very High Speed Integrated Circuit (VHSIC) Hardware Description Language (VHDL) is used to model the HAT system.
860545	An information-theoretic measure for document similarity Recent work has demonstrated that the assessment of pairwise object similarity can be approached in an axiomatic manner using information theory. We extend this concept specifically to document similarity and test the effectiveness of an information-theoretic measure for pairwise document similarity. We adapt query retrieval to rate the quality of document similarity measures and demonstrate that our proposed information-theoretic measure for document similarity yields statistically significant improvements over other popular measures of similarity.
860546	Optimizing term vectors for efficient and robust filtering We describe an efficient, robust method for selecting and optimizing terms for a classification or filtering task. Terms are extracted from positive examples in training data based on several alternative term-selection algorithms, then combined additively after a simple term-score normalization step to produce a merged and ranked master term vector. The score threshold for the master vector is set via beta-gamma regulation over all the available training data. The process avoids para-meter calibrations and protracted training. It also results in compact profiles for run-time evaluation of test (new) documents. Results on TREC-2002 filtering-task datasets demonstrate substantial improvements over TREC-median results and rival both idealized IR-based results and optimized (and expensive) SVM-based classifiers in general effectiveness.
860547	The TREC-like evaluation of music IR systems This poster reports upon the ongoing efforts being made to establish TREC-like and other comprehensive evaluation paradigms within the Music IR (MIR) and Music Digital Library (MDL) research communities. The proposed research tasks are based upon expert opinion garnered from members of the Information Retrieval (IR), MDL and MIR communities with regard to the construction and implementation of scientifically valid evaluation frameworks.
860548	Stemming in the language modeling framework An abstract is not available.
860549	Generating hierarchical summaries for web searches Hierarchies provide a means of organizing, summarizing and accessing information. We describe a method for automatically generating hierarchies from small collections of text, and then apply this technique to summarizing the documents retrieved by a search engine.
860550	Analysis of anchor text for web search An abstract is not available.
860552	User-assisted query translation for interactive CLIR An abstract is not available.
860553	DefScriber: a hybrid system for definitional QA An abstract is not available.
860554	Querying XML using structures and keywords in timber This demonstration will describe how Timber, a native XML database system, has been extended with the capability to answer XML-style structured queries (e.g., XQuery) with embedded IR-style keyword-based non-boolean conditions. With the original structured query processing engine and the IR extensions built into the system, Timber is well suited for efficiently and effectively processing queries with both structural and textual content constraints.
860555	SE-LEGO: creating metasearch engines on demand An abstract is not available.
860556	MIND: resource selection and data fusion in multimedia distributed digital libraries An abstract is not available.
860557	Head/modifier pairs for everyone An abstract is not available.
860558	Document retrieval from user-selected web sites We present a new tool for gathering textual information according to a query (texts) on arbitrary web sites specified by an information-seeking user. This tool is helpful in any knowledge-intensive area. Its technology is based on the vector space model with optimized feature definition. .
860559	eArchivarius: accessing collections of electronic mail We present eArchivarius an interactive system for accessing collections of electronic mail. The system combines search, clustering visualization, and time-based visualization of email messages and people who send or received the messages.
