1571942	An interdisciplinary perspective on information retrieval An abstract is not available.
1571943	From networks to human behavior Highly interconnected networks with amazingly complex topology describe systems as diverse as the World Wide Web, our cells, social systems or the economy. Recent studies indicate that these networks are the result of self-organizing processes governed by simple but generic laws, resulting in architectural features that makes them much more similar to each other than one would have expected by chance. I will discuss the amazing order characterizing our interconnected world and its implications to network robustness and spreading processes. Finally, most of these networks are driven by the temporal patterns characterizing human activity. I will use communication and web browsing data to show that there is deep order in the temporal domain of human dynamics, and discuss the different ways to understand and model the emerging patterns.
1571945	Context-aware query classification Understanding users'search intent expressed through their search queries is crucial to Web search and online advertisement. Web query classification (QC) has been widely studied for this purpose. Most previous QC algorithms classify individual queries without considering their context information. However, as exemplified by the well-known example on query "jaguar", many Web queries are short and ambiguous, whose real meanings are uncertain without the context information. In this paper, we incorporate context information into the problem of query classification by using conditional random field (CRF) models. In our approach, we use neighboring queries and their corresponding clicked URLs (Web pages) in search sessions as the context information. We perform extensive experiments on real world search logs and validate the effectiveness and effciency of our approach. We show that we can improve the F1 score by 52% as compared to other state-of-the-art baselines.
1571946	Refined experts: improving classification in large taxonomies While large-scale taxonomies--especially for web pages--have been in existence for some time, approaches to automatically classify documents into these taxonomies have met with limited success compared to the more general progress made in text classification. We argue that this stems from three causes: increasing sparsity of training data at deeper nodes in the taxonomy, error propagation where a mistake made high in the hierarchy cannot be recovered, and increasingly complex decision surfaces in higher nodes in the hierarchy. While prior research has focused on the first problem, we introduce methods that target the latter two problems--first by biasing the training distribution to reduce error propagation and second by propagating up "first-guess" expert information in a bottom-up manner before making a refined top down choice. Finally, we present an empirical study demonstrating that the suggested changes lead to 10--30% improvements in F1 scores versus an accepted competitive baseline, hierarchical SVMs.
1571947	Dynamicity vs. effectiveness: studying online clustering for scatter/gather We proposed and implemented a novel clustering algorithm called LAIR2, which has constant running time average for on-the-fly Scatter/Gather browsing [4]. Our experiments showed that when running on a single processor, the LAIR2 on-line clustering algorithm was several hundred times faster than a parallel Buckshot algorithm running on multiple processors [11]. This paper reports on a study that examined the effectiveness of the LAIR2 algorithm in terms of clustering quality and its impact on retrieval performance. We conducted a user study on 24 subjects to evaluate on-the-fly LAIR2 clustering in Scatter/Gather search tasks by comparing its performance to the Buckshot algorithm, a classic method for Scatter/Gather browsing [4]. Results showed significant differences in terms of subjective perceptions of clustering quality. Subjects perceived that the LAIR2 algorithm produced significantly better quality clusters than the Buckshot method did. Subjects felt that it took less effort to complete the tasks with the LAIR2 system, which was more effective in helping them in the tasks. Interesting patterns also emerged from subjects' comments in the final open-ended questionnaire. We discuss implications and future research.
1571949	Web searching for daily living The new concept proposed in this paper is a query free web search that automatically retrieves a web page including information related to the daily activity that we are currently engaged in for automatically displaying the page on Internet-connected domestic appliances around us such as televisions. When we are washing a coffee maker, for example, a web page is retrieved that includes tips such as `cleaning a coffee maker with vinegar removes stains well.' A method designed on the basis of this concept automatically searches for a web page by using a query constructed from the use of ordinary household objects that is detected by sensors attached to the objects. An in-situ experiment tests a variety of IR techniques and the experiment confirmed that our daily activities can produce related web pages with high accuracy.
1571950	Global ranking by exploiting user clicks It is now widely recognized that user interactions with search results can provide substantial relevance information on the documents displayed in the search results. In this paper, we focus on extracting relevance information from one source of user interactions, i.e., user click data, which records the sequence of documents being clicked and not clicked in the result set during a user search session. We formulate the problem as a global ranking problem, emphasizing the importance of the sequential nature of user clicks, with the goal to predict the relevance labels of all the documents in a search session. This is distinct from conventional learning to rank methods that usually design a ranking model defined on a single document; in contrast, in our model the relational information among the documents as manifested by an aggregation of user clicks is exploited to rank all the documents jointly. In particular, we adapt several sequential supervised learning algorithms, including the conditional random field (CRF), the sliding window method and the recurrent sliding window method, to the global ranking problem. Experiments on the click data collected from a commercial search engine demonstrate that our methods can outperform the baseline models for search results re-ranking.
1571951	Good abandonment in mobile and PC internet search Query abandonment by search engine users is generally considered to be a negative signal. In this paper, we explore the concept of good abandonment. We define a good abandonment as an abandoned query for which the user's information need was successfully addressed by the search results page, with no need to click on a result or refine the query. We present an analysis of abandoned internet search queries across two modalities (PC and mobile) in three locales. The goal is to approximate the prevalence of good abandonment, and to identify types of information needs that may lead to good abandonment, across different locales and modalities. Our study has three key findings: First, queries potentially indicating good abandonment make up a significant portion of all abandoned queries. Second, the good abandonment rate from mobile search is significantly higher than that from PC search, across all locales tested. Third, classified by type of information need, the major classes of good abandonment vary dramatically by both locale and modality. Our findings imply that it is a mistake to uniformly consider query abandonment as a negative signal. Further, there is a potential opportunity for search engines to drive additional good abandonment, especially for mobile search users, by improving search features and result snippets.
1571953	Efficient query expansion for advertisement search Online advertising represents a growing part of the revenues of major Internet service providers such as Google and Yahoo. A commonly used strategy is to place advertisements (ads) on the search result pages according to the users' submitted queries. Relevant ads are likely to be clicked by a user and to increase the revenues of both advertisers and publishers. However, bid phrases defined by ad-owners are usually contained in limited number of ads. Directly matching user queries with bid phrases often results in finding few appropriate ads. To address this shortcoming, query expansion is often used to increase the chances to match the ads. Nevertheless, query expansion on top of the traditional inverted index faces efficiency issues such as high time complexity and heavy I/O costs. Moreover, precision cannot always be improved, sometimes even hurt due to the involvement of additional noise. In this paper, we propose an efficient ad search solution relying on a block-based index able to tackle the issues associated with query expansion. Our index structure places clusters of similar bid phrases in corresponding blocks with their associated ads. It reduces the number of merge operations significantly during query expansion and allows sequential scans rather than random accesses, saving I/O costs. We adopt flexible block sizes according to the clustering results of bid phrases to further optimize the index structure for efficient ad search. The pre-computation of such clusters is achieved through an agglomerative iterative clustering algorithm. Finally, we adapt the spreading activation mechanism to return the top-k relevant ads, improving search precision. The experimental results of our prototype, AdSearch, show that we can indeed return a larger number of relevant ads without sacrificing execution speed.
1571954	Query dependent pseudo-relevance feedback based on wikipedia Pseudo-relevance feedback (PRF) via query-expansion has been proven to be e®ective in many information retrieval (IR) tasks. In most existing work, the top-ranked documents from an initial search are assumed to be relevant and used for PRF. One problem with this approach is that one or more of the top retrieved documents may be non-relevant, which can introduce noise into the feedback process. Besides, existing methods generally do not take into account the significantly different types of queries that are often entered into an IR system. Intuitively, Wikipedia can be seen as a large, manually edited document collection which could be exploited to improve document retrieval effectiveness within PRF. It is not obvious how we might best utilize information from Wikipedia in PRF, and to date, the potential of Wikipedia for this task has been largely unexplored. In our work, we present a systematic exploration of the utilization of Wikipedia in PRF for query dependent expansion. Specifically, we classify TREC topics into three categories based on Wikipedia: 1) entity queries, 2) ambiguous queries, and 3) broader queries. We propose and study the effectiveness of three methods for expansion term selection, each modeling the Wikipedia based pseudo-relevance information from a different perspective. We incorporate the expansion terms into the original query and use language modeling IR to evaluate these methods. Experiments on four TREC test collections, including the large web collection GOV2, show that retrieval performance of each type of query can be improved. In addition, we demonstrate that the proposed method out-performs the baseline relevance model in terms of precision and robustness.
1571955	Segment-level display time as implicit feedback: a comparison to eye tracking We examine two basic sources for implicit relevance feedback on the segment level for search personalization: eye tracking and display time. A controlled study has been conducted where 32 participants had to view documents in front of an eye tracker, query a search engine, and give explicit relevance ratings for the results. We examined the performance of the basic implicit feedback methods with respect to improved ranking and compared their performance to a pseudo relevance feedback baseline on the segment level and the original ranking of a Web search engine. Our results show that feedback based on display time on the segment level is much coarser than feedback from eye tracking. But surprisingly, for re-ranking and query expansion it did work as well as eye-tracking-based feedback. All behavior-based methods performed significantly better than our non-behavior-based baseline and especially improved poor initial rankings of the Web search engine. The study shows that segment-level display time yields comparable results as eye-tracking-based feedback. Thus, it should be considered in future personalization systems as an inexpensive but precise method for implicit feedback.
1571957	Addressing morphological variation in alphabetic languages The selection of indexing terms for representing documents is a key decision that limits how effective subsequent retrieval can be. Often stemming algorithms are used to normalize surface forms, and thereby address the problem of not finding documents that contain words related to query terms through infectional or derivational morphology. However, rule-based stemmers are not available for every language and it is unclear which methods for coping with morphology are most effective. In this paper we investigate an assortment of techniques for representing text and compare these approaches using data sets in eighteen languages and five different writing systems. We find character n-gram tokenization to be highly effective. In half of the languages examined n-grams outperform unnormalized words by more than 25%; in highly infective languages relative improvements over 50% are obtained. In languages with less morphological richness the choice of tokenization is not as critical and rule-based stemming can be an attractive option, if available. We also conducted an experiment to uncover the source of n-gram power and a causal relationship between the morphological complexity of a language and n-gram effectiveness was demonstrated.
1571958	Web derived pronunciations for spoken term detection Indexing and retrieval of speech content in various forms such as broadcast news, customer care data and on-line media has gained a lot of interest for a wide range of applications, from customer analytics to on-line media search. For most retrieval applications, the speech content is typically first converted to a lexical or phonetic representation using automatic speech recognition (ASR). The first step in searching through indexes built on these representations is the generation of pronunciations for named entities and foreign language query terms. This paper summarizes the results of the work conducted during the 2008 JHU Summer Workshop by the Multilingual Spoken Term Detection team, on mining the web for pronunciations and analyzing their impact on spoken term detection. We will first present methods to use the vast amount of pronunciation information available on the Web, in the form of IPA and ad-hoc transcriptions. We describe techniques for extracting candidate pronunciations from Web pages and associating them with orthographic words, filtering out poorly extracted pronunciations, normalizing IPA pronunciations to better conform to a common transcription standard, and generating phonemic representations from ad-hoc transcriptions. We then present an analysis of the effectiveness of using these pronunciations to represent Out-Of-Vocabulary (OOV) query terms on the performance of a spoken term detection (STD) system. We will provide comparisons of Web pronunciations against automated techniques for pronunciation generation as well as pronunciations generated by human experts. Our results cover a range of speech indexes based on lattices, confusion networks and one-best transcriptions at both word and word fragments levels.
1571959	Combining LVCSR and vocabulary-independent ranked utterance retrieval for robust speech search Well tuned Large-Vocabulary Continuous Speech Recognition (LVCSR) has been shown to generally be more effective than vocabulary-independent techniques for ranked retrieval of spoken content when one or the other approach is used alone. Tuning LVCSR systems to a topic domain can be costly, however, and the experiments in this paper show that Out-Of-Vocabulary (OOV) query terms can significantly reduce retrieval effectiveness when that tuning is not performed. Further experiments demonstrate, however, that retrieval effectiveness for queries with OOV terms can be substantially improved by combining evidence from LVCSR with additional evidence from vocabulary-independent Ranked Utterance Retrieval (RUR). The combination is performed by using relevance judgments from held-out topics to learn generic (i.e., topic-independent), smooth, non-decreasing transformations from LVCSR and RUR system scores to probabilities of topical relevance. Evaluated using a CLEF collection that includes topics, spontaneous conversational speech audio, and relevance judgments, the system recovers 57% of the mean uninterpolated average precision that could have been obtained through LVCSR domain tuning for very short queries (or 41% for longer queries).
1571961	Risky business: modeling and exploiting uncertainty in information retrieval Most retrieval models estimate the relevance of each document to a query and rank the documents accordingly. However, such an approach ignores the uncertainty associated with the estimates of relevancy. If a high estimate of relevancy also has a high uncertainty, then the document may be very relevant or not relevant at all. Another document may have a slightly lower estimate of relevancy but the corresponding uncertainty may be much less. In such a circumstance, should the retrieval engine risk ranking the first document highest, or should it choose a more conservative (safer) strategy that gives preference to the second document? There is no definitive answer to this question, as it depends on the risk preferences of the user and the information retrieval system. In this paper we present a general framework for modeling uncertainty and introduce an asymmetric loss function with a single parameter that can model the level of risk the system is willing to accept. By adjusting the risk preference parameter, our approach can effectively adapt to users' different retrieval strategies. We apply this asymmetric loss function to a language modeling framework and a practical risk-aware document scoring function is obtained. Our experiments on several TREC collections show that our "risk-averse" approach significantly improves the Jelinek-Mercer smoothing language model, and a combination of our "risk-averse" approach and the Jelinek-Mercer smoothing method generally outperforms the Dirichlet smoothing method. Experimental results also show that the "risk-averse" approach, even without smoothing from the collection statistics, performs as well as three commonly-adopted retrieval models, namely, the Jelinek-Mercer and Dirichlet smoothing methods, and BM25 model.
1571962	Approximating true relevance distribution from a mixture model based on irrelevance data Pseudo relevance feedback (PRF), which has been widely applied in IR, aims to derive a distribution from the top n pseudo relevant documents D . However, these documents are often a mixture of relevant and irrelevant documents. As a result, the derived distribution is actually a mixture model, which has long been limiting the performance of PRF. This is particularly the case when we deal with difficult queries where the truly relevant documents in D are very sparse. In this situation, it is often easier to identify a small number of seed irrelevant documents, which can form a seed irrelevant distribution. Then, a fundamental and challenging problem arises: solely based on the mixed distribution and a seed irrelevance distribution, how to automatically generate an optimal approximation of the true relevance distribution? In this paper, we propose a novel distribution separation model (DSM) to tackle this problem. Theoretical justifications of the proposed algorithm are given. Evaluation results from our extensive simulated experiments on several large scale TREC data sets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, which outperforms a well respected PRF Model, the Relevance Model (RM), as well as the use of RM on D with the seed negative documents directly removed.
1571963	Portfolio theory of information retrieval This paper studies document ranking under uncertainty. It is tackled in a general situation where the relevance predictions of individual documents have uncertainty, and are dependent between each other. Inspired by the Modern Portfolio Theory, an economic theory dealing with investment in financial markets, we argue that ranking under uncertainty is not just about picking individual relevant documents, but about choosing the right combination of relevant documents. This motivates us to quantify a ranked list of documents on the basis of its expected overall relevance (mean) and its variance; the latter serves as a measure of risk, which was rarely studied for document ranking in the past. Through the analysis of the mean and variance, we show that an optimal rank order is the one that balancing the overall relevance (mean) of the ranked list against its risk level (variance). Based on this principle, we then derive an efficient document ranking algorithm. It generalizes the well-known probability ranking principle (PRP) by considering both the uncertainty of relevance predictions and correlations between retrieved documents. Moreover, the benefit of diversification is mathematically quantified; we show that diversifying documents is an effective way to reduce the risk of document ranking. Experimental results in text retrieval confirm performance.
1571965	A statistical comparison of tag and query logs We investigate tag and query logs to see if the terms people use to annotate websites are similar to the ones they use to query for them. Over a set of URLs, we compare the distribution of tags used to annotate each URL with the distribution of query terms for clicks on the same URL. Understanding the relationship between the distributions is important to determine how useful tag data may be for improving search results and conversely, query data for improving tag prediction. In our study, we compare both term frequency distributions using vocabulary overlap and relative entropy. We also test statistically whether the term counts come from the same underlying distribution. Our results indicate that the vocabulary used for tagging and searching for content are similar but not identical. We further investigate the content of the websites to see which of the two distributions (tag or query) is most similar to the content of the annotated/searched URL. Finally, we analyze the similarity for different categories of URLs in our sample to see if the similarity between distributions is dependent on the topic of the website or the popularity of the URL.
1571966	Simultaneously modeling semantics and structure of threaded discussions: a sparse coding approach and its applications The huge amount of knowledge in web communities has motivated the research interests in threaded discussions. The dynamic nature of threaded discussions poses lots of challenging problems for computer scientists. Although techniques such as semantic models and structural models have been shown to be useful in a number of areas, they are inefficient in understanding threaded discussions due to three reasons: (I) as most of users read existing messages before posting, posts in a discussion thread are temporally dependent on the previous ones; It causes the semantics and structure to be coupled with each other in threaded discussions; (II) in online discussion threads, there are a lot of junk posts which are useless and may disturb content analysis; and (III) it is very hard to judge the quality of a post. In this paper, we propose a sparse coding-based model named SMSS to Simultaneously Model Semantics and Structure of threaded discussions. The model projects each post into a topic space, and approximates each post by a linear combination of previous posts in the same discussion thread. Meanwhile, the model also imposes two sparse constraints to force a sparse post reconstruction in the topic space and a sparse post approximation from previous posts. The sparse properties effectively take into account the characteristics of threaded discussions. Towards the above three problems, we demonstrate the competency of our model in three applications: reconstructing reply structure of threaded discussions, identifying junk posts, and finding experts in a given board/sub-board in web communities. Experimental results show encouraging performance of the proposed SMSS model in all these applications.
1571967	Enhancing cluster labeling using wikipedia This work investigates cluster labeling enhancement by utilizing Wikipedia, the free on-line encyclopedia. We describe a general framework for cluster labeling that extracts candidate labels from Wikipedia in addition to important terms that are extracted directly from the text. The "labeling quality" of each candidate is then evaluated by several independent judges and the top evaluated candidates are recommended for labeling. Our experimental results reveal that the Wikipedia labels agree with manual labels associated by humans to a cluster, much more than with significant terms that are extracted directly from the text. We show that in most cases even when human's associated label appears in the text, pure statistical methods have difficulty in identifying them as good descriptors. Furthermore, our experiments show that for more than 85% of the clusters in our test collection, the manual label (or an inflection, or a synonym of it) appears in the top five labels recommended by our system.
1571969	Compressing term positions in web indexes Large search engines process thousands of queries per second on billions of pages, making query processing a major factor in their operating costs. This has led to a lot of research on how to improve query throughput, using techniques such as massive parallelism, caching, early termination, and inverted index compression. We focus on techniques for compressing term positions in web search engine indexes. Most previous work has focused on compressing docID and frequency data, or position information in other types of text collections. Compression of term positions in web pages is complicated by the fact that term occurrences tend to cluster within documents but not across document boundaries, making it harder to exploit clustering effects. Also, typical access patterns for position data are different from those for docID and frequency data. We perform a detailed study of a number of existing and new techniques for compressing position data in web indexes. We also study how to efficiently access position data for ranking functions that take proximity features into account.
1571970	Brute force and indexed approaches to pairwise document similarity comparisons with MapReduce This paper explores the problem of computing pairwise similarity on document collections, focusing on the application of "more like this" queries in the life sciences domain. Three MapReduce algorithms are introduced: one based on brute force, a second where the problem is treated as large-scale ad hoc retrieval, and a third based on the Cartesian product of postings lists. Each algorithm supports one or more approximations that trade effectiveness for efficiency, the characteristics of which are studied experimentally. Results show that the brute force algorithm is the most efficient of the three when exact similarity is desired. However, the other two algorithms support approximations that yield large efficiency gains without significant loss of effectiveness.
1571971	Efficiency trade-offs in two-tier web search systems Search engines rely on searching multiple partitioned corpora to return results to users in a reasonable amount of time. In this paper we analyze the standard two-tier architecture for Web search with the difference that the corpus to be searched for a given query is predicted in advance. We show that any predictor better than random yields time savings, but this decrease in the processing time yields an increase in the infrastructure cost. We provide an analysis and investigate this trade-off in the context of two different scenarios on real-world data. We demonstrate that in general the decrease in answer time is justified by a small increase in infrastructure cost.
1571973	A classification-based approach to question answering in discussion boards Discussion boards and online forums are important platforms for people to share information. Users post questions or problems onto discussion boards and rely on others to provide possible solutions and such question-related content sometimes even dominates the whole discussion board. However, to retrieve this kind of information automatically and effectively is still a non-trivial task. In addition, the existence of other types of information (e.g., announcements, plans, elaborations, etc.) makes it difficult to assume that every thread in a discussion board is about a question. We consider the problems of identifying question-related threads and their potential answers as classification tasks. Experimental results across multiple datasets demonstrate that our method can significantly improve the performance in both question detection and answer finding subtasks. We also do a careful comparison of how different types of features contribute to the final result and show that non-content features play a key role in improving overall performance. Finally, we show that a ranking scheme based on our classification approach can yield much better performance than prior published methods.
1571974	Ranking community answers by modeling question-answer relationships via analogical reasoning The method of finding high-quality answers has significant impact on user satisfaction in community question answering systems. However, due to the lexical gap between questions and answers as well as spam typically existing in user-generated content, filtering and ranking answers is very challenging. Previous solutions mainly focus on generating redundant features, or finding textual clues using machine learning techniques; none of them ever consider questions and their answers as relational data but instead model them as independent information. Moreover, they only consider the answers of the current question, and ignore any previous knowledge that would be helpful to bridge the lexical and semantic gap. We assume that answers are connected to their questions with various types of latent links, i.e. positive indicating high-quality answers, negative links indicating incorrect answers or user-generated spam, and propose an analogical reasoning-based approach which measures the analogy between the new question-answer linkages and those of relevant knowledge which contains only positive links; the candidate answer which has the most analogous link is assumed to be the best answer. We conducted experiments based on 29.8 million Yahoo!Answer question-answer threads and showed the effectiveness of our approach.
1571975	A syntactic tree matching approach to finding similar questions in community-based qa services While traditional question answering (QA) systems tailored to the TREC QA task work relatively well for simple questions, they do not suffice to answer real world questions. The community-based QA systems offer this service well, as they contain large archives of such questions where manually crafted answers are directly available. However, finding similar questions in the QA archive is not trivial. In this paper, we propose a new retrieval framework based on syntactic tree structure to tackle the similar question matching problem. We build a ground-truth set from Yahoo! Answers, and experimental results show that our method outperforms traditional bag-of-word or tree kernel based methods by 8.3% in mean average precision. It further achieves up to 50% improvement by incorporating semantic features as well as matching of potential answers. Our model does not rely on training, and it is demonstrated to be robust against grammatical errors as well.
1571977	On social networks and collaborative recommendation Social network systems, like last.fm, play a significant role in Web 2.0, containing large amounts of multimedia-enriched data that are enhanced both by explicit user-provided annotations and implicit aggregated feedback describing the personal preferences of each user. It is also a common tendency for these systems to encourage the creation of virtual networks among their users by allowing them to establish bonds of friendship and thus provide a novel and direct medium for the exchange of data. We investigate the role of these additional relationships in developing a track recommendation system. Taking into account both the social annotation and friendships inherent in the social graph established among users, items and tags, we created a collaborative recommendation system that effectively adapts to the personal information needs of each user. We adopt the generic framework of Random Walk with Restarts in order to provide with a more natural and efficient way to represent social networks. In this work we collected a representative enough portion of the music social network last.fm, capturing explicitly expressed bonds of friendship of the user as well as social tags. We performed a series of comparison experiments between the Random Walk with Restarts model and a user-based collaborative filtering method using the Pearson Correlation similarity. The results show that the graph model system benefits from the additional information embedded in social knowledge. In addition, the graph model outperforms the standard collaborative filtering method.
1571978	Learning to recommend with social trust ensemble As an indispensable technique in the field of Information Filtering, Recommender System has been well studied and developed both in academia and in industry recently. However, most of current recommender systems suffer the following problems: (1) The large-scale and sparse data of the user-item matrix seriously affect the recommendation quality. As a result, most of the recommender systems cannot easily deal with users who have made very few ratings. (2) The traditional recommender systems assume that all the users are independent and identically distributed; this assumption ignores the connections among users, which is not consistent with the real world recommendations. Aiming at modeling recommender systems more accurately and realistically, we propose a novel probabilistic factor analysis framework, which naturally fuses the users' tastes and their trusted friends' favors together. In this framework, we coin the term Social Trust Ensemble to represent the formulation of the social trust restrictions on the recommender systems. The complexity analysis indicates that our approach can be applied to very large datasets since it scales linearly with the number of observations, while the experimental results show that our method performs better than the state-of-the-art approaches.
1571979	Fast nonparametric matrix factorization for large-scale collaborative filtering With the sheer growth of online user data, it becomes challenging to develop preference learning algorithms that are sufficiently flexible in modeling but also affordable in computation. In this paper we develop nonparametric matrix factorization methods by allowing the latent factors of two low-rank matrix factorization methods, the singular value decomposition (SVD) and probabilistic principal component analysis (pPCA), to be data-driven, with the dimensionality increasing with data size. We show that the formulations of the two nonparametric models are very similar, and their optimizations share similar procedures. Compared to traditional parametric low-rank methods, nonparametric models are appealing for their flexibility in modeling complex data dependencies. However, this modeling advantage comes at a computational price--it is highly challenging to scale them to large-scale problems, hampering their application to applications such as collaborative filtering. In this paper we introduce novel optimization algorithms, which are simple to implement, which allow learning both nonparametric matrix factorization models to be highly efficient on large-scale problems. Our experiments on EachMovie and Netflix, the two largest public benchmarks to date, demonstrate that the nonparametric models make more accurate predictions of user ratings, and are computationally comparable or sometimes even faster in training, in comparison with previous state-of-the-art parametric matrix factorization models.
1571981	Building enriched document representations using aggregated anchor text It is well known that anchor text plays a critical role in a variety of search tasks performed over hypertextual domains, including enterprise search, wiki search, and web search. It is common practice to enrich a document's standard textual representation with all of the anchor text associated with its incoming hyperlinks. However, this approach does not help match relevant pages with very few inlinks. In this paper, we propose a method for overcoming anchor text sparsity by enriching document representations with anchor text that has been aggregated across the hyperlink graph. This aggregation mechanism acts to smooth, or diffuse, anchor text within a domain. We rigorously evaluate our proposed approach on a large web search test collection. Our results show the approach significantly improves retrieval effectiveness, especially for longer, more difficult queries.
1571982	Using anchor texts with their hyperlink structure for web search As a good complement to page content, anchor texts have been extensively used, and proven to be useful, in commercial search engines. However, anchor texts have been assumed to be independent, whether they come from the same Web site or not. Intuitively, an anchor text from unrelated Web sites should be considered as stronger evidence than that from the same site. This paper proposes two new methods to take into account the possible relationships between anchor texts. We consider two relationships in this paper: links from the same site and links from related sites. The importance assigned to the anchor texts in these two situations is discounted. Experimental results show that these two new models outperform the baseline model which assumes independence between hyperlinks.
1571983	Link analysis for private weighted graphs Link analysis methods have been used successfully for knowledge discovery from the link structure of mutually linking entities. Existing link analysis methods have been inherently designed based on the fact that the entire link structure of the target graph is observable such as public web documents; however, link information in graphs in the real world, such as human relationship or economic activities, is rarely open to public. If link analysis can be performed using graphs with private links in a privacy-preserving way, it enables us to rank entities connected with private ties, such as people, organizations, or business transactions. In this paper, we present a secure link analysis for graphs with private links by means of cryptographic protocols. Our solutions are designed as privacy-preserving expansions of well-known link analysis methods, PageRank and HITS. The outcomes of our protocols are completely equivalent to those of PageRank and HITS. Furthermore, our protocols theoretically guarantee that the private link information possessed by each node is not revealed to other nodes. %We demonstrate the efficiency of our solution by experimental studies, comparing with existing solutions, such as secure function evaluation, decentralized spectral analysis, and privacy-preserving link-analysis.
1571985	Learning to rank for quantity consensus queries Web search is increasingly exploiting named entities like persons, places, businesses, addresses and dates. Entity ranking is also of current interest at INEX and TREC. Numerical quantities are an important class of entities, especially in queries about prices and features related to products, services and travel. We introduce Quantity Consensus Queries (QCQs), where each answer is a tight quantity interval distilled from evidence of relevance in thousands of snippets. Entity search and factoid question answering have benefited from aggregating evidence from multiple promising snippets, but these do not readily apply to quantities. Here we propose two new algorithms that learn to aggregate information from multiple snippets. We show that typical signals used in entity ranking, like rarity of query words and their lexical proximity to candidate quantities, are very noisy. Our algorithms learn to score and rankquantity intervals directly, combining snippet quantity and snippet text information. We report on experiments using hundreds of QCQs with ground truth taken from TREC QA, Wikipedia Infoboxes, and other sources, leading to tens of thousands of candidate snippets and quantities. Our algorithms yield about 20% better MAP and NDCG compared to the best-known collective rankers, and are 35% better than scoring snippets independent of each other.
1571986	Learning in a pairwise term-term proximity framework for information retrieval Traditional ad hoc retrieval models do not take into account the closeness or proximity of terms. Document scores in these models are primarily based on the occurrences or non-occurrences of query-terms considered independently of each other. Intuitively, documents in which query-terms occur closer together should be ranked higher than documents in which the query-terms appear far apart. This paper outlines several term-term proximity measures and develops an intuitive framework in which they can be used to fully model the proximity of all query-terms for a particular topic. As useful proximity functions may be constructed from many proximity measures, we use a learning approach to combine proximity measures to develop a useful proximity function in the framework. An evaluation of the best proximity functions show that there is a significant improvement over the baseline ad hoc retrieval model and over other more recent methods that employ the use of single proximity measures.
1571987	Robust sparse rank learning for non-smooth ranking measures Recently increasing attention has been focused on directly optimizing ranking measures and inducing sparsity in learning models. However, few attempts have been made to relate them together in approaching the problem of learning to rank. In this paper, we consider the sparse algorithms to directly optimize the Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG) which is a widely-used ranking measure. We begin by establishing a reduction framework under which we reduce ranking, as measured by NDCG, to the importance weighted pairwise classification. Furthermore, we provide a sound theoretical guarantee for this reduction, bounding the realized NDCG regret in terms of a properly weighted pairwise classification regret, which implies that good performance can be robustly transferred from pairwise classification to ranking. Based on the converted pairwise loss function, it is conceivable to take into account sparsity in ranking models and to come up with a gradient possessing certain performance guarantee. For the sake of achieving sparsity, a novel algorithm named RSRank has also been devised, which performs L1 regularization using truncated gradient descent. Finally, experimental results on benchmark collection confirm the significant advantage of RSRank in comparison with several baseline methods.
1571989	Named entity recognition in query This paper addresses the problem of Named Entity Recognition in Query (NERQ), which involves detection of the named entity in a given query and classification of the named entity into predefined classes. NERQ is potentially useful in many applications in web search. The paper proposes taking a probabilistic approach to the task using query log data and Latent Dirichlet Allocation. We consider contexts of a named entity (i.e., the remainders of the named entity in queries) as words of a document, and classes of the named entity as topics. The topic model is constructed by a novel and general learning method referred to as WS-LDA (Weakly Supervised Latent Dirichlet Allocation), which employs weakly supervised learning (rather than unsupervised learning) using partially labeled seed entities. Experimental results show that the proposed method based on WS-LDA can accurately perform NERQ, and outperform the baseline methods.
1571990	A 2-poisson model for probabilistic coreference of named entities for improved text retrieval Text retrieval queries frequently contain named entities. The standard approach of term frequency weighting does not work well when estimating the term frequency of a named entity, since anaphoric expressions (like he, she, the movie, etc) are frequently used to refer to named entities in a document, and the use of anaphoric expressions causes the term frequency of named entities to be underestimated. In this paper, we propose a novel 2-Poisson model to estimate the frequency of anaphoric expressions of a named entity, without explicitly resolving the anaphoric expressions. Our key assumption is that the frequency of anaphoric expressions is distributed over named entities in a document according to the probabilities of whether the document is elite for the named entities. This assumption leads us to formulate our proposed Co-referentially Enhanced Entity Frequency (CEEF). Experimental results on the text collection of TREC Blog Track show that CEEF achieves significant and consistent improvements over state-of-the-art retrieval methods using standard term frequency estimation. In particular, we achieve a 3% increase of MAP over the best performing run of TREC 2008 Blog Track.
1571991	Mining employment market via text block detection and adaptive cross-domain information extraction We have developed an approach for analyzing online job advertisements in different domains (industries) from different regions worldwide. Our approach is able to extract precise information from the text content supporting useful employment market analysis locally and globally. A major component in our approach is an information extraction framework which is composed of two challenging tasks. The first task is to detect unformatted text blocks automatically based on an unsupervised learning model. Identifying these useful text blocks through this learning model allows the generation of highly effective features for the next task which is text fragment extraction learning. The task of text fragment extraction learning is formulated as a domain adaptation model for text fragment classification. One advantage of our approach is that it can easily adapt to a large number of online job advertisements in different and new domains. Extensive experiments have been conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness and flexibility of our approach.
1571993	A proximity language model for information retrieval The proximity of query terms in a document is a very important information to enable ranking models go beyond the "bag of word" assumption in information retrieval. This paper studies the integration of term proximity information into the unigram language modeling. A new proximity language model (PLM) is proposed which views query terms' proximity centrality as the Dirichlet hyper-parameter that weights the parameters of the unigram document language model. Several forms of proximity measure are developed to be used in PLM which could compute a query term's proximate centrality in a specific document. In experiments, the proximity language model is compared with the basic language model and previous works that combine the proximity information with language model using linear score combination. The experiment results show that the proposed model performs better in both top precision and average precision.
1571994	Positional language models for information retrieval Although many variants of language models have been proposed for information retrieval, there are two related retrieval heuristics remaining "external" to the language modeling approach: (1) proximity heuristic which rewards a document where the matched query terms occur close to each other; (2) passage retrieval which scores a document mainly based on the best matching passage. Existing studies have only attempted to use a standard language model as a "black box" to implement these heuristics, making it hard to optimize the combination parameters. In this paper, we propose a novel positional language model (PLM) which implements both heuristics in a unified language model. The key idea is to define a language model for each position of a document, and score a document based on the scores of its PLMs. The PLM is estimated based on propagated counts of words within a document through a proximity-based density function, which both captures proximity heuristics and achieves an effect of "soft" passage retrieval. We propose and study several representative density functions and several different PLM-based document ranking strategies. Experiment results on standard TREC test collections show that the PLM is effective for passage retrieval and performs better than a state-of-the-art proximity-based retrieval model.
1571995	A bayesian learning approach to promoting diversity in ranking for biomedical information retrieval In this paper, we propose a Bayesian learning approach to promoting diversity for information retrieval in biomedicine and a re-ranking model to improve retrieval performance in the biomedical domain. First, the re-ranking model computes the maximum posterior probability of the hidden property corresponding to each retrieved passage. Then it iteratively groups the passages into subsets according to their properties. Finally, these passages are re-ranked from the subsets as our output. There is no need for our proposed method to use any external biomedical resource. We evaluate our Bayesian learning approach by conducting extensive experiments on the TREC 2004-2007 Genomics data sets. The experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed Bayesian learning approach for promoting diversity in ranking for biomedical information retrieval on four years TREC data sets.
1571997	Sources of evidence for vertical selection Web search providers often include search services for domain-specific subcollections, called verticals, such as news, images, videos, job postings, company summaries, and artist profiles. We address the problem of vertical selection, predicting relevant verticals (if any) for queries issued to the search engine's main web search page. In contrast to prior query classification and resource selection tasks, vertical selection is associated with unique resources that can inform the classification decision. We focus on three sources of evidence: (1) the query string, from which features are derived independent of external resources, (2) logs of queries previously issued directly to the vertical, and (3) corpora representative of vertical content. We focus on 18 different verticals, which differ in terms of semantics, media type, size, and level of query traffic. We compare our method to prior work in federated search and retrieval effectiveness prediction. An in-depth error analysis reveals unique challenges across different verticals and provides insight into vertical selection for future work.
1571998	Adaptation of offline vertical selection predictions in the presence of user feedback Web search results often integrate content from specialized corpora known as verticals. Given a query, one important aspect of aggregated search is the selection of relevant verticals from a set of candidate verticals. One drawback to previous approaches to vertical selection is that methods have not explicitly modeled user feedback. However, production search systems often record a variety of feedback information. In this paper, we present algorithms for vertical selection which adapt to user feedback. We evaluate algorithms using a novel simulator which models performance of a vertical selector situated in realistic query traffic.
1571999	A probabilistic topic-based ranking framework for location-sensitive domain information retrieval It has been observed that many queries submitted to search engines are location-sensitive. Traditional search techniques fail to interpret the significance of such geographical clues and as such are unable to return highly relevant search results. Although there have been efforts in the literature to support location-aware information retrieval, critical challenges still remain in terms of search result quality and data scalability. In this paper, we propose an innovative probabilistic ranking framework for domain information retrieval where users are interested in a set of location-sensitive topics. Our proposed method recognizes the geographical distribution of topic influence in the process of ranking documents and models it accurately using probabilistic Gaussian Process classifiers. Additionally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed ranking framework by implementing it in a Web search service for NBA news. Extensive performance evaluation is performed on real Web document collections, which confirms that our proposed mechanism works significantly better (around 29.7% averagely using DCG20 measure) than other popular location-aware information retrieval techniques in ranking quality.
1572001	Entropy-biased models for query representation on the click graph Query log analysis has received substantial attention in recent years, in which the click graph is an important technique for describing the relationship between queries and URLs. State-of-the-art approaches based on the raw click frequencies for modeling the click graph, however, are not noise-eliminated. Nor do they handle heterogeneous query-URL pairs well. In this paper, we investigate and develop a novel entropy-biased framework for modeling click graphs. The intuition behind this model is that various query-URL pairs should be treated differently, i.e., common clicks on less frequent but more specific URLs are of greater value than common clicks on frequent and general URLs. Based on this intuition, we utilize the entropy information of the URLs and introduce a new concept, namely the inverse query frequency (IQF), to weigh the importance (discriminative ability) of a click on a certain URL. The IQF weighting scheme is never explicitly explored or statistically examined for any bipartite graphs in the information retrieval literature. We not only formally define and quantify this scheme, but also incorporate it with the click frequency and user frequency information on the click graph for an effective query representation. To illustrate our methodology, we conduct experiments with the AOL query log data for query similarity analysis and query suggestion tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that considerable improvements in performance are obtained with our entropy-biased models. Moreover, our method can also be applied to other bipartite graphs.
1572002	Click-through prediction for news queries A growing trend in commercial search engines is the display of specialized content such as news, products, etc. interleaved with web search results. Ideally, this content should be displayed only when it is highly relevant to the search query, as it competes for space with "regular" results and advertisements. One measure of the relevance to the search query is the click-through rate the specialized content achieves when displayed; hence, if we can predict this click-through rate accurately, we can use this as the basis for selecting when to show specialized content. In this paper, we consider the problem of estimating the click-through rate for dedicated news search results. For queries for which news results have been displayed repeatedly before, the click-through rate can be tracked online; however, the key challenge for which previously unseen queries to display news results remains. In this paper we propose a supervised model that offers accurate prediction of news click-through rates and satisfies the requirement of adapting quickly to emerging news events.
1572003	Smoothing clickthrough data for web search ranking Incorporating features extracted from clickthrough data (called clickthrough features) has been demonstrated to significantly improve the performance of ranking models for Web search applications. Such benefits, however, are severely limited by the data sparseness problem, i.e., many queries and documents have no or very few clicks. The ranker thus cannot rely strongly on clickthrough features for document ranking. This paper presents two smoothing methods to expand clickthrough data: query clustering via Random Walk on click graphs and a discounting method inspired by the Good-Turing estimator. Both methods are evaluated on real-world data in three Web search domains. Experimental results show that the ranking models trained on smoothed clickthrough features consistently outperform those trained on unsmoothed features. This study demonstrates both the importance and the benefits of dealing with the sparseness problem in clickthrough data.
1572005	Predicting user interests from contextual information Search and recommendation systems must include contextual information to effectively model users' interests. In this paper, we present a systematic study of the effectiveness of five variant sources of contextual information for user interest modeling. Post-query navigation and general browsing behaviors far outweigh direct search engine interaction as an information-gathering activity. Therefore we conducted this study with a focus on Website recommendations rather than search results. The five contextual information sources used are: social, historic, task, collection, and user interaction. We evaluate the utility of these sources, and overlaps between them, based on how effectively they predict users' future interests. Our findings demonstrate that the sources perform differently depending on the duration of the time window used for future prediction, and that context overlap outperforms any isolated source. Designers of Website suggestion systems can use our findings to provide improved support for post-query navigation and general browsing behaviors.
1572006	A comparison of query and term suggestion features for interactive searching Query formulation is one of the most difficult and important aspects of information seeking and retrieval. Two techniques, term relevance feedback and query suggestion, provide methods to help users formulate queries, but each is limited in different ways. In this research we combine these two techniques by automatically creating query suggestions using term relevance feedback techniques. To evaluate our approach, we conducted an interactive information retrieval study with 55 subjects and 20 topics. Each subject completed four topics, half with a term suggestion system and half with a query suggestion system. We also investigated the source of the suggestions: approximately half of all subjects were provided with system-generated suggestions, while half were provided with user-generated suggestions. Results show that subjects used more query suggestions than term suggestions and saved more documents with these suggestions, even though there were no significant differences in performance. Subjects preferred the query suggestion system and rated it higher along a number of dimensions including its ability to help them think of new approaches to searching. Qualitative data provided insight into subjects' usage and ratings, and indicated that subjects often used the suggestions even when they did not click on them.
1572007	An aspectual interface for supporting complex search tasks With the increasing importance of search systems on the web, there is a continuing push to design interfaces which are a better match with the kinds of real-world tasks in which users are engaged. In this paper, we consider how broad, complex search tasks may be supported via the search interface. In particular, we consider search tasks which may be composed of multiple aspects, or multiple related subtasks. For example, in decision making tasks the user may investigate multiple possible solutions before settling on a single, final solution, while other tasks, such as report writing, may involve searching on multiple interrelated topics. A search interface is presented which is designed to support such broad search tasks, allowing a user to create search aspects, each of which models an independent subtask of some larger task. The interface is built on the intuition that users should be able to structure their searching environment when engaged on complex search tasks, where the act of structuring and organization may aid the user in understanding his or her task. A user study was carried out which compared our aspectual interface to a standard web-search interface. The results suggest that an aspectual interface can aid users when engaged in broad search tasks where the search aspects must be identified during searching; for a task where search aspects were pre-defined, no advantage over the baseline was found. Results for a decision making task were less clear cut, but show some evidence for improved task performance.
1572009	Combining audio content and social context for semantic music discovery When attempting to annotate music, it is important to consider both acoustic content and social context. This paper explores techniques for collecting and combining multiple sources of such information for the purpose of building a query-by-text music retrieval system. We consider two representations of the acoustic content (related to timbre and harmony) and two social sources (social tags and web documents). We then compare three algorithms that combine these information sources: calibrated score averaging (CSA), RankBoost, and kernel combination support vector machines (KC-SVM). We demonstrate empirically that each of these algorithms is superior to algorithms that use individual information sources.
1572010	Automatic video tagging using content redundancy The analysis of the leading social video sharing platform YouTube reveals a high amount of redundancy, in the form of videos with overlapping or duplicated content. In this paper, we show that this redundancy can provide useful information about connections between videos. We reveal these links using robust content-based video analysis techniques and exploit them for generating new tag assignments. To this end, we propose different tag propagation methods for automatically obtaining richer video annotations. Our techniques provide the user with additional information about videos, and lead to enhanced feature representations for applications such as automatic data organization and search. Experiments on video clustering and classification as well as a user evaluation demonstrate the viability of our approach.
1572011	CompositeMap: a novel framework for music similarity measure With the continuing advances in data storage and communication technology, there has been an explosive growth of music information from different application domains. As an effective technique for organizing, browsing, and searching large data collections, music information retrieval is attracting more and more attention. How to measure and model the similarity between different music items is one of the most fundamental yet challenging research problems. In this paper, we introduce a novel framework based on a multimodal and adaptive similarity measure for various applications. Distinguished from previous approaches, our system can effectively combine music properties from different aspects into a compact signature via supervised learning. In addition, an incremental Locality Sensitive Hashing algorithm has been developed to support efficient retrieval processes with different kinds of queries. Experimental results based on two large music collections reveal various advantages of the proposed framework including effectiveness, efficiency, adaptiveness, and scalability.
1572013	Quantifying performance and quality gains in distributed web search engines Distributed search engines based on geographical partitioning of a central Web index emerge as a feasible solution to the immense growth of the Web, user bases, and query traffic. However, there is still lack of research in quantifying the performance and quality gains that can be achieved by such architectures. In this paper, we develop various cost models to evaluate the performance benefits of a geographically distributed search engine architecture based on partial index replication and query forwarding. Specifically, we focus on possible performance gains due to the distributed nature of query processing and Web crawling processes. We show that any response time gain achieved by distributed query processing can be utilized to improve search relevance as the use of complex but more accurate algorithms can now be enabled for document ranking. We also show that distributed Web crawling leads to better Web coverage and try to see if this improves the search quality. We verify the validity of our claims over large, real-life datasets via simulations.
1572014	SUSHI: scoring scaled samples for server selection Modern techniques for distributed information retrieval use a set of documents sampled from each server, but these samples have been underutilised in server selection. We describe a new server selection algorithm, SUSHI, which unlike earlier algorithms can make full use of the text of each sampled document and which does not need training data. SUSHI can directly optimise for many common cases, including high precision retrieval, and by including a simple stopping condition can do so while reducing network traffic. Our experiments compare SUSHI with alternatives and show it achieves the same effectiveness as the best current methods while being substantially more efficient, selecting as few as 20% as many servers.
1572015	Effective query expansion for federated search While query expansion techniques have been shown to improve retrieval performance in a centralized setting, they have not been well studied in a federated setting. In this paper, we consider how query expansion may be adapted to federated environments and propose several new methods: where focused expansions are used in a selective fashion to produce specific queries for each source (or a set of sources). On a number of different testbeds, we show that focused query expansion can significantly outperform the previously proposed global expansion method, and---contrary to earlier work---show that query expansion can improve performance over standard federated retrieval. These findings motivate further research examining the different methods for query expansion, and other forms of system and user interaction, in order to continue improving the performance of interactive federated search systems.
1572017	On rank correlation and the distance between rankings Rank correlation statistics are useful for determining whether a there is a correspondence between two measurements, particularly when the measures themselves are of less interest than their relative ordering. Kendall's - in particular has found use in Information Retrieval as a "meta-evaluation" measure: it has been used to compare evaluation measures, evaluate system rankings, and evaluate predicted performance. In the meta-evaluation domain, however, correlations between systems confound relationships between measurements, practically guaranteeing a positive and significant estimate of - regardless of any actual correlation between the measurements. We introduce an alternative measure of distance between rankings that corrects this by explicitly accounting for correlations between systems over a sample of topics, and moreover has a probabilistic interpretation for use in a test of statistical significance. We validate our measure with theory, simulated data, and experiment.
1572018	Score adjustment for correction of pooling bias Information retrieval systems are evaluated against test collections of topics, documents, and assessments of which documents are relevant to which topics. Documents are chosen for relevance assessment by pooling runs from a set of existing systems. New systems can return unassessed documents, leading to an evaluation bias against them. In this paper, we propose to estimate the degree of bias against an unpooled system, and to adjust the system's score accordingly. Bias estimation can be done via leave-one-out experiments on the existing, pooled systems, but this requires the problematic assumption that the new system is similar to the existing ones. Instead, we propose that all systems, new and pooled, be fully assessed against a common set of topics, and the bias observed against the new system on the common topics be used to adjust scores on the existing topics. We demonstrate using resampling experiments on TREC test sets that our method leads to a marked reduction in error, even with only a relatively small number of common topics, and that the error decreases as the number of topics increases.
1572019	Towards methods for the collective gathering and quality control of relevance assessments Growing interest in online collections of digital books and video content motivates the development and optimization of adequate retrieval systems. However, traditional methods for collecting relevance assessments to tune system performance are challenged by the nature of digital items in such collections, where assessors are faced with a considerable effort to review and assess content by extensive reading, browsing, and within-document searching. The extra strain is caused by the length and cohesion of the digital item and the dispersion of topics within it. We propose a method for the collective gathering of relevance assessments using a social game model to instigate participants' engagement. The game provides incentives for assessors to follow a predefined review procedure and makes provisions for the quality control of the collected relevance judgments. We discuss the approach in detail, and present the results of a pilot study conducted on a book corpus to validate the approach. Our analysis reveals intricate relationships between the affordances of the system, the incentives of the social game, and the behavior of the assessors. We show that the proposed game design achieves two designated goals: the incentive structure motivates endurance in assessors and the review process encourages truthful assessment.
1572021	On the local optimality of LambdaRank A machine learning approach to learning to rank trains a model to optimize a target evaluation measure with repect to training data. Currently, existing information retrieval measures are impossible to optimize directly except for models with a very small number of parameters. The IR community thus faces a major challenge: how to optimize IR measures of interest directly. In this paper, we present a solution. Specifically, we show that LambdaRank, which smoothly approximates the gradient of the target measure, can be adapted to work with four popular IR target evaluation measures using the same underlying gradient construction. It is likely, therefore, that this construction is extendable to other evaluation measures. We empirically show that LambdaRank finds a locally optimal solution for mean NDCG@10, mean NDCG, MAP and MRR with a 99% confidence rate. We also show that the amount of effective training data varies with IR measure and that with a sufficiently large training set size, matching the training optimization measure to the target evaluation measure yields the best accuracy.
1572022	Document selection methodologies for efficient and effective learning-to-rank Learning-to-rank has attracted great attention in the IR community. Much thought and research has been placed on query-document feature extraction and development of sophisticated learning-to-rank algorithms. However, relatively little research has been conducted on selecting documents for learning-to-rank data sets nor on the effect of these choices on the efficiency and effectiveness of learning-to-rank algorithms. In this paper, we employ a number of document selection methodologies, widely used in the context of evaluation--depth-k pooling, sampling (infAP, statAP), active-learning (MTC), and on-line heuristics (hedge). Certain methodologies, e.g. sampling and active-learning, have been shown to lead to efficient and effective evaluation. We investigate whether they can also enable efficient and effective learning-to-rank. We compare them with the document selection methodology used to create the LETOR datasets. Further, all of the utilized methodologies are different in nature, and thus they construct training data sets with different properties, such as the proportion of relevant documents in the data or the similarity among them. We study how such properties affect the efficiency, effectiveness, and robustness of learning-to-rank collections.
1572023	An improved markov random field model for supporting verbose queries Recent work in supervised learning of term-based retrieval models has shown significantly improved accuracy can often be achieved via better model estimation. In this paper, we show retrieval accuracy with Metzler and Croft's Markov random field (MRF) approach can be similarly improved via supervised learning. While the original MRF method estimates a parameter for each of its three feature classes from data, parameters within each class are set via a uniform weighting scheme adopted from the standard unigram. We conjecture greater MRF retrieval accuracy should be possible by better estimating within-class parameters, particularly for verbose queries employing natural language terms. Retrieval experiments with these queries on three TREC document collections show our improved MRF consistently out-performs both the original MRF and supervised unigram baselines. Additional experiments using blind-feedback and evaluation with optimal weighting demonstrate both the immediate value and further potential of our method.
1572025	Placing flickr photos on a map In this paper we investigate generic methods for placing photos uploaded to Flickr on the World map. As primary input for our methods we use the textual annotations provided by the users to predict the single most probable location where the image was taken. Central to our approach is a language model based entirely on the annotations provided by users. We define extensions to improve over the language model using tag-based smoothing and cell-based smoothing, and leveraging spatial ambiguity. Further we demonstrate how to incorporate GeoNamesfootnote{http://www.geonames.org visited May 2009}, a large external database of locations. For varying levels of granularity, we are able to place images on a map with at least twice the precision of the state-of-the-art reported in the literature.
1572026	An automatic translation of tags for multimedia contents using folksonomy networks This paper proposes a novel method to translate tags attached to multimedia contents for cross-language retrieval. The main issue in this problem is the sense disambiguation of tags given with few textual contexts. In order to solve this problem, the proposed method represents both tags and its translation candidates as networks of co-occurring tags since a network allows richer expression of contexts than other expressions such as co-occurrence vectors. The method translates a tag by selecting the optimal one from possible candidates based on a network similarity even when neither the textual contexts nor sophisticated language resources are available. The experiments on the MIR Flickr-2008 test set show that the proposed method achieves 90.44% accuracy in translating tags from English into German, which is significantly higher than the baseline methods of a frequency based translation and a co-occurrence-based translation.
1572027	CrowdReranking: exploring multiple search engines for visual search reranking Most existing approaches to visual search reranking predominantly focus on mining information within the initial search results. However, the initial ranked list cannot provide enough cues for reranking by itself due to the typically unsatisfying visual search performance. This paper presents a new method for visual search reranking called CrowdReranking, which is characterized by mining relevant visual patterns from image search results of multiple search engines which are available on the Internet. Observing that different search engines might have different data sources for indexing and methods for ranking, it is reasonable to assume that there exist different search results yet certain common visual patterns relevant to a given query among those results. We first construct a set of visual words based on the local image patches collected from multiple image search engines. We then explicitly detect two kinds of visual patterns, i.e., salient and concurrent patterns, among the visual words. Theoretically, we formalize reranking as an optimization problem on the basis of the mined visual patterns and propose a close-form solution. Empirically, we conduct extensive experiments on several real-world search engines and one benchmark dataset, and show that the proposed CrowdReranking is superior to the state-of-the-art works.
1572029	Including summaries in system evaluation In batch evaluation of retrieval systems, performance is calculated based on predetermined relevance judgements applied to a list of documents returned by the system for a query. This evaluation paradigm, however, ignores the current standard operation of search systems which require the user to view summaries of documents prior to reading the documents themselves. In this paper we modify the popular IR metrics MAP and P@10 to incorporate the summary reading step of the search process, and study the effects on system rankings using TREC data. Based on a user study, we establish likely disagreements between relevance judgements of summaries and of documents, and use these values to seed simulations of summary relevance in the TREC data. Re-evaluating the runs submitted to the TREC Web Track, we find the average correlation between system rankings and the original TREC rankings is 0.8 (Kendall ?), which is lower than commonly accepted for system orderings to be considered equivalent. The system that has the highest MAP in TREC generally remains amongst the highest MAP systems when summaries are taken into account, but other systems become equivalent to the top ranked system depending on the simulated summary relevance. Given that system orderings alter when summaries are taken into account, the small amount of effort required to judge summaries in addition to documents (19 seconds vs 88 seconds on average in our data) should be undertaken when constructing test collections.
1572030	When more is less: the paradox of choice in search engine use In numerous everyday domains, it has been demonstrated that increasing the number of options beyond a handful can lead to paralysis and poor choice and decrease satisfaction with the choice. Were this so-called paradox of choice to hold in search engine use, it would mean that increasing recall can actually work counter to user satisfaction if it implies choice from a more extensive set of result items. The existence of this effect was demonstrated in an experiment where users (N=24) were shown a search scenario and a query and were required to choose the best result item within 30 seconds. Having to choose from six results yielded both higher subjective satisfaction with the choice and greater confidence in its correctness than when there were 24 items on the results page. We discuss this finding in the wider context of "choice architecture"--that is, how result presentation affects choice and satisfaction.
1572031	Where to stop reading a ranked list?: threshold optimization using truncated score distributions Ranked retrieval has a particular disadvantage in comparison with traditional Boolean retrieval: there is no clear cut-off point where to stop consulting results. This is a serious problem in some setups. We investigate and further develop methods to select the rank cut-off value which optimizes a given effectiveness measure. Assuming no other input than a system's output for a query--document scores and their distribution--the task is essentially a score-distributional threshold optimization problem. The recent trend in modeling score distributions is to use a normal-exponential mixture: normal for relevant, and exponential for non-relevant document scores. We discuss the two main theoretical problems with the current model, support incompatibility and non-convexity, and develop new models that address them. The main contributions of the paper are two truncated normal-exponential models, varying in the way the out-truncated score ranges are handled. We conduct a range of experiments using the TREC 2007 and 2008 Legal Track data, and show that the truncated models lead to significantly better results.
1572033	The wisdom of the few: a collaborative filtering approach based on expert opinions from the web Nearest-neighbor collaborative filtering provides a successful means of generating recommendations for web users. However, this approach suffers from several shortcomings, including data sparsity and noise, the cold-start problem, and scalability. In this work, we present a novel method for recommending items to users based on expert opinions. Our method is a variation of traditional collaborative filtering: rather than applying a nearest neighbor algorithm to the user-rating data, predictions are computed using a set of expert neighbors from an independent dataset, whose opinions are weighted according to their similarity to the user. This method promises to address some of the weaknesses in traditional collaborative filtering, while maintaining comparable accuracy. We validate our approach by predicting a subset of the Netflix data set. We use ratings crawled from a web portal of expert reviews, measuring results both in terms of prediction accuracy and recommendation list precision. Finally, we explore the ability of our method to generate useful recommendations, by reporting the results of a user-study where users prefer the recommendations generated by our approach.
1572034	Personalized tag recommendation using graph-based ranking on multi-type interrelated objects Social tagging is becoming increasingly popular in many Web 2.0 applications where users can annotate resources (e.g. Web pages) with arbitrary keywords (i.e. tags). A tag recommendation module can assist users in tagging process by suggesting relevant tags to them. It can also be directly used to expand the set of tags annotating a resource. The benefits are twofold: improving user experience and enriching the index of resources. However, the former one is not emphasized in previous studies, though a lot of work has reported that different users may describe the same concept in different ways. We address the problem of personalized tag recommendation for text documents. In particular, we model personalized tag recommendation as a "query and ranking" problem and propose a novel graph-based ranking algorithm for interrelated multi-type objects. When a user issues a tagging request, both the document and the user are treated as a part of the query. Tags are then ranked by our graph-based ranking algorithm which takes into consideration both relevance to the document and preference of the user. Finally, the top ranked tags are presented to the user as suggestions. Experiments on a large-scale tagging data set collected from Del.icio.us have demonstrated that our proposed algorithm significantly outperforms algorithms which fail to consider the diversity of different users' interests.
1572035	Leveraging sources of collective wisdom on the web for discovering technology synergies One of the central tasks of R&D strategy and portfolio management at large technology companies and research institutions refers to the identification of technological synergies throughout the organization. These efforts are geared towards saving resources by consolidating scattered expertise, sharing best practices, and reusing available technologies across multiple product lines. In the past, this task has been done in a manual evaluation process by technical domain experts. While feasible, the major drawback of this approach is the enormous effort in terms of availability and time: For a structured and complete analysis every combination of any two technologies has to be rated explicitly. We present a novel approach that recommends technological synergies in an automated fashion, making use of abundant collective wisdom from the Web, both in pure textual form as well as classification ontologies. Our method has been deployed for practical support of the synergy evaluation process within our company. We have also conducted empirical evaluations based on randomly selected technology pairs so as to benchmark the accuracy of our approach, as compared to a group of general computer science technologists as well as a control group of domain experts.
1572037	Query side evaluation: an empirical analysis of effectiveness and effort Typically, Information Retrieval evaluation focuses on measuring the performance of the system's ability at retrieving relevant information, and not the query's ability. However, the effectiveness of a retrieval system is strongly influenced by the quality of the query submitted. In this paper, the effectiveness and effort of querying is empirically examined in the context of the Principle of Least Effort, Zipf's Law and the Law of Diminishing Returns. This query focused investigation leads to a number of novel findings which should prove useful in the development of future retrieval methods and evaluation techniques. While, also motivating further research into query side evaluation.
1572038	Reducing long queries using query quality predictors Long queries frequently contain many extraneous terms that hinder retrieval of relevant documents. We present techniques to reduce long queries to more effective shorter ones that lack those extraneous terms. Our work is motivated by the observation that perfectly reducing long TREC description queries can lead to an average improvement of 30% in mean average precision. Our approach involves transforming the reduction problem into a problem of learning to rank all sub-sets of the original query (sub-queries) based on their predicted quality, and selecting the top sub-query. We use various measures of query quality described in the literature as features to represent sub-queries, and train a classifier. Replacing the original long query with the top-ranked sub-query chosen by the ranker results in a statistically significant average improvement of 8% on our test sets. Analysis of the results shows that query reduction is well-suited for moderately-performing long queries, and a small set of query quality predictors are well-suited for the task of ranking sub-queries.
1572039	Extracting structured information from user queries with semi-supervised conditional random fields When search is against structured documents, it is beneficial to extract information from user queries in a format that is consistent with the backend data structure. As one step toward this goal, we study the problem of query tagging which is to assign each query term to a pre-defined category. Our problem could be approached by learning a conditional random field (CRF) model (or other statistical models) in a supervised fashion, but this would require substantial human-annotation effort. In this work, we focus on a semi-supervised learning method for CRFs that utilizes two data sources: (1) a small amount of manually-labeled queries, and (2) a large amount of queries in which some word tokens have derived labels, i.e., label information automatically obtained from additional resources. We present two principled ways of encoding derived label information in a CRF model. Such information is viewed as hard evidence in one setting and as soft evidence in the other. In addition to the general methodology of how to use derived labels in semi-supervised CRFs, we also present a practical method on how to obtain them by leveraging user click data and an in-domain database that contains structured documents. Evaluation on product search queries shows the effectiveness of our approach in improving tagging accuracies.
1572041	The impact of crawl policy on web search effectiveness Crawl selection policy has a direct influence on Web search effectiveness, because a useful page that is not selected for crawling will also be absent from search results. Yet there has been little or no work on measuring this effect. We introduce an evaluation framework, based on relevance judgments pooled from multiple search engines, measuring the maximum potential NDCG that is achievable using a particular crawl. This allows us to evaluate different crawl policies and investigate important scenarios like selection stability over multiple iterations. We conduct two sets of crawling experiments at the scale of 1~billion and 100~million pages respectively. These show that crawl selection based on PageRank, indegree and trans-domain indegree all allow better retrieval effectiveness than a simple breadth-first crawl of the same size. PageRank is the most reliable and effective method. Trans-domain indegree can outperform PageRank, but over multiple crawl iterations it is less effective and more unstable. Finally we experiment with combinations of crawl selection methods and per-domain page limits, which yield crawls with greater potential NDCG than PageRank.
1572042	Optimizing search engine revenue in sponsored search Displaying sponsored ads alongside the search results is a key monetization strategy for search engine companies. Since users are more likely to click ads that are relevant to their query, it is crucial for search engine to deliver the right ads for the query and the order in which they are displayed. There are several works investigating on how to learn a ranking function to maximize the number of ad clicks. In this paper, we address a new revenue optimization problem and aim to answer the question: how to construct a ranking model that can deliver high quality ads to the user as well as maximize search engine revenue? We introduce two novel methods from di fferent machine learning perspectives, and both of them take the revenue component into careful considerations. The algorithms are built upon the click-through log data with real ad clicks and impressions. The extensively experimental results verify the proposed algorithm that can produce more revenue than other methods as well as avoid losing relevance accuracy. To provide deep insight into the importance of each feature to search engine revenue, we extract twelve basic features from four categories. The experimental study provides a feature ranking list according to the revenue benefit of each feature.
1572043	Web-derived resources for web information retrieval: from conceptual hierarchies to attribute hierarchies A weakly-supervised extraction method identifies concepts within conceptual hierarchies, at the appropriate level of specificity (e.g., Bank vs. Institution ), to which attributes (e.g., routing number ) extracted from unstructured text best apply. The extraction exploits labeled classes of instances acquired from a combination of Web documents and query logs, and inserted into existing conceptual hierarchies. The correct concept is identified within the top three positions on average over gold-standard attributes, which corresponds to higher accuracy than in alternative experiments.
1572045	Spam filter evaluation with imprecise ground truth When trained and evaluated on accurately labeled datasets, online email spam filters are remarkably effective, achieving error rates an order of magnitude better than classifiers in similar applications. But labels acquired from user feedback or third-party adjudication exhibit higher error rates than the best filters -- even filters trained using the same source of labels. It is appropriate to use naturally occuring labels -- including errors -- as training data in evaluating spam filters. Erroneous labels are problematic, however, when used as ground truth to measure filter effectiveness. Any measurement of the filter's error rate will be augmented and perhaps masked by the label error rate. Using two natural sources of labels, we demonstrate automatic and semi-automatic methods that reduce the influence of labeling errors on evaluation, yielding substantially more precise measurements of true filter error rates.
1572046	Telling experts from spammers: expertise ranking in folksonomies With a suitable algorithm for ranking the expertise of a user in a collaborative tagging system, we will be able to identify experts and discover useful and relevant resources through them. We propose that the level of expertise of a user with respect to a particular topic is mainly determined by two factors. Firstly, an expert should possess a high quality collection of resources, while the quality of a Web resource depends on the expertise of the users who have assigned tags to it. Secondly, an expert should be one who tends to identify interesting or useful resources before other users do. We propose a graph-based algorithm, SPEAR (SPamming-resistant Expertise Analysis and Ranking), which implements these ideas for ranking users in a folksonomy. We evaluate our method with experiments on data sets collected from Delicious.com comprising over 71,000 Web documents, 0.5 million users and 2 million shared bookmarks. We also show that the algorithm is more resistant to spammers than other methods such as the original HITS algorithm and simple statistical measures.
1572047	Detecting spammers and content promoters in online video social networks A number of online video social networks, out of which YouTube is the most popular, provides features that allow users to post a video as a response to a discussion topic. These features open opportunities for users to introduce polluted content, or simply pollution, into the system. For instance, spammers may post an unrelated video as response to a popular one aiming at increasing the likelihood of the response being viewed by a larger number of users. Moreover, opportunistic users-- promoters --may try to gain visibility to a specific video by posting a large number of (potentially unrelated) responses to boost the rank of the responded video , making it appear in the top lists maintained by the system. Content pollution may jeopardize the trust of users on the system, thus compromising its success in promoting social interactions. In spite of that, the available literature is very limited in providing a deep understanding of this problem. In this paper, we go a step further by addressing the issue of detecting video spammers and promoters. Towards that end, we manually build a test collection of real YouTube users, classifying them as spammers, promoters, and legitimates. Using our test collection, we provide a characterization of social and content attributes that may help distinguish each user class. We also investigate the feasibility of using a state-of-the-art supervised classification algorithm to detect spammers and promoters, and assess its effectiveness in our test collection. We found that our approach is able to correctly identify the majority of the promoters, misclassifying only a small percentage of legitimate users. In contrast, although we are able to detect a significant fraction of spammers, they showed to be much harder to distinguish from legitimate users.
1572049	AdOn: an intelligent overlay video advertising system This paper presents a new video advertising system, called AdOn, which supports intelligent overlay video ads. Unlike most current ad-networks such as Youtube that overlay the ads at fixed positions in the videos (e.g., on the bottom fifth of videos 15 seconds in), AdOn is able to automatically detect a set of spatio-temporal nonintrusive positions and associate the contextually relevant ads with these positions. The overlay positions are obtained on the basis of video structuring, face and text detection, as well as visual saliency analysis, so that the intrusiveness to the users can be minimized. The ads are selected according to content-based multimodal relevance so that advertising relevance can be maximized. AdOn represents one of the first attempts towards intelligent overlay video advertising by leveraging video content analysis techniques.
1572050	Agreement among statistical significance tests for information retrieval evaluation at varying sample sizes Research has shown that little practical difference exists between the randomization, Student's paired t, and bootstrap tests of statistical significance for TREC ad-hoc retrieval experiments with 50 topics. We compared these three tests on runs with topic sizes down to 10 topics. We found that these tests show increasing disagreement as the number of topics decreases. At smaller numbers of topics, the randomization test tended to produce smaller p-values than the t-test for p-values less than 0.1. The bootstrap exhibited a systematic bias towards p-values strictly less than the t-test with this bias increasing as the number of topics decreased. We recommend the use of the randomization test although the t-test appears to be suitable even when the number of topics is small.
1572051	Annotation of URLs: more than the sum of parts Recently a number of studies have demonstrated that search engine logfiles are an important resource to determine the relevance relation between URLs and query terms. We hypothesized that the queries associated with a URL could also be presented as useful URL metadata in a search engine result list, e.g. for helping to determine the semantic category of a URL. We evaluated this hypothesis by a classification experiment based on the DMOZ dataset. Our method can also annotate URLs that have no associated queries.
1572052	Automatic URL completion and prediction using fuzzy type-ahead search Type-ahead search is a new information-access paradigm, in which systems can find answers to keyword queries "on-the-fly" as a user types in a query. It improves traditional autocomplete search by allowing query keywords to appear at different places in an answer. In this paper we study the problem of automatic URL completion and prediction using fuzzy type-ahead search. That is, we interactively find relevant URLs that contain words matching query keywords, even approximately, as the user types in a query. Supporting fuzzy search is very important when the user has limited knowledge about URLs. We describe the design and implementation of our method, and report the experimental results on Firefox.
1572053	Beyond session segmentation: predicting changes in search intent with client-side user interactions Effective search session segmentation "grouping queries according to common task or intent" can be useful for improving relevance, search evaluation, and query suggestion. Previous work has largely attempted to segment search sessions off-line, after the fact. In contrast, we present preliminary investigation of predicting, in real time, whether a user is about to switch interest - that is, whether the user is about to finish the current search and switch to another search task (or stop searching altogether). We explore an approach for this task using client-side user behavior such as clicks, scrolls, and mouse movements, contextualized by the content of the search result pages and previous searches. Our experiments over thousands of real searches show that we can identify context and user behavior patterns that indicate that a user is about to switch to a new search task. These preliminary results can be helpful for more effective query suggestion and personalization.
1572054	Blog distillation using random walks This paper addresses the blog distillation problem. That is, given a user query find the blogs most related to the query topic. We model the blogosphere as a single graph that includes extra information besides the content of the posts. By performing a random walk on this graph we extract most relevant blogs for each query. Our experiments on the TREC'07 data set show 15% improvement in MAP and 8% improvement in Precision@10 over the Language Modeling baseline.
1572055	A case for improved evaluation of query difficulty prediction Query difficulty prediction aims to identify, in advance, how well an information retrieval system will perform when faced with a particular search request. The current standard evaluation methodology involves calculating a correlation coefficient, to indicate how strongly the predicted query difficulty is related with an actual system performance measure, usually Average Precision. We run a series of experiments based on predictors that have been shown to perform well in the literature, comparing these across different TREC runs. Our results demonstrate that the current evaluation methodology is severely limited. Although it can be used to demonstrate the performance of a predictor for a single system, such performance is not consistent over a variety of retrieval systems. We conclude that published results in the query difficulty area are generally not comparable, and recommend that prediction be evaluated against a spectrum of underlying search systems.
1572056	Characterizing the subjectivity of topics A document or web page in isolation may appear completely reasonable, but may represent a biased perspective on the topic being discussed. Given the topic of a document, we propose new metrics provocativeness and balance that suggest when the topic could be controversial. We explore the use of these metrics to characterize the subjectivity of the topics in the TREC Blog Track.
1572057	Classifying library catalogue by author profiling This paper presents a novel approach to classifying library records by making use of what we call "author profile," a representation of an author's expertise along a library classification. Coupled with a string kernel classifier, the idea is shown to bring a significant improvement over a baseline.
1572058	Cluster-based query expansion We demonstrate the merits of using document clusters that are created offline to improve the overall effectiveness and performance robustness of a state-of-the-art pseudo-feedback-based query expansion method -- the relevance model.
1572059	Comparing both relevance and robustness in selection of web ranking functions In commercial search engines, a ranking function is selected for deployment mainly by comparing the relevance measurements over candidates. In this paper we suggest to select Web ranking functions according to both their relevance and robustness to the changes that may lead to relevance degradation over time. We argue that the ranking robustness can be effectively measured by taking into account the ranking score distribution across Web pages. We then improve NDCG with two new metrics and show their superiority in terms of stability to ranking score turbulence and stability in function selection.
1572060	A comparison of retrieval-based hierarchical clustering approaches to person name disambiguation This paper describes a simple clustering approach to person name disambiguation of retrieved documents. The methods are based on standard IR concepts and do not require any task-specific features. We compare different term-weighting and indexing methods and evaluate their performance against the Web People Search task (WePS). Despite their simplicity these approaches achieve very competitive performance.
1572061	Compression-based document length prior for language models The inclusion of document length factors has been a major topic in the development of retrieval models. We believe that current models can be further improved by more refined estimations of the document's scope. In this poster we present a new document length prior that uses the size of the compressed document. This new prior is introduced in the context of Language Modeling with Dirichlet smoothing. The evaluation performed on several collections shows significant improvements in effectiveness.
1572062	Concept representation based video indexing This poster introduces a novel concept-based video indexing approach. It is developed based on a rich set of base concepts, of which the models are available. Then, for a given concept with several labeled samples, we combine the base concepts to fit it and its model can thus be obtained accordingly. Empirical results demonstrate that this method can achieve great performance even with very limited labeled data. We have compared different representation approaches including both sparse and non-sparse methods. Our conclusion is that the sparse method will lead to much better performance.
1572063	Context transfer in search advertising We define and study the process of context transfer in search advertising, which is the transition of a user from the context of Web search to the context of the landing page that follows an ad-click. We conclude that in the vast majority of cases, the user is shown one of three types of pages, which can be accurately distinguished using automatic text classification.
1572064	Counting ancestors to estimate authority The AncestorRank algorithm calculates an authority score by using just one characteristic of the web graph-the number of ancestors per node. For scalability, we estimate the number of ancestors by using a probabilistic counting algorithm. We also consider the case in which ancestors which are closer to the node have more influence than those farther from the node. Thus we further apply a decay factor delta on the contributions from successively earlier ancestors. The resulting authority score is used in combination with a content-based ranking algorithm. Our experiments show that as long as delta is in the range of [0.1, 0.9], AncestorRank can greatly improve BM25 performance, and in our experiments is often better than PageRank.
1572065	Cross language name matching Cross language information retrieval methods are used to determine which segments of Arabic language documents match name-based English queries. We investigate and contrast a word-based translation model with a character-based transliteration model in order to handle spelling variation and previously unseen names. We measure performance by making a novel use of the training data from the 2007 ACE Entity Translation
1572066	Deep versus shallow judgments in learning to rank Much research in learning to rank has been placed on developing sophisticated learning methods, treating the training set as a given. However, the number of judgments in the training set directly aff ects the quality of the learned system. Given the expense of obtaining relevance judgments for constructing training data, one often has a limited budget in terms of how many judgments he can get. The major problem then is how to distribute this judgment e ffort across diff erent queries. In this paper, we investigate the tradeo ff between the number of queries and the number of judgments per query when training sets are constructed. In particular, we show that up to a limit, training sets with more queries but shallow (less) judgments per query are more cost effective than training sets with less queries but deep (more) judgments per query.
1572067	Developing energy efficient filtering systems Processing large volumes of information generally requires massive amounts of computational power, which consumes a significant amount of energy. An emerging challenge is the development of ``environmentally friendly'' systems that are not only efficient in terms of time, but also energy efficient. In this poster, we outline our initial efforts at developing greener filtering systems by employing Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) to perform the core information processing task. FPGAs enable code to be executed in parallel at a chip level, while consuming only a fraction of the power of a standard (von Neuman style) processor. On a number of test collections, we demonstrate that the FPGA filtering system performs 10-20 times faster than the Itanium based implementation, resulting in considerable energy savings.
1572068	Enhancing topical ranking with preferences from click-through data To overcome the training data insufficiency problem for dedicated model in topical ranking, this paper proposes to utilize click-through data to improve learning. The efficacy of click-through data is explored under the framework of preference learning. The empirical experiment on a commercial search engine shows that, the model trained with the dedicated labeled data combined with skip-next preferences could beat the baseline model and the generic model in NDCG5 for 4.9% and 2.4% respectively.
1572069	Equivalence between nonnegative tensor factorization and tensorial probabilistic latent semantic analysis This paper establishes a connection between NMF and PLSA on multi-way data, called NTF and T-PLSA respectively. Two types of T-PLSA models are proven to be equivalent to non-negative PARAFAC and non-negative Tucker3. This paper also shows that by running NTF and T-PLSA alternatively, they can jump out of each other's local minima and achieve a better clustering solution.
1572070	The ESA retrieval model revisited Among the retrieval models that have been proposed in the last years, the ESA model of Gabrilovich and Markovitch received much attention. The authors report on a significant improvement in the retrieval performance, which is explained with the semantic concepts introduced by the document collection underlying ESA. Their explanation appears plausible but our analysis shows that the connections are more involved and that the "concept hypothesis" does not hold. In our contribution we analyze several properties that in fact affect the retrieval performance. Moreover, we introduce a formalization of ESA, which reveals its close connection to existing retrieval models.
1572071	Estimating query performance using class predictions We investigate using topic prediction data, as a summary of document content, to compute measures of search result quality. Unlike existing quality measures such as query clarity that require the entire content of the top-ranked results, class-based statistics can be computed efficiently online, because class information is compact enough to precompute and store in the index. In an empirical study we compare the performance of class-based statistics to their language-model counterparts for predicting two measures: query difficulty and expansion risk. Our findings suggest that using class predictions can offer comparable performance to full language models while reducing computation overhead.
1572072	Evaluating effects of machine translation accuracy on cross-lingual patent retrieval We organized a machine translation (MT) task at the Seventh NTCIR Workshop. Participating groups were requested to machine translate sentences in patent documents and also search topics for retrieving patent documents across languages. We analyzed the relationship between the accuracy of MT and its effects on the retrieval accuracy.
1572073	Evaluating web search using task completion time We consider experiments to measure the quality of a web search algorithm based on how much total time users take to complete assigned search tasks using that algorithm. We first analyze our data to verify that there is in fact a negative relationship between a user's total search time and a user's satisfaction for the types of tasks under consideration. Secondly, we fit a model with the user's total search time as the response to compare two different search algorithms. Finally, we propose an alternative experimental design which we demonstrate to be a substantial improvement over our current design in terms of variance reduction and efficiency.
1572074	An evaluation of entity and frequency based query completion methods We present a semantic approach to suggesting query completions which leverages entity and type information. When compared to a frequency-based approach, we show that such information mostly helps rare queries.
1572075	Evolutionary document summarization for disaster management In this poster, we develop an evolutionary document summarization system for discovering the changes and differences in each phase of a disaster evolution. Given a collection of document streams describing an event, our system generates a short summary delivering the main development theme of the event by extracting the most representative and discriminative sentences at each phase. Experimental results on the collection of press releases for Hurricane Wilma in 2005 demonstrate the efficacy of our proposal.
1572076	Experiments in CLIR using fuzzy string search based on surface similarity Cross Language Information Retrieval (CLIR) between languages of the same origin is an interesting topic of research. The similarity of the writing systems used for these languages can be used effectively to not only improve CLIR, but to overcome the problems of textual variations, textual errors, and even the lack of linguistic resources like stemmers to an extent. We have conducted CLIR experiments between three languages which use writing systems (scripts) of Brahmi-origin, namely Hindi, Bengali and Marathi. We found significant improvements for all the six language pairs using a method for fuzzy text search based on Surface Similarity. In this paper we report these results and compare them with a baseline CLIR system and a CLIR system that uses Scaled Edit Distance (SED) for fuzzy string matching.
1572077	Feature selection for automatic taxonomy induction Most existing automatic taxonomy induction systems exploit one or more features to induce a taxonomy; nevertheless there is no systematic study examining which are the best features for the task under various conditions. This paper studies the impact of using different features on taxonomy induction for different types of relations and for terms at different abstraction levels. The evaluation shows that different conditions need different technologies or different combination of the technologies. In particular, co-occurrence and lexico-syntactic patterns are good features for is-a, sibling and part-of relations; contextual, co-occurrence, patterns, and syntactic features work well for concrete terms; co-occurrence works well for abstract terms.
1572078	Finding advertising keywords on video scripts A key to success to contextual in-video advertising is finding advertising keywords on video contents effectively, but there has been little literature in the area so far. This paper presents some preliminary results of our learning-based system that finds relevant advertising keywords on particular scene of video contents using their scripts. The system is trained with not only features proven useful in earlier studies but novel features that reflect the situation of a targeted scene. Experimental results show that the new features are potentially helpful for enhancing the accuracy of keyword extraction for contextual in-video advertising.
1572079	Fitting score distribution for blog opinion retrieval Current blog opinion retrieval approaches cannot be applied if the topic relevance and opinion score distributions by rank are dissimilar. This problem severely limits the feasibility of these approaches. We propose to tackle this problem by fitting the distribution of opinion scores, which replaces the original topic relevance score distribution with the simulated one. Our proposed score distribution fitting method markedly enhances the feasibility of a state-of-the-art dictionary-based opinion retrieval approach. Evaluation on a standard TREC blog test collection shows significant improvements over high quality topic relevance baselines.
1572080	A graph-based approach to mining multilingual word associations from wikipedia In this paper, we propose a graph-based approach to constructing a multilingual association dictionary from Wikipedia, in which we exploit two kinds of links in Wikipedia articles to associate multilingual words and concepts together in a graph. The mined association dictionary is applied in cross language information retrieval (CLIR) to verify its quality. We evaluate our approach on four CLIR data sets and the experimental results show that it is possible to mine a good multilingual association dictionary from Wikipedia articles.
1572081	Has adhoc retrieval improved since 1994? Evaluation forums such as TREC allow systematic measurement and comparison of information retrieval techniques. The goal is consistent improvement, based on reliable comparison of the effectiveness of different approaches and systems. In this paper we report experiments to determine whether this goal has been achieved. We ran five publicly available search systems, in a total of seventeen different configurations, against nine TREC adhoc-style collections, spanning 1994 to 2005. These runsets were then used as a benchmark for reassessing the relative effectiveness of the original TREC runs for those collections. Surprisingly, there appears to have been no overall improvement in effectiveness for either median or top-end TREC submissions, even after allowing for several possible confounds. We therefore question whether the effectiveness of adhoc information retrieval has improved over the past decade and a half.
1572082	High precision retrieval using relevance-flow graph Traditional bag-of-words information retrieval models use aggregated term statistics to measure the relevance of documents, making it difficult to detect non-relevant documents that contain many query terms by chance or in the wrong context. In-depth document analysis is needed to filter out these deceptive documents. In this paper, we hypothesize that truly relevant documents have relevant sentences in predictable patterns. Our experimental results show that we can successfully identify and exploit these patterns to significantly improve retrieval precision at top ranks.
1572083	Identifying the original contribution of a document via language modeling One goal of text mining is to provide readers with automatic methods for quickly finding the key ideas in individual documents and whole corpora. To this effect, we propose a statistically well-founded method for identifying the original ideas that a document contributes to a corpus, focusing on self-referential diachronic corpora such as research publications, blogs, email, and news articles. Our statistical model of passage impact defines (interesting) original content through a combination of impact and novelty, and it can be used to identify the most original passages in a document. Unlike heuristic approaches, this statistical model is extensible and open to analysis. We evaluate the approach on both synthetic and real data, showing that the passage impact model outperforms a heuristic baseline method.
1572084	The importance of manual assessment in link discovery Using a ground truth extracted from the Wikipedia, and a ground truth created through manual assessment, we show that the apparent performance advantage seen in machine learning approaches to link discovery are an artifact of trivial links that are actively rejected by manual assessors.
1572085	Improving search relevance for implicitly temporal queries An abstract is not available.
1572086	Improving user confidence in cultural heritage aggregated results State of the art web search systems enable aggregation of information from many sources. Users are challenged to assess the reliability of information from different sources. We report on an empirical user study on the effect of displaying credibility ratings of multiple cultural heritage sources (e.g. museum websites, art blogs) on users' search performance and selection. The results of our online interactive study (N=122) show that when explicitly presenting these ratings, people become significantly more confident in their selection of information from aggregated results.
1572087	Incorporating prior knowledge into a transductive ranking algorithm for multi-document summarization This paper presents a transductive approach to learn ranking functions for extractive multi-document summarization. At the first stage, the proposed approach identifies topic themes within a document collection, which help to identify two sets of relevant and irrelevant sentences to a question. It then iteratively trains a ranking function over these two sets of sentences by optimizing a ranking loss and fitting a prior model built on keywords. The output of the function is used to find further relevant and irrelevant sentences. This process is repeated until a desired stopping criterion is met.
1572088	Integrating clusters created offline with query-specific clusters for document retrieval Previous work on cluster-based document retrieval has used either static document clusters that are created offline, or query-specific (dynamic) document clusters that are created from top-retrieved documents. We present the potential merit of integrating these two types of clusters.
1572089	Integrating phrase inseparability in phrase-based model In this paper, we propose a new phrase-based IR model, which integrates a measure of "inseparability" of phrases. Our experiments show its high potential to produce large improvements in retrieval effectiveness.
1572090	Is spam an issue for opinionated blog post search? In opinion-finding, the retrieval system is tasked with retrieving not just relevant documents, but those that also express an opinion towards the query target entity. This task has been studied in the context of the blogosphere by groups participating in the 2006-2008 TREC Blog tracks. Spam blogs (splogs) are thought to be a problem on the blogosphere. In this paper, we investigate the extent to which spam has affected the participating groups' retrieval systems over the three years of the TREC Blog track opinion-finding task. Our results show that spam can be an issue, with most systems retrieving some spam for every topic. However, removing spam from the rankings does not markedly change the relative performance of opinion-finding approaches.
1572091	Is this urgent?: exploring time-sensitive information needs in collaborative question answering As online Collaborative Question Answering (CQA) servicessuch as Yahoo! Answers and Baidu Knows are attracting users, questions, and answers at an explosive rate, the truly urgent and important questions are increasingly getting lost in the crowd. That is, questions that require immediate responses are pushed out of the way by the trivial but more recently arriving questions. Unlike other questions in collaborative question answering (CQA) for which users might be willing to wait until good answers appear, urgent questions are likely to be of interest to the asker only if answered in the next few minutes or hours. For such questions, late responses are either not useful or are simply not applicable. Unfortunately, current collaborative question-answering systems do not distinguish urgent questions from the rest, and could thus be ineffective for urgent information needs. We explore text- and data- mining methods for automatically identifying urgent questions in the CQA setting. Our results indicate that modeling the question context (i.e., the particular forum/category where the question was posted) can increase classification accuracy compared to the text of the question alone.
1572092	It pays to be picky: an evaluation of thread retrieval in online forums Online forums host a rich information exchange, often with contributions from many subject matter experts. In this work we evaluate algorithms for thread retrieval in a large and active online forum community. We compare methods that utilize thread structure to a naïve method that treats a thread as a single document. We find that thread structure helps, and additionally selective methods of thread scoring, which only use evidence from a small number of messages in the thread, significantly and consistently outperform inclusive methods which use all the messages in the thread.
1572093	Knowledge transformation for cross-domain sentiment classification With the explosion of user-generated web2.0 content in the form of blogs, wikis and discussion forums, the Internet has rapidly become a massive dynamic repository of public opinion on an unbounded range of topics. A key enabler of opinion extraction and summarization is sentiment classification: the task of automatically identifying whether a given piece of text expresses positive or negative opinion towards a topic of interest. Building high-quality sentiment classifiers using standard text categorization methods is challenging due to the lack of labeled data in a target domain. In this paper, we consider the problem of cross-domain sentiment analysis: can one, for instance, download rated movie reviews from rottentomatoes.com or IMBD discussion forums, learn linguistic expressions and sentiment-laden terms that generally characterize opinionated reviews and then successfully transfer this knowledge to the target domain, thereby building high-quality sentiment models without manual effort? We outline a novel sentiment transfer mechanism based on constrained non-negative matrix tri-factorizations of term-document matrices in the source and target domains. We report some preliminary results with this approach.
1572094	K-tree: large scale document clustering We introduce K-tree in an information retrieval context. It is an efficient approximation of the k-means clustering algorithm. Unlike k-means it forms a hierarchy of clusters. It has been extended to address issues with sparse representations. We compare performance and quality to CLUTO using document collections. The K-tree has a low time complexity that is suitable for large document collections. This tree structure allows for efficient disk based implementations where space requirements exceed that of main memory.
1572095	A latent topic model for linked documents Documents in many corpora, such as digital libraries and webpages, contain both content and link information. To explicitly consider the document relations represented by links, in this paper we propose a citation-topic (CT) model which assumes a probabilistic generative process for corpora. In the CT model a given document is modeled as a mixture of a set of topic distributions, each of which is borrowed (cited) from a document that is related to the given document. Moreover, the CT model contains a random process for selecting the related documents according to the structure of the generative model determined by links and therefore, the transitivity of the relations among documents is captured. We apply the CT model on the document clustering task and the experimental comparisons against several state-of-the-art approaches demonstrate very promising performances.
1572096	Measuring constraint violations in information retrieval Recently, an inductive approach to modelling term-weighting function correctness has provided a number of axioms (constraints), to which all good term-weighting functions should adhere. These constraints have been shown to be theoretically and empirically sound in a number of works. It has been shown that when a term-weighting function breaks one or more of the constraints, it typically indicates sub-optimality of that function. This elegant inductive approach may more accurately model the human process of determining the relevance a document. It is intuitive that a person's notion of relevance changes as terms that are either on or off-topic are encountered in a given document. Ultimately, it would be desirable to be able to mathematically determine the performance of term-weighting functions without the need for test collections. Many modern term-weighting functions do not satisfy the constraints in an unconditional manner. However, the degree to which these functions violate the constraints has not been investigated. A comparison between weighting functions from this perspective may shed light on the poor performance of certain functions in certain settings. Moreover, if a correlation exists between performance and the number of violations, measuring the degree of violation could help more accurately predict how a certain scheme will perform on a given collection.
1572097	Measuring the descriptiveness of web comments This paper investigates whether Web comments are of descriptive nature, that is, whether the combined text of a set of comments is similar in topic to the commented object. If so, comments may be used in place of the respective object in all kinds of cross-media retrieval tasks. Our experiments reveal that comments on textual objects are indeed descriptive: 10 comments suffice to expect a high similarity between the comments and the commented text; 100-500 comments suffice to replace the commented text in a ranking task, and to measure the contribution of the commenters beyond the commented text.
1572098	Mining product reviews based on shallow dependency parsing This paper presents a novel method for mining product reviews, where it mines reviews by identifying product features, expressions of opinions and relations between them. By taking advantage of the fact that most of product features are phrases, a concept of shallow dependency parsing is introduced, which extends traditional dependency parsing to phrase level. This concept is then implemented for extracting relation between product features and expressions of opinions. Experimental evaluations show that the mining task can benefit from shallow dependency parsing.
1572099	Modeling facial expressions and peripheral physiological signals to predict topical relevance By analyzing explicit & implicit feedback information retrieval systems can determine topical relevance and tailor search criteria to the user's needs. In this paper we investigate whether it is possible to infer what is relevant by observing user affective behaviour. The sensory data employed range between facial expressions and peripheral physiological signals. We extract a set of features from the signals and analyze the data using classification methods, such as SVM and KNN. The results of our initial evaluation indicate that prediction of relevance is possible, to a certain extent, and implicit feedback models can benefit from taking into account user affective behavior.
1572100	Modeling search response time Modeling the response time of search engines is an important task for many applications such as resource selection in federated text search. Limited research has been conducted to address this task. Prior research calculated the search response time of all queries in the same way either with the average response time of several sample queries or with a single probability distribution, which is irrelevant to the characteristics of queries. However, the search response time may vary a lot for different types of queries. This paper proposes a novel query-specific and source-specific approach to model search response time. Some training data is acquired by measuring the search response time of some sample queries from a search engine. Then, a query-specific model is estimated with the training data and their corresponding response times by utilizing Ridge Regression. The obtained model can be used to predict search response times for new queries. A set of empirical studies are conducted to show the effectiveness of the proposed method.
1572101	Multiclass VisualRank: image ranking method in clustered subsets based on visual features This paper proposes Multiclass VisualRank, a method that expands the idea of VisualRank into more than one category of images. Multiclass VisualRank divides images retrieved from search engines into several categories based on distinctive patterns of visual features, and gives ranking within the category. Experimental results show that our method can extract several different image categories relevant to given keyword and gives good ranking scores to retrieved images.
1572102	Multiple approaches to analysing query diversity In this paper we examine user queries with respect to diversity: providing a mix of results across different interpretations. Using two query log analysis techniques (click entropy and reformulated queries), 14.9 million queries from the Microsoft Live Search log were analysed. We found that a broad range of query types may benefit from diversification. Additionally, although there is a correlation between word ambiguity and the need for diversity, the range of results users may wish to see for an ambiguous query stretches well beyond traditional notions of word sense.
1572103	Multiview clustering: a late fusion approach using latent models Multi-view clustering is an important problem in information retrieval due to the abundance of data offering many perspectives and generating multi-view representations. We investigate in this short note a late fusion approach for multi-view clustering based on the latent modeling of cluster-cluster relationships. We derive a probabilistic multi-view clustering model outperforming an early-fusion approach based on multi-view feature correlation analysis.
1572104	On efficient posting list intersection with multicore processors An abstract is not available.
1572105	On perfect document rankings for expert search Expert search systems often employ a document search component to identify on-topic documents, which are then used to identify people likely to have relevant expertise. This work investigates the impact of the retrieval effectiveness of the underlying document search component. It has been previously shown that applying techniques to the underlying document search component that normally improve the effectiveness of a document search engine also have a positive impact on the retrieval effectiveness of the expert search engine. In this work, we experiment with fictitious perfect document rankings, to attempt to identify an upper-bound in expert search system performance. Our surprising results infer that non-relevant documents can bring useful expertise evidence, and that removing these does not lead to an upper-bound in retrieval performance.
1572106	On single-pass indexing with MapReduce Indexing is an important Information Retrieval (IR) operation, which must be parallelised to support large-scale document corpora. We propose a novel adaptation of the state-of-the-art single-pass indexing algorithm in terms of the MapReduce programming model. We then experiment with this adaptation, in the context of the Hadoop MapReduce implementation. In particular, we explore the scale of improvements that can be achieved when using firstly more processing hardware and secondly larger corpora. Our results show that indexing speed increases in a close to linear fashion when scaling corpus size or number of processing machines. This suggests that the proposed indexing implementation is viable to support upcoming large-scale corpora.
1572107	On the relative age of spam and ham training samples for email filtering Email spam filters are commonly trained on a sample of spam and ham (non-spam) messages. We investigate the effect on filter performance of using samples of spam and ham messages sent months before those to be filtered. Our results show that filter performance deteriorates with the overall age of spam and ham samples, but at different rates. Spam and ham samples of different ages may be mixed to advantage, provided temporal cues are elided
1572108	Page hunt: improving search engines using human computation games There has been a lot of work on evaluating and improving the relevance of web search engines. In this paper, we suggest using human computation games to elicit data from players that can be used to improve search. We describe Page Hunt, a single-player game. The data elicited using Page Hunt has several applications including providing metadata for pages, providing query alterations for use in query refinement, and identifying ranking issues. We describe an experiment with over 340 game players, and highlight some interesting aspects of the data obtained.
1572109	Personalized music emotion recognition In recent years, there has been a dramatic proliferation of research on information retrieval based on highly subjective concepts such as emotion, preference and aesthetic. Such retrieval methods are fascinating but challenging since it is difficult to built a general retrieval model that performs equally well to everyone. In this paper, we propose two novel methods, bag-of-users model and residual modeling, to accommodate the individual differences for emotion-based music retrieval. The proposed methods are intuitive and generally applicable to other information retrieval tasks that involve subjective perception. Evaluation result shows the effectiveness of the proposed methods.
1572110	Predicting stopping behaviour: a preliminary analysis The analysis of search transaction logs often characterizes a search session but rarely looks at the end point. When do users stop, and what cues are present suggesting that stopping is eminent? In this preliminary analysis of the logs of 288 search sessions conducted in a laboratory setting, we identified the activity performed by participants as well as search transitions that were invoked over the course of a search session. The 4331 search transitions (15 per task on average) contained a total of 9295 actions. We isolated the final transition in each search session for detailed analysis. As hypothesized some behaviours are predictable, and suggestive of stopping behavior, with the potential for modeling.
1572111	Protein identification as an information retrieval problem We present the first interdisciplinary work on transforming a popular problem in proteomics, i.e. protein identification from tandem mass spectra, to an Information Retrieval (IR) problem. We present an empirical comparison of popular IR approaches, such as those available from Indri and Lemur toolkits on benchmark datasets, to representative popular baselines in the proteomics literature. Our experiments demonstrate statistically significant evidence that popular IR approaches outperform representative baseline approaches in proteomics.
1572112	Query sampling for ranking learning in web search Learning to rank has become a popular approach to build a ranking model for Web search recently. Based on our observation, the constitution of the training set will greatly influence the performance of the learned ranking model. Meanwhile, the number of queries in Web search is nearly infinite and the human labeling cost is expensive, hence a subset of queries need to be carefully selected for training. In this paper, we develop a greedy algorithm to sample the queries, by simultaneously taking the query density, difficulty and diversity into consideration. The experimental results on a collected Web search dataset comprising 2024 queries show that the proposed method can lead to a more informative training set for building an effective model.
1572113	A ranking approach to keyphrase extraction This paper addresses the issue of automatically extracting keyphrases from a document. Previously, this problem was formalized as classification and learning methods for classification were utilized. This paper points out that it is more essential to cast the problem as ranking and employ a learning to rank method to perform the task. Specifically, it employs Ranking SVM, a state-of-art method of learning to rank, in keyphrase extraction. Experimental results on three datasets show that Ranking SVM significantly outperforms the baseline methods of SVM and Naive Bayes, indicating that it is better to exploit learning to rank techniques in keyphrase extraction.
1572114	Reciprocal rank fusion outperforms condorcet and individual rank learning methods Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF), a simple method for combining the document rankings from multiple IR systems, consistently yields better results than any individual system, and better results than the standard method Condorcet Fuse. This result is demonstrated by using RRF to combine the results of several TREC experiments, and to build a meta-learner that ranks the LETOR 3 dataset better than any previously reported method
1572115	Relevance criteria for e-commerce: a crowdsourcing-based experimental analysis We discuss the concept of relevance criteria in the context of e-Commerce search. A vast body of research literature describes the beyond-topical criteria used to determine the relevance of the document to the need. We argue that in an e-Commerce scenario there are some differences, and novel and different criteria can be used to determine relevance. We experimentally validate this hypothesis by means of Amazon Mechanical Turk using a crowdsourcing approach.
1572116	A relevance model based filter for improving ad quality Recently there has been a surge in research that predicts retrieval relevance using historical click-through data. While a larger number of clicks between a query and a document provides a stronger ``confidence" of relevance, most models in the literature that learn from clicks are error-prone as they do not take into account any confidence estimates. Sponsored Search models are especially prone to this error as they are typically trained on search engine logs in order to predict click-through-rate (CTR). The estimated CTR ultimately determines the rank at which an ad is shown and also impacts the price (cost-per-click) for the advertiser. In this paper, we improve a model that applies collaborative filtering on click data by training a filter that has been trained to predict pure relevance. Applying the filter to ads that have seen few clicks on live traffic results in improved CTR and click-yield (CY). Additionally, in offline experiments we find that using features based on the emph{organic} results improves the relevance based filter's performance.
1572117	A relevance-based topic model for news event tracking Event tracking is the task of discovering temporal patterns of popular events from text streams. Existing approaches for event tracking have two limitations: scalability and inability to rule out non-relevant portions in text streams. In this study, we propose a novel approach to tackle these limitations. To demonstrate the approach, we track news events across a collection of weblogs spanning a two-month time period.
1572118	Revisiting logical imaging for information retrieval Retrieval with Logical Imaging is derived from belief revision and provides a novel mechanism for estimating the relevance of a document through logical implication (i.e. P(q->d). In this poster, we perform the first comprehensive evaluation of Logical Imaging (LI) in Information Retrieval (IR) across several TREC test Collections. When compared against standard baseline models, we show that LI fails to improve performance. This failure can be attributed to a nuance within the model that means non-relevant documents are promoted in the ranking, while relevant documents are demoted. This is an important contribution because it not only contextualizes the effectiveness of LI, but crucially explains why it fails. By addressing this nuance, future LI models could be significantly improved.
1572119	A robust retrieval system of polyphonic music based on chord progression similarity Retrieval systems for polyphonic music rely on the automatic estimation of similarity between two musical pieces. In the case of symbolic music, existing systems either consider a monophonic reduction based on melody or propose algorithms with high complexity. In this paper, we propose a new approach. Musical pieces are represented as a sequence of chords which are estimated from groups of notes sounding at the same time. A root and a mode are associated to each chord. Local alignment is then applied for estimating a similarity score between these sequences. Experiments performed on MIDI files collected on the Internet show that the system proposed allows the retrieval of different versions of the same song.
1572120	Score and rank convergence of HITS How many iterations does the (ever more) popular HITS algorithm require to converge in score and, perhaps more importantly, in rank (i.e. to get the nodes of a graph "in the right order")? After pinning down the elusive notion of convergence in rank we provide the first non-trivial bounds on the convergence of HITS. A "worst case" example, requiring a number of iterations superexponential in the size of the target graph to achieve even "mild" convergence, suggests the need for greater caution in the experimental evaluation of the algorithm - as recent results of poor performance (e.g. vs. SALSA) might be due to insufficient iterations, rather than to an intrinsic deficiency of HITS. An almost matching upper bound shows that, as long as one employs exponential acceleration e.g. through a "squaring trick", a polynomial running time (practical in many application domains) always provides strong convergence guarantees.
1572121	A search engine in a few lines.: yes, we can! Many research implementations of search engines are written in C, C++, or Java. They are difficult to understand and modify because they are at least a few thousand lines of code and contain many low-level details. In this paper, we show how to achieve a much shorter and higher level implementation: one in about a few hundred lines. We accomplish this result through the use of a high-level functional programming language, F#, and some of its features such as sequences, pipes and structured input and output. By using a search engine implementation as a case study, we argue that functional programming fits the domain of Information Retrieval problems much better than imperative/OO languages like C++ and Java. Functional programming languages are ideal for rapid algorithm prototyping and data exploration in the field of Information Retrieval (IR). Additionally, our implementation can be used as case study in an IR course since it is a very high level, but nevertheless executable specification of a search engine.
1572122	Search engine predilection towards news media providers In this poster paper, we present a preliminary study on the predilection of web search engines towards various online news media provider sites using an access based measure.
1572123	Searching documentation using text, OCR, and image We describe a mixed-modality method to index and search software documentation in three ways: plain text, OCR text of embedded figures, and visual features of these figures. Using a corpus of 102 computer books with a total of 62,943 pages and 75,800 figures, we empirically demonstrate that our method achieves better precision/recall than do alternatives based on single modalities.
1572124	Selecting hierarchical clustering cut points for web person-name disambiguation Hierarchical clustering is often used to cluster person-names referring to the same entities. Since the correct number of clusters for a given person-name is not known a priori, some way of deciding where to cut the resulting dendrogram to balance risks of over- or under-clustering is needed. This paper reports on experiments in which outcome-specific and result-set measures are used to learn a global similarity threshold. Results on the Web People Search (WePS)-2 task indicate that approximately 85% of the optimal F1 measure can be achieved on held-out data.
1572125	Serendipitous search via wikipedia: a query log analysis We analyse the query log of a click-oriented Japanese search engine that utilises the link structures of Wikipedia for encouraging the user to change his information need and to perform repeated, serendipitous, exploratory search. Our results show that users tend to make transitions within the same query type: from person names to person names, from place names to place names, and so on.
1572126	Spoken information retrieval for turkish broadcast news Speech Retrieval systems utilize automatic speech recognition (ASR) to generate textual data for indexing. However, automatic transcriptions include errors, either because of out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words or due to ASR inaccuracy. In this work, we address spoken information retrieval in Turkish, a morphologically rich language where OOV rates are high. We apply several techniques, such as using subword units and indexing alternative hypotheses, to cope with the OOV problem and ASR inaccuracy. Experiments are performed on our Turkish Broadcast News (BN) Corpus which also incorporates a spoken IR collection. Results indicate that word segmentation is quite useful but the efficiency of indexing alternative hypotheses depends on retrieval type.
1572127	A study of inter-annotator agreement for opinion retrieval Evaluation of sentiment analysis, like large-scale IR evaluation, relies on the accuracy of human assessors to create judgments. Subjectivity in judgments is a problem for relevance assessment and even more so in the case of sentiment annotations. In this study we examine the degree to which assessors agree upon sentence-level sentiment annotation. We show that inter-assessor agreement is not contingent on document length or frequency of sentiment but correlates positively with automated opinion retrieval performance. We also examine the individual annotation categories to determine which categories pose most difficulty for annotators.
1572128	SugarCube: quantification of topic propagation in the blogosphere using percolation theory Blogs facilitate online debates and discussions for millions of people around the world. Identifying the most popular and prevailing topics discussed in the Blogosphere is a crucial task. This poster describes our novel approach to the quantification of the level of topic propagation in the Blogosphere. Our model uses graph-theoretic representations of the Blogosphere's link structures that allows it to deduce the `Percolation Threshold', which is then used in the quantification and definition of a global topic. The result of our experiments on a blog collection shows that our model is able to quantify the propagation of topics. Moreover, our model is successful in identifying specific topics that propagate throughout the Blogosphere and classifies them as `Global'.
1572129	System scoring using partial prior information We introduce smoothing of retrieval effectiveness scores, which balances results from prior incomplete query sets against limited additional complete information, in order to obtain more refined system orderings than would be possible on the new queries alone.
1572130	Tag-based object similarity computation using term space dimension reduction In this paper, we propose a novel approach for measuring similarity between web objects. Our similarity measure is defined based on the representation of a web object as a collection of tags. Precisely, we first construct a vector space in which multiple terms are mapped into a single dimension by using information available from Open Directory Project and Delicious.com. Then we position web objects in the vector space and apply the traditional cosine measure for similarity computation. We demonstrate that the proposed similarity computation method is able to overcome the limitation of traditional vector space approach while at the same time require less computational cost compares to LSI (Latent Semantic Indexing).
1572131	Tagging products using image classification Associating labels with online products can be a labor-intensive task. We study the extent to which a standard "bag of visual words" image classifier can be used to tag products with useful information, such as whether a sneaker has laces or velcro straps. Using Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) image descriptors at random keypoints, a hierarchical visual vocabulary, and a variant of nearest-neighbor classification, we achieve accuracies between 66% and 98% on 2- and 3-class classification tasks using several dozen training examples. We also increase accuracy by combining information from multiple views of the same product.
1572132	Template-independent wrapper for web forums This paper presents a novel work on the task of extracting data from Web forums. Millions of users contribute rich information to Web forum everyday, which has become an important resource for manyWeb applications, such as product opinion retrieval, social network analysis, and so on. The novelty of the proposed algorithm is that it can not only extract the pure text but also distinguish between the original post and replies. Experimental results on a large number of real Web forums indicate that the proposed algorithm can correctly ex
1572133	Temporal collaborative filtering with adaptive neighbourhoods Collaborative Filtering aims to predict user tastes, by minimising the mean error produced when predicting hidden user ratings. The aim of a deployed recommender system is to iteratively predict users' preferences over a dynamic, growing dataset, and system administrators are confronted with the problem of having to continuously tune the parameters calibrating their CF algorithm. In this work, we formalise CF as a time-dependent, iterative prediction problem. We then perform a temporal analysis of the Netflix dataset, and evaluate the temporal performance of two CF algorithms. We show that, due to the dynamic nature of the data, certain prediction methods that improve prediction accuracy on the Netflix probe set do not show similar improvements over a set of iterative train-test experiments with growing data. We then address the problem of parameter selection and update, and propose a method to automatically assign and update per-user neighbourhood sizes that (on the temporal scale) outperforms setting global parameters.
1572134	Temporal query substitution for ad search Recently, information retrieval researchers have witnessed the increasing interest in query substitution for ad search. Most previous works substitute search queries via content based query similarities, and few of them take the temporal characteristics of queries into consideration. In this extended abstract, we propose a novel temporal similarity measurement for query substitution in ad search task. We firstly extract temporal features, such as burst and periodicity, from query frequency curves and then define the temporal query similarity by integrating these new features with the temporal query frequency distribution. Compared to the traditional temporal similarity measurements such as correlation coefficient, our proposed approach is more effective owing to the explicit extraction of high-level semantic query temporal features for similarity measure. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed similarity measure can make the ads more relevant to user search queries compared to ad search without temporal features.
1572135	Term-based commercial intent analysis In this work, we investigate the contribution of query terms and their corresponding ad click rates on commercial intent of queries. A probabilistic model is proposed following the hypothesis that a query is likely to receive ad clicks based on contributions from its individual terms.
1572136	Topic (query) selection for IR evaluation The need for evaluating large amounts of topics (queries) makes IR evaluation an uneasy task. In this paper, we study a topic selection problem for IR evaluation. The selection criterion is based on the overall difficulty of the chosen set, as well as the uncertainty of the final IR metric applied to the systems. Our preliminary experiments demonstrate that our approach helps to identify a set of topics that provides confident estimates of systems' performance while keeping the requirement of the query difficulty.
1572137	Topic prerogative feature selection using multiple query examples for automatic video retrieval Well acceptance of relevance feedback and collaborative systems has given the users to express their preferences in terms of multiple query examples. The technology devised to utilize these user preferences, is expected to mine the semantic knowledge embedded within these query examples. In this paper, we propose a video mining framework based on dynamic learning from queries, using a statistical model for topic prerogative feature selection. The proposed method is specifically designed for multiple query example scenarios. The effectiveness of the proposed framework has been established with an extensive experimentation on TRECVid2007 data collection. The results reveal that our approach achieves a performance that is in par with the best results for this corpus without the requirement of any textual data.
1572138	Topic set size redux The cost as well as the power and reliability of a retrieval test collection are all proportional to the number of topics included in it. Test collections created through community evaluations such as TREC generally use 50 topics. Prior work estimated the reliability of 50-topic sets by extrapolating confidence levels from those of smaller sets, and concluded that 50 topics are sufficient to have high confidence in a comparison, especially when the comparison is statistically significant. Using topic sets that actually contain 50 topics, this paper shows that statistically significant differences can be wrong, even when statistical significance is accompanied by moderately large (>10%) relative differences in scores. Further, using standardized evaluation scores rather than raw evaluation scores does not increase the reliability of these paired comparisons. Researchers should continue to be skeptical of conclusions demonstrated on only a single test collection.
1572139	Transforming patents into prior-art queries Searching for prior-art patents is an essential step for the patent examiner to validate or invalidate a patent application. In this paper, we consider the whole patent as the query, which reduces the burden on the user, and also makes many more potential search features available. We explore how to automatically transform the query patent into an effective search query, especially focusing on the effect of different patent fields. Experiments show that the background summary of a patent is the most useful source of terms for generating a query, even though most previous work used the patent claims.
1572140	Two-stage query segmentation for information retrieval Modeling term dependence has been shown to have a significant positive impact on retrieval. Current models, however, use sequential term dependencies, leading to an increased query latency, especially for long queries. In this paper, we examine two query segmentation models that reduce the number of dependencies. We find that two-stage segmentation based on both query syntactic structure and external information sources such as query logs, attains retrieval performance comparable to the sequential dependence model, while achieving a 50% reduction in query latency.
1572141	Undergraduates' evaluations of assigned search topics This paper evaluates undergraduate students' knowledge, interests and experiences with 20 topics from the TREC Robust Track collection. The goal is to characterize these topics along several dimensions to help researchers make more informed decisions about which topics are most appropriate to use in experimental IIR evaluations with undergraduate student subjects.
1572142	A unified inverted index for an efficient image and text retrieval We present an efficient method for approximate search in a combination of several metric spaces -- which are a generalization of low level image features -- using an inverted index. Our approximation gives very high recall with subsecond response time on a real data set of one million images extracted from Flickr. We further exploit the inverted index to improve efficiency of the query processing by combining our search in metric features with search in associated textual metadata.
1572143	Usefulness of click-through data in expert search The task in expert finding is to identify members of an organisation with relevant expertise on a given topic. Typically, an expert search engine uses evidence from the authors of on-topic documents found in the organisation's intranet by search engines. The search result click-through behaviour of many intranet search engine users provides an additional source of evidence to identify topically-relevant documents, and via document authorship, experts. In this poster, we assess the usefulness of click-through log data for expert finding. We find that ranking authors based solely on the clicks their documents receive is reasonably effective at correctly identifying relevant experts. Moreover, we show that this evidence can successfully be integrated with an existing expert search engine to increase its retrieval effectiveness.
1572144	User-centric multi-criteria information retrieval Information retrieval models usually represent content only, and not other considerations, such as authority, cost, and recency. How could multiple criteria be utilized in information retrieval, and how would it effect the results? In our experiments, using multiple user-centric criteria always produced better results than a single criteria.
1572145	Users' stopping behaviors and estimates of recall This paper investigates subjects' stopping behaviors and estimates of recall in an interactive information retrieval (IIR) experiment. Subjects completed four recall-oriented search tasks and were asked to estimate how many of the relevant documents they believed they had found after each task. Subjects also responded to an interview question probing their reasons for stopping a search. Results show that most subjects believed they found about 51-60% of the relevant documents and that this estimate was correlated positively with number of documents saved and actual recall, even though subjects' recall estimates were inaccurate. Reasons given for stopping search are also explored.
1572146	Using dynamic markov compression to detect vandalism in the wikipedia We apply the Dynamic Markov Compression model to detect spam edits in the Wikipedia. The method appears to outperform previous efforts based on compression models, providing performance comparable to methods based on manually constructed rules.
1572147	Using wikipedia categories for ad hoc search In this paper we explore the use of category information for ad hoc retrieval in Wikipedia. We show that techniques for entity ranking exploiting this category information can also be applied to ad hoc topics and lead to significant improvements. Automatically assigned target categories are good surrogates for manually assigned categories, which perform only slightly better.
1572148	Visualizing the problems with the INEX topics Topics form a crucial component of a test collection. We show, through visualization, that the INEX 2008 topics have shortcomings, which questions their validity for evaluating XML retrieval effectiveness.
1572149	What queries are likely to recur in web search? We study the recurrence dynamics of queries in Web search by analysing a large real-world query log dataset. We find that query frequency is more useful in predicting collective query recurrence whereas query recency is more useful in predicting individual query recurrence. Our findings provide valuable insights for understanding and improving Web search.
1572150	When is query performance prediction effective? The utility of Query Performance Prediction (QPP) methods is commonly evaluated by reporting correlation coefficients to denote how well the methods perform at predicting the retrieval performance of a set of queries. However, a quintessential question remains unexplored: how strong does the correlation need to be in order to realize an increase in retrieval performance? In this work, we address this question in the context of Selective Query Expansion (SQE) and perform a large-scale experiment. The results show that to consistently and predictably improve retrieval effectiveness in the ideal SQE setting, a Kendall's Tau correlation of tau>=0.5 is required, a threshold which most existing query performance prediction methods fail to reach.
1572151	Who said what to whom?: capturing the structure of debates Transcripts of meetings are a document genre characterized by a complex narrative structure. The essence is not only what is said, but also by who and to whom. This paper investigates whether we can use semantic annotations like the speaker in order to capture this debate structure, as well as the related content of the debate. The structure is visualized in a graph, while the content is condensed into word clouds, that are created using a parsimonious language model. Evaluation shows that both tools adequately capture the structure and content of the debate at an aggregated level.
1572153	EvaluatIR: an online tool for evaluating and comparing IR systems An abstract is not available.
1572154	Expertise search in academia using facets An abstract is not available.
1572155	Exploiting social context for expertise propagation An abstract is not available.
1572156	Social networks and discovery in the enterprise (SaND) An abstract is not available.
1572157	Sifting micro-blogging stream for events of user interest Micro-blogging is a new form of social communication that encourages users to share information about anything they are seeing or doing, the motivation facilitated by the ability to post brief text messages through a variety of devices. Twitter, the most popular micro-blogging tool, is exhibiting rapid growth [3]: up to 11% of online Americans are using Twitter by December 2008, compared to 6% in May 2008. Due to its nature, micro-blogosphere has unique features: (i) It is a source of extremely up-to-date information about what is happening in the world; (ii) It captures the wisdom of millions of people and covers a broad range of domains. These features make micro-blogosphere more than a popular medium of social communication: we believe that it has additionally become a valuable source of extremely up-to-date news on virtually any subject of user interest. Making use of micro-blogosphere in this new role we meet the following challenges: (A) Since any given subject is generally mentioned in the micro-blogging stream on the continuous basis, a method is needed for locating periods of news on this subject. (B) Additionally, even for such periods, stream filtering is required for removing noise and for extracting messages that best describe the news. To address these challenges we make and exploit the following observations: (A) For an arbitrary subject, events that catch user interest gain distinguishably more attention than the average mentioning of the subject resulting in message activity bursts for it. (B) Most of the messages in an activity burst describe common event in close variations - either rephrased or "retweeted" between the users. We demonstrate TweetSieve - a system that allows obtaining news on any given subject by sifting the Twitter stream. Our work is related to frequecy-based analysis applied to blogs [1], but higher latency and lower coverage in blogs makes the analysis less effective than in case of micro-blogs. In TweetSieve demo, the user is able to express the subject of her interest by an arbitrary search string. The system shows the period of events occuring for the subject and outputs tweets that best describe each of the events. Figure 1 shows a screenshot of the system for "Semantic search" as a sample subject. The underlying process consists of two steps: Identifying activity bursts. Counting the messages matching the search string in the stream over time, the frequency curve is constructed. Activity bursts in the curve are identified by taking the periods of frequency exceeding the standard deviation from the average. Selecting messages that best describe news events. For the set of all messages matching the search string in an activity burst, we apply the message-granular variation of our keyphrase extraction algorithm [2] that is specifically suited to efficiently filtering noisy data. The algorithm clusters messages with respect to their similarity to each other and chooses central messages from the most dense clusters. As the similarity measure we use Jaccard coefficient for the "bag of words" representation of messages. The demonstration illustrates the potential of our approach in bringing news acquisition to a new level of promptness and coverage range.
1572158	Incentives for social annotation The effectiveness of community-driven annotation, such as social bookmarking, depends on user participation. Since the participation of many users is motivated by selfish reasons, an effective way to encourage participation is to create useful or entertaining applications. We demo two such tools -- a browser extension and a game.
1572159	Accommodating colorblind users in image search There are about 8% of men and 0.8% of women suffering from colorblindness. Due to certain loss of color information, the existing image search techniques may not provide satisfactory results for these users. In this demonstration, we show an image search system that can accommodate colorblind users. It can help these special users find and enjoy what they want by providing multiple services for them, including search results reranking, image recoloring and color indication.
1572160	Generic similarity search engine demonstrated by an image retrieval application We introduce a generic engine for large-scale similarity search and demonstrate it on a set of 100 million Flickr images.
1572161	Pharos: an audiovisual search platform An abstract is not available.
1572162	Agate: information gathering for risk monitoring Internet sources provide new ways to acquire information about risk and to follow up the evolution of natural disasters in real time. We will present first, an architecture dedicated to unstructured information processing. Then, we will show how the spatial and temporal representation extended with semantic properties answers information ambiguity problem. Agate platform was evaluated by a non-governmental organization which filtered alerts according to types of disaster and their locations.
1572163	wikiSearch: enabling interactivity in search wikiSearch, is a search engine customized for the Wikipedia corpus but with design features that may be generalized to other search systems. Its features enhance basic functionality and enable more fluid interactivity while supporting both workflow in the search process and the experimental process used in lab testing.
1572164	CDPRanking: discovering and ranking cross-document paths between entities An abstract is not available.
1572166	Context-based health information retrieval An abstract is not available.
1572167	Modeling uncertainty in video retrieval: a retrieval model for uncertain semantic representations of videos An abstract is not available.
1572168	Toponym ambiguity in geographical information retrieval The objectives of this research work is to study the effects of toponym (place name) ambiguity in the Geographical Information Retrieval (GIR) task. Our experience with GIR systems shows that toponym ambiguity may be an important factor in the inability of these systems to take advantage from geographical knowledge. Previous studies over ambiguity and Information Retrieval (IR) suggested that disambiguation may be useful in some specific IR scenario. We suppose that GIR may constitute such a scenario. This preliminary study was carried out over the WordNet based, manually disambiguated collection developed for the CLIR-WSD task, using the GeoCLEF collection of 100 geographically related topics. The employed GIR system was based on the GeoWorSE system that participated in GeoCLEF 2008. The experiments were carried out considering the manual disambiguation and comparing this result with those obtained by randomly disambiguating the document collection and those obtained by using always the most common referent. The obtained results show no significant difference in the overall results, although the work gave an insight into some errors that are produced by toponym ambiguity and how they may affect the results. These preliminary results also suggest that WordNet is not a suitable resource for the planned research.
1572169	Exploiting temporal information in retrieval of archived documents In a text retrieval community, many researchers have shown a good quality of searching a current snapshot of the Web. However, only a small number have demonstrated a good quality of searching a long-term archival domain, where documents are preserved for a long time, i.e., ten years or more. In such a domain, a search application is not only applicable for archivists or historians, but also in a context of national library and enterprise search (searching document repositories, emails, etc.). In the rest of this paper, we will explain three problems of searching document archives and propose possible approaches to solve these problems. Our main research question is: How to improve the quality of search in a document archive using temporal information?
1572170	Using document structure for automatic summarization An abstract is not available.
1572171	Topic structure for information retrieval In my research, I propose a coherence measure, with the goal of discovering and using topic structures within and between documents, of which I explore its extensions and applications in information retrieval.
1572172	Using computational community interest as an indicator for ranking Ranking documents in response to users' information needs is a challenging task, due, in part, to the dynamic nature of users' interests with respect to a query. I hypothesize that the interests of a given user are similar to the interests of the broader community of which he is a part and propose an innovative method that uses social media to characterize the interests of the community and use this characterization to improve future rankings. By generating a community interest vector (CIV) for a given query, we use community interest to alter the ranking score of individual documents retrieved by the query. The CIV is based on a continuously updated set of recent (daily or past few hours) user-oriented text data. The user-oriented data can be user blogs or user comment tagged news. Preliminary evaluation shows that the new ranking method significantly improves ranking performance.
1572173	Affective adaptive retrieval: study of emotion in adaptive retrieval An abstract is not available.
1572174	A study on performance volatility in information retrieval A common practice in comparative evaluation of information retrieval (IR) systems is to create a test collection comprising a set of topics (queries), a document corpus, and relevance judgments, and to monitor the performance of retrieval systems over such a collection. A typical evaluation of a system involves computing a performance metric, e.g., Average Precision (AP), for each topic and then using the average performance metric, e.g., Mean Average Precision (MAP) to express the overall system performance. However, averages do not capture all the important aspects of system performance, and used alone may not thoroughly express system effectiveness, i.e., average of performance can mask large variance in individual topic effectiveness. The author hypothesis is that, in addition to the average of overall performance, attention needs to be paid to how a system performance varies across topics. This variability can be measured by calculating the standard deviation (SD) of individual performance scores. We refer to this performance variation as Volatility.
1572175	Novelty detection across different source types and languages An abstract is not available.
1572176	Personalizing information retrieval using task features, topic knowledge, and task product Personalization of information retrieval tailors search towards individual users to meet their particular information needs. Personalization systems obtain additional information about users and their contexts beyond the queries they submit to the systems, and use this information to bring the desired documents to top ranks. The additional information can come from various sources: user preferences, user behaviors, contexts, etc. [1] To avoid users taking extra effort in providing explicit preferences, most personalization approaches have adopted an implicit strategy to obtain users' interests from their behaviors and/or contexts, such as query history, browsing history, and so on. Task, topic knowledge, and desktop information have been used as evidence for personalization. Tailoring display time threshold based on task information was found to improve implicit relevance feedback performance [5]. User's familiarity with search topics was found to be positively correlated with reading time but negatively correlated with search efficacy [3]. This indicated the possibility of inferring topic familiarity from searching behavior. Desktop information was also found to be a good source for personalization [2, 4], and personalization using only those files relevant to user queries are more effective than using the entire desktop data [2]. Since search often happens in a work task environment, we examine how user-generated products and retained documents can help improve search performance. To these ends, this study looks at how the following factors can help personalize search: features of user's work tasks (including task stage and task type), user's familiarity with work task topic, user's saving and using behaviors, and task product(s) that the user generated for the work task. Work tasks are designed to include multiple sub-tasks, each being a stage. Two types of sub-task interdependence are considered: parallel, where the sub-tasks do not depend upon each other, or dependent, where one sub-task depends upon the accomplishment of other sub-task(s). The study examines the interaction effects of these factors, dwell time, and document usefulness. It also looks at a personalization technique that extracts terms for query expansion from work task product(s) and user behaviors. There are three research questions: RQ1: Does the stage of the user's task help predict document usefulness from dwell time in the parallel and the dependent tasks, respectively? RQ2. Does the user's familiarity with work task topic help predict document usefulness from dwell time in the parallel and the dependent tasks, respectively? RQ3. Do user's task product(s) and saving and using behaviors help with query disambiguation? Twenty-four participants are recruited, each coming three times (as three experiment sessions) to a usability laboratory working on three sub-tasks in a general task, either a parallel or a dependent. Take the parallel task as an example. It asks the participants to write a three-section article on hybrid cars, and each section is finished in one session. The three sections focus on Honda Civic sedan hybrid, Nissan Altima sedan hybrid, and Toyota Camry sedan hybrid, respectively. When searching for information, half of the participants use a query expansion condition, where the system recommends search terms based on their work in previous sessions, and the other half use a non-query expansion system condition. Data are collected by three major means: logging software that records user-system interactions, an eye tracker that records eye movement, and questionnaires that elicit users' background information and their perceptions on a number of aspects. The results will provide new evidence on personalizing search by taking account of the examined contextual factors.
1572177	Exploiting memory cues in personal lifelog retrieval In recent years personal lifelogs (PLs) have become an emerging field of research. PLs are collections of digital data taken from an individual's life experiences, gathered from both digital and physical worlds. PLs collections can potentially be collected over periods of years and thus can be very large. In our research group, four researchers have been engaged in collection of individual one-year-long PLs data sets. These collections include logs of computer and mobile phone activities, digital photos, in particular passively captured Microsoft SenseCam images, geo-location (via GPS), surrounding people or objects (via Bluetooth), and various biometric data. The complex data types and heterogeneous structure of this corpus brings great challenges to traditional content based information retrieval (IR). Yet, the rich connections integral to personal experience offer exciting potential opportunities to leverage features from human memory and associated models to support retrieval. My PhD project aims to develop an interface to assist IR from PLs. In doing this I plan to exploit features in human memory, in particular the mechanisms in associative memory models. Previous studies in personal information re-finding have explored the use of generally well-remembered attributes or metadata of the search targets, such as date, item type/format, authors of documents [1]. There have also been systems which utilize associated computer items or real life events (e.g. [2, 3]) to assist re-finding tasks. However, few of them looked into exactly what types of associated items/events people tend to recall. I plan to explore associations among PL items, as well as their attributes regarding their role in an individual's memory, since I believe that some associations and types of metadata which are available and feasible for use, may have been omitted in existing systems; due to the methods used in previous research where the users' behaviour may have been guided by the searching or management tools available to them. As indicated by some information seeking studies (e.g. [4]), different search context, search motivation, or personal differences such as habits, may lead to varied recall of contents and information seeking behaviours. For this reason, I will also investigate: the influences on personal information re-finding behaviour of context, lifestyle, and differences in prior personal experiences of IR tools. Results from these studies will be used to explore personalisation in search, e.g. to dynamically increase the importance of geo-location in scoring of search results for subjects who travel frequently. As indicated by [4], people tend to make small steps to approach the targets they are looking for, rather than trying to do this in a single search with a "perfect query" comprising all of the relevant details, partially because of their trouble in recalling them. To relieve users from the heavy cognitive burden of recalling the exact target, and on the other hand to reduce the rate of inaccurate queries caused by false recall, my proposed interface will be based on browsing and recognizing, instead of traditional recalling and searching. For example, a user will be able to browse and narrow results by recognizing landmarks and estimating the target activities' time range from the user's digital or physical life [5]. An important issue in my work will be to consider the challenges of evaluating my work with only a very limited number of PL datasets. To partially address this issue, I am currently in engaged in a number of smaller scale diary studies of searching experiences for larger numbers of subjects.
1835450	Is the cranfield paradigm outdated? An abstract is not available.
1835451	Refactoring the search problem The most common way of framing the search problem is as an exchange between a user and a database, where the user issues queries and the database replies with results that satisfy constraints imposed by the query but that also optimize some notion of relevance. There are several variations to this basic model that augment the dialogue between humans and machines through query refinement, relevance feedback, and other mechanism. However, rarely is this problem ever posed in a way in which the properties of the client and server are fundamentally different and in a way in which exploiting the differences can be used to yield substantially different experiences. I propose a reframing of the basic search problem which presupposes that servers are scalable on most dimensions but suffer from low communication latencies while clients have lower scalability but support vastly richer user interactions because of lower communication latencies. Framed in this manner, there is clear utility in refactoring the search problem so that user interactions are processed fluidly by a client while the server is relegated to pre-computing the properties of a result set that cannot be efficiently left to the client. I will demonstrate Pivot, an experimental client application that allows the user to visually interact with thousands of search results at once, while using facetted-based exploration in a zoomable interface. I will argue that the evolving structure of the Web will tend to push all IR-based applications in a similar direction, which has the algorithmic intelligence increasingly split between clients and servers. Put another way, my claim is that future clients will be neither thin nor dumb.
1835453	Prototype hierarchy based clustering for the categorization and navigation of web collections This paper presents a novel prototype hierarchy based clustering (PHC) framework for the organization of web collections. It solves simultaneously the problem of categorizing web collections and interpreting the clustering results for navigation. By utilizing prototype hierarchies and the underlying topic structures of the collections, PHC is modeled as a multi-criterion optimization problem based on minimizing the hierarchy evolution, maximizing category cohesiveness and inter-hierarchy structural and semantic resemblance. The flexible design of metrics enables PHC to be a general framework for applications in various domains. In the experiments on categorizing 4 collections of distinct domains, PHC achieves 30% improvement in ¼ F 1 over the state-of-the-art techniques. Further experiments provide insights on performance variations with abstract and concrete domains, completeness of the prototype hierarchy, and effects of different combinations of optimization criteria.
1835454	Person name disambiguation by bootstrapping In this paper, we report our system that disambiguates person names in Web search results. The system uses named entities, compound key words, and URLs as features for document similarity calculation, which typically show high precision but low recall clustering results. We propose to use a two-stage clustering algorithm by bootstrapping to improve the low recall values, in which clustering results of the first stage are used to extract features used in the second stage clustering. Experimental results revealed that our algorithm yields better score than the best systems at the latest WePS workshop.
1835455	Self-taught hashing for fast similarity search The ability of fast similarity search at large scale is of great importance to many Information Retrieval (IR) applications. A promising way to accelerate similarity search is semantic hashing which designs compact binary codes for a large number of documents so that semantically similar documents are mapped to similar codes (within a short Hamming distance). Although some recently proposed techniques are able to generate high-quality codes for documents known in advance, obtaining the codes for previously unseen documents remains to be a very challenging problem. In this paper, we emphasise this issue and propose a novel Self-Taught Hashing (STH) approach to semantic hashing: we first find the optimal l -bit binary codes for all documents in the given corpus via unsupervised learning, and then train l classifiers via supervised learning to predict the l -bit code for any query document unseen before. Our experiments on three real-world text datasets show that the proposed approach using binarised Laplacian Eigenmap (LapEig) and linear Support Vector Machine (SVM) outperforms state-of-the-art techniques significantly.
1835457	Personalizing information retrieval for multi-session tasks: the roles of task stage and task type Dwell time as a user behavior has been found in previous studies to be an unreliable predictor of document usefulness, with contextual factors such as the user's task needing to be considered in its interpretation. Task stage has been shown to influence search behaviors including usefulness judgments, as has task type. This paper reports on an investigation of how task stage and task type may help predict usefulness from the time that users spend on retrieved documents, over the course of several information seeking episodes. A 3-stage controlled experiment was conducted with 24 participants, each coming 3 times to work on 3 sub-tasks of a general task, couched either as "parallel" or "dependent" task type. The full task was to write a report on the general topic, with interim documents produced for each sub-task. Results show that task stage can help in inferring document usefulness from decision time, especially in the parallel task. The findings can be used to increase accuracy in predicting document usefulness and accordingly in personalizing search for multi-session tasks.
1835458	Predicting searcher frustration When search engine users have trouble finding information, they may become frustrated, possibly resulting in a bad experience (even if they are ultimately successful). In a user study in which participants were given difficult information seeking tasks, half of all queries submitted resulted in some degree of self-reported frustration. A third of all successful tasks involved at least one instance of frustration. By modeling searcher frustration, search engines can predict the current state of user frustration and decide when to intervene with alternative search strategies to prevent the user from becoming more frustrated, giving up, or switching to another search engine. We present several models to predict frustration using features extracted from query logs and physical sensors. We are able to predict frustration with a mean average precision of 65% from the physical sensors, and 87% from the query log features.
1835459	The good, the bad, and the random: an eye-tracking study of ad quality in web search We investigate how people interact with Web search engine result pages using eye-tracking. While previous research has focused on the visual attention devoted to the 10 organic search results, this paper examines other components of contemporary search engines, such as ads and related searches. We systematically varied the type of task (informational or navigational), the quality of the ads (relevant or irrelevant to the query), and the sequence in which ads of different quality were presented. We measured the effects of these variables on the distribution of visual attention and on task performance. Our results show significant effects of each variable. The amount of visual attention that people devote to organic results depends on both task type and ad quality. The amount of visual attention that people devote to ads depends on their quality, but not the type of task. Interestingly, the sequence and predictability of ad quality is also an important factor in determining how much people attend to ads. When the quality of ads varied randomly from task to task, people paid little attention to the ads, even when they were good. These results further our understanding of how attention devoted to search results is influenced by other page elements, and how previous search experiences influence how people attend to the current page.
1835461	Ranking using multiple document types in desktop search A typical desktop environment contains many document types (email, presentations, web pages, pdfs, etc.) each with different metadata. Predicting which types of documents a user is looking for in the context of a given query is a crucial part of providing effective desktop search. The problem is similar to selecting resources in distributed IR, but there are some important differences. In this paper, we quantify the impact of type prediction in producing a merged ranking for desktop search and introduce a new prediction method that exploits type-specific metadata. In addition, we show that type prediction performance and search effectiveness can be further enhanced by combining existing methods of type prediction using discriminative learning models. Our experiments employ pseudo-desktop collections and a human computation game for acquiring realistic and reusable queries.
1835462	Acquisition of instance attributes via labeled and related instances This paper presents a method for increasing the quality of automatically extracted instance attributes by exploiting weakly-supervised and unsupervised instance relatedness data. This data consists of (a) class labels for instances and (b) distributional similarity scores. The method organizes the text-derived data into a graph, and automatically propagates attributes among related instances, through random walks over the graph. Experiments on various graph topologies illustrate the advantage of the method over both the original attribute lists and a per-class attribute extractor, both in terms of the number of attributes extracted per instance and the accuracy of the top-ranked attributes.
1835463	Relevance and ranking in online dating systems Match-making systems refer to systems where users want to meet other individuals to satisfy some underlying need. Examples of match-making systems include dating services, resume/job bulletin boards, community based question answering, and consumer-to-consumer marketplaces. One fundamental component of a match-making system is the retrieval and ranking of candidate matches for a given user. We present the first in-depth study of information retrieval approaches applied to match-making systems. Specifically, we focus on retrieval for a dating service. This domain offers several unique problems not found in traditional information retrieval tasks. These include two-sided relevance, very subjective relevance, extremely few relevant matches, and structured queries. We propose a machine learned ranking function that makes use of features extracted from the uniquely rich user profiles that consist of both structured and unstructured attributes. An extensive evaluation carried out using data gathered from a real online dating service shows the benefits of our proposed methodology with respect to traditional match-making baseline systems. Our analysis also provides deep insights into the aspects of match-making that are particularly important for producing highly relevant matches.
1835465	Scalability of findability: effective and efficient IR operations in large information networks It is crucial to study basic principles that support adaptive and scalable retrieval functions in large networked environments such as the Web, where information is distributed among dynamic systems. We conducted experiments on decentralized IR operations on various scales of information networks and analyzed effectiveness, efficiency, and scalability of various search methods. Results showed network structure, i.e., how distributed systems connect to one another, is crucial for retrieval performance. Relying on partial indexes of distributed systems, some level of network clustering enabled very efficient and effective discovery of relevant information in large scale networks. For a given network clustering level, search time was well explained by a poly-logarithmic relation to network size (i.e., the number of distributed systems), indicating a high scalability potential for searching in a growing information space. In addition, network clustering only involved local self-organization and required no global control - clustering time remained roughly constant across the various scales of networks.
1835466	Caching search engine results over incremental indices A Web search engine must update its index periodically to incorporate changes to the Web. We argue in this paper that index updates fundamentally impact the design of search engine result caches, a performance-critical component of modern search engines. Index updates lead to the problem of cache invalidation : invalidating cached entries of queries whose results have changed. Naive approaches, such as flushing the entire cache upon every index update, lead to poor performance and in fact, render caching futile when the frequency of updates is high. Solving the invalidation problem efficiently corresponds to predicting accurately which queries will produce different results if re-evaluated, given the actual changes to the index. To obtain this property, we propose a framework for developing invalidation predictors and define metrics to evaluate invalidation schemes. We describe concrete predictors using this framework and compare them against a baseline that uses a cache invalidation scheme based on time-to-live (TTL). Evaluation over Wikipedia documents using a query log from the Yahoo! search engine shows that selective invalidation of cached search results can lower the number of unnecessary query evaluations by as much as 30% compared to a baseline scheme, while returning results of similar freshness. In general, our predictors enable fewer unnecessary invalidations and fewer stale results compared to a TTL-only scheme for similar freshness of results.
1835467	Query forwarding in geographically distributed search engines Query forwarding is an important technique for preserving the result quality in distributed search engines where the index is geographically partitioned over multiple search sites. The key component in query forwarding is the thresholding algorithm by which the forwarding decisions are given. In this paper, we propose a linear-programming-based thresholding algorithm that significantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art in terms of achieved search efficiency values. Moreover, we evaluate a greedy heuristic for partial index replication and investigate the impact of result cache freshness on query forwarding performance. Finally, we present some optimizations that improve the performance further, under certain conditions. We evaluate the proposed techniques by simulations over a real-life setting, using a large query log and a document collection obtained from Yahoo!.
1835468	A joint probabilistic classification model for resource selection Resource selection is an important task in Federated Search to select a small number of most relevant information sources. Current resource selection algorithms such as GlOSS, CORI, ReDDE, Geometric Average and the recent classification-based method focus on the evidence of individual information sources to determine the relevance of available sources. Current algorithms do not model the important relationship information among individual sources. For example, an information source tends to be relevant to a user query if it is similar to another source with high probability of being relevant. This paper proposes a joint probabilistic classification model for resource selection. The model estimates the probability of relevance of information sources in a joint manner by considering both the evidence of individual sources and their relationship. An extensive set of experiments have been conducted on several datasets to demonstrate the advantage of the proposed model.
1835470	Temporal click model for sponsored search Previous studies on search engine click modeling have identified two presentation factors that affect users' behavior: (1) position bias: the same result will get a different number of clicks when displayed in different positions and (2) externalities: the same result might get more clicks when displayed with results of relatively lower quality than when shown with higher quality results. In this paper we focus on analyzing the sequence of user actions to model users' click behavior on sponsored listings shown on the search results page. We first show that temporal click sequences are good indicators of externalities in the advertising domain. We then describe the positional rationality hypothesis to explain both the position bias and the externalities, and based on this hypothesis we further propose the temporal click model (TCM) , a Bayesian framework that is scalable and computationally efficient. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt in the literature to estimate positional bias, externalities and unbiased user-perceived ad quality from user click logs in a combined model. We finally evaluate the proposed model on two real datasets, each containing over 100 million ad impressions obtained from a commercial search engine. The experimental results show that TCM outperforms two other competitive methods at click prediction.
1835471	Freshness matters: in flowers, food, and web authority The collective contributions of billions of users across the globe each day result in an ever-changing web. In verticals like news and real-time search, recency is an obvious significant factor for ranking. However, traditional link-based web ranking algorithms typically run on a single web snapshot without concern for user activities associated with the dynamics of web pages and links. Therefore, a stale page popular many years ago may still achieve a high authority score due to its accumulated in-links. To remedy this situation, we propose a temporal web link-based ranking scheme, which incorporates features from historical author activities. We quantify web page freshness over time from page and in-link activity, and design a web surfer model that incorporates web freshness, based on a temporal web graph composed of multiple web snapshots at different time points. It includes authority propagation among snapshots, enabling link structures at distinct time points to influence each other when estimating web page authority. Experiments on a real-world archival web corpus show our approach improves upon PageRank in both relevance and freshness of the search results.
1835472	The importance of anchor text for ad hoc search revisited It is generally believed that propagated anchor text is very important for effective Web search as offered by the commercial search engines. "Google Bombs" are a notable illustration of this. However, many years of TREC Web retrieval research failed to establish the effectiveness of link evidence for ad hoc retrieval on Web collections. The ultimate resolution to this dilemma was that typical Web search is very different from the traditional ad hoc methodology. So far, however, no one has established why link information, like incoming link degree or anchor text, does not help ad hoc retrieval effectiveness. Several possible explanations were given, including the collections being too small for anchors to be effective, and the density of the link graph being too low. The new TREC 2009 Web Track collection is substantially larger than previous collections and has a dense link graph. Our main finding is that propagated anchor text outperforms full-text retrieval in terms of early precision, and in combination with it, gives an improvement in overall precision. We then analyse the impact of link density and collection size by down-sampling the number of links and the number of pages respectively. Other findings are that, contrary to expectations, (inter-server) link density has little impact on effectiveness, while the size of the collection has a substantial impact on the quantity, quality and effectiveness of anchor text. We also compare the diversity of the search results of anchor text and full-text approaches, which show that anchor text performs significantly better than full-text search and confirm our findings for the ad hoc search task.
1835473	Ready to buy or just browsing?: detecting web searcher goals from interaction data An improved understanding of the relationship between search intent, result quality, and searcher behavior is crucial for improving the effectiveness of web search. While recent progress in user behavior mining has been largely focused on aggregate server-side click logs, we present a new class of search behavior models that also exploit fine-grained user interactions with the search results. We show that mining these interactions, such as mouse movements and scrolling, can enable more effective detection of the user's search goals. Potential applications include automatic search evaluation, improving search ranking, result presentation, and search advertising. We describe extensive experimental evaluation over both controlled user studies, and logs of interaction data collected from hundreds of real users. The results show that our method is more effective than the current state-of-the-art techniques, both for detection of searcher goals, and for an important practical application of predicting ad clicks for a given search session.
1835475	Learning to efficiently rank It has been shown that learning to rank approaches are capable of learning highly effective ranking functions. However, these approaches have mostly ignored the important issue of efficiency. Given that both efficiency and effectiveness are important for real search engines, models that are optimized for effectiveness may not meet the strict efficiency requirements necessary to deploy in a production environment. In this work, we present a unified framework for jointly optimizing effectiveness and efficiency. We propose new metrics that capture the tradeoff between these two competing forces and devise a strategy for automatically learning models that directly optimize the tradeoff metrics. Experiments indicate that models learned in this way provide a good balance between retrieval effectiveness and efficiency. With specific loss functions, learned models converge to familiar existing ones, which demonstrates the generality of our framework. Finally, we show that our approach naturally leads to a reduction in the variance of query execution times, which is important for query load balancing and user satisfaction.
1835476	Ranking for the conversion funnel In contextual advertising advertisers show ads to users so that they will click on them and eventually purchase a product. Optimizing this action sequence, called the conversion funnel, is the ultimate goal of advertising. Advertisers, however, often have very different sub-goals for their ads such as purchase, request for a quote, or simply a site visit. Often an improvement for one advertiser's goal comes at the expense of others. A single ranking function must balance these different goals in order to make an efficient system for all advertisers. We propose a ranking method that globally balances the goals of all advertisers, while simultaneously improving overall performance. Our method has been shown to improve significantly over the baseline in online traffic at a major ad network.
1835477	How good is a span of terms?: exploiting proximity to improve web retrieval Ranking search results is a fundamental problem in information retrieval. In this paper we explore whether the use of proximity and phrase information can improve web retrieval accuracy. We build on existing research by incorporating novel ranking features based on flexible proximity terms with recent state-of-the-art machine learning ranking models. We introduce a method of determining the goodness of a set of proximity terms that takes advantage of the structured nature of web documents, document metadata, and phrasal information from search engine user query logs. We perform experiments on a large real-world Web data collection and show that using the goodness score of flexible proximity terms can improve ranking accuracy over state-of-the-art ranking methods by as much as 13%. We also show that we can improve accuracy on the hardest queries by as much as 9% relative to state-of-the-art approaches.
1835478	Learning to rank only using training data from related domain Like traditional supervised and semi-supervised algorithms, learning to rank for information retrieval requires document annotations provided by domain experts. It is costly to annotate training data for different search domains and tasks. We propose to exploit training data annotated for a related domain to learn to rank retrieved documents in the target domain, in which no labeled data is available. We present a simple yet effective approach based on instance-weighting scheme. Our method first estimates the importance of each related-domain document relative to the target domain. Then heuristics are studied to transform the importance of individual documents to the pairwise weights of document pairs, which can be directly incorporated into the popular ranking algorithms. Due to importance weighting, ranking model trained on related domain is highly adaptable to the data of target domain. Ranking adaptation experiments on LETOR3.0 dataset [27] demonstrate that with a fair amount of related-domain training data, our method significantly outperforms the baseline without weighting, and most of time is not significantly worse than an "ideal" model directly trained on target domain.
1835480	Optimal meta search results clustering By analogy with merging documents rankings, the outputs from multiple search results clustering algorithms can be combined into a single output. In this paper we study the feasibility of meta search results clustering, which has unique features compared to the general meta clustering problem. After showing that the combination of multiple search results clusterings is empirically justified, we cast meta clustering as an optimization problem of an objective function measuring the probabilistic concordance between the clustering combination and the single clusterings. We then show, using an easily computable upper bound on such a function, that a simple stochastic optimization algorithm delivers reasonable approximations of the optimal value very efficiently, and we also provide a method for labeling the generated clusters with the most agreed upon cluster labels. Optimal meta clustering with meta labeling is applied to three description-centric, state-of-the-art search results clustering algorithms. The performance improvement is demonstrated through a range of evaluation techniques (i.e., internal, classification-oriented, and information retrieval-oriented), using suitable test collections of search results with document-level relevance judgments per subtopic.
1835481	Analysis of structural relationships for hierarchical cluster labeling Cluster label quality is crucial for browsing topic hierarchies obtained via document clustering. Intuitively, the hierarchical structure should influence the labeling accuracy. However, most labeling algorithms ignore such structural properties and therefore, the impact of hierarchical structures on the labeling accuracy is yet unclear. In our work we integrate hierarchical information, i.e. sibling and parent-child relations, in the cluster labeling process. We adapt standard labeling approaches, namely Maximum Term Frequency, Jensen-Shannon Divergence, Chi Square Test, and Information Gain, to take use of those relationships and evaluate their impact on 4 different datasets, namely the Open Directory Project, Wikipedia, TREC Ohsumed and the CLEF IP European Patent dataset. We show, that hierarchical relationships can be exploited to increase labeling accuracy especially on high-level nodes.
1835482	On the existence of obstinate results in vector space models The vector space model (VSM) is a popular and widely applied model in information retrieval (IR). VSM creates vector spaces whose dimensionality is usually high (e.g., tens of thousands of terms). This may cause various problems, such as susceptibility to noise and difficulty in capturing the underlying semantic structure, which are commonly recognized as different aspects of the "curse of dimensionality." In this paper, we investigate a novel aspect of the dimensionality curse, which is referred to as hubness and manifested by the tendency of some documents (called hubs) to be included in unexpectedly many search result lists. Hubness may impact VSM considerably since hubs can become obstinate results, irrelevant to a large number of queries, thus harming the performance of an IR system and the experience of its users. We analyze the origins of hubness, showing it is primarily a consequence of high (intrinsic) dimensionality of data, and not a result of other factors such as sparsity and skewness of the distribution of term frequencies. We describe the mechanisms through which hubness emerges by exploring the behavior of similarity measures in high-dimensional vector spaces. Our consideration begins with the classical VSM (tf-idf term weighting and cosine similarity), but the conclusions generalize to more advanced variations, such as Okapi BM25. Moreover, we explain why hubness may not be easily mitigated by dimensionality reduction, and propose a similarity adjustment scheme that takes into account the existence of hubs. Experimental results over real data indicate that significant improvement can be obtained through consideration of hubness.
1835484	Social media recommendation based on people and tags We study personalized item recommendation within an enterprise social media application suite that includes blogs, bookmarks, communities, wikis, and shared files. Recommendations are based on two of the core elements of social media - people and tags. Relationship information among people, tags, and items, is collected and aggregated across different sources within the enterprise. Based on these aggregated relationships, the system recommends items related to people and tags that are related to the user. Each recommended item is accompanied by an explanation that includes the people and tags that led to its recommendation, as well as their relationships with the user and the item. We evaluated our recommender system through an extensive user study. Results show a significantly better interest ratio for the tag-based recommender than for the people-based recommender, and an even better performance for a combined recommender. Tags applied on the user by other people are found to be highly effective in representing that user's topics of interest.
1835485	A network-based model for high-dimensional information filtering The Vector Space Model has been and to a great extent still is the de facto choice for profile representation in content-based Information Filtering. However, user profiles represented as weighted keyword vectors have inherent dimensionality problems. As the number of profile keywords increases, the vector representation becomes ambiguous, due to the exponential increase in the volume of the vector space and in the number of possible keyword combinations. We argue that the complexity and dynamics of Information Filtering require user profile representations which are resilient and resistant to this "curse of dimensionality". A user profile has to be able to incorporate many features and to adapt to a variety of interest changes. We propose an alternative, network-based profile representation that meets these challenging requirements. Experiments show that the network profile representation can more effectively capture additional information about a user's interests and thus achieve significant performance improvements over a vector-based representation comprising the same weighted keywords.
1835486	Temporal diversity in recommender systems Collaborative Filtering (CF) algorithms, used to build web-based recommender systems, are often evaluated in terms of how accurately they predict user ratings. However, current evaluation techniques disregard the fact that users continue to rate items over time : the temporal characteristics of the system's top- N recommendations are not investigated. In particular, there is no means of measuring the extent that the same items are being recommended to users over and over again. In this work, we show that temporal diversity is an important facet of recommender systems, by showing how CF data changes over time and performing a user survey. We then evaluate three CF algorithms from the point of view of the diversity in the sequence of recommendation lists they produce over time. We examine how a number of characteristics of user rating patterns (including profile size and time between rating) affect diversity. We then propose and evaluate set methods that maximise temporal recommendation diversity without extensively penalising accuracy.
1835487	Serendipitous recommendations via innovators To realize services that provide serendipity, this paper assesses the surprise of each user when presented recommendations. We propose a recommendation algorithm that focuses on the search time that, in the absence of any recommendation, each user would need to find a desirable and novel item by himself. Following the hypothesis that the degree of user's surprise is proportional to the estimated search time, we consider both innovators' preferences and trends for identifying items with long estimated search times. To predict which items the target user is likely to purchase in the near future, the candidate items, this algorithm weights each item that innovators have purchased and that reflect one or more current trends; it then lists them in order of decreasing weight. Experiments demonstrate that this algorithm outputs recommendations that offer high user/item coverage, a low Gini coefficient, and long estimated search times, and so offers a high degree of recommendation serendipitousness.
1835489	On statistical analysis and optimization of information retrieval effectiveness metrics This paper presents a new way of thinking for IR metric optimization. It is argued that the optimal ranking problem should be factorized into two distinct yet interrelated stages: the relevance prediction stage and ranking decision stage. During retrieval the relevance of documents is not known a priori, and the joint probability of relevance is used to measure the uncertainty of documents' relevance in the collection as a whole. The resulting optimization objective function in the latter stage is, thus, the expected value of the IR metric with respect to this probability measure of relevance. Through statistically analyzing the expected values of IR metrics under such uncertainty, we discover and explain some interesting properties of IR metrics that have not been known before. Our analysis and optimization framework do not assume a particular (relevance) retrieval model and metric, making it applicable to many existing IR models and metrics. The experiments on one of resulting applications have demonstrated its significance in adapting to various IR metrics.
1835490	Information-based models for ad hoc IR We introduce in this paper the family of information-based models for ad hoc information retrieval. These models draw their inspiration from a long-standing hypothesis in IR, namely the fact that the difference in the behaviors of a word at the document and collection levels brings information on the significance of the word for the document. This hypothesis has been exploited in the 2-Poisson mixture models, in the notion of eliteness in BM25, and more recently in DFR models. We show here that, combined with notions related to burstiness, it can lead to simpler and better models.
1835491	Score distribution models: assumptions, intuition, and robustness to score manipulation Inferring the score distribution of relevant and non-relevant documents is an essential task for many IR applications (e.g. information filtering, recall-oriented IR, meta-search, distributed IR). Modeling score distributions in an accurate manner is the basis of any inference. Thus, numerous score distribution models have been proposed in the literature. Most of the models were proposed on the basis of empirical evidence and goodness-of-fit. In this work, we model score distributions in a rather different, systematic manner. We start with a basic assumption on the distribution of terms in a document. Following the transformations applied on term frequencies by two basic ranking functions, BM25 and Language Models, we derive the distribution of the produced scores for all documents. Then we focus on the relevant documents. We detach our analysis from particular ranking functions. Instead, we consider a model for precision-recall curves, and given this model, we present a general mathematical framework which, given any score distribution for all retrieved documents, produces an analytical formula for the score distribution of relevant documents that is consistent with the precision-recall curves that follow the aforementioned model. In particular, assuming a Gamma distribution for all retrieved documents, we show that the derived distribution for the relevant documents resembles a Gaussian distribution with a heavy right tail.
1835493	Geometric representations for multiple documents Combining multiple documents to represent an information object is well-known as an effective approach for many Information Retrieval tasks. For example, passages can be combined to represent a document for retrieval, document clusters are represented using combinations of the documents they contain, and feedback documents can be combined to represent a query model. Various techniques for combination have been introduced, and among them, representation techniques based on concatenation and the arithmetic mean are frequently used. Some recent work has shown the potential of a new representation technique using the geometric mean. However, these studies lack a theoretical foundation explaining why the geometric mean should have advantages for representing multiple documents. In this paper, we show that the arithmetic mean and the geometric mean are approximations to the center of mass in certain geometries, and show empirically that the geometric mean is closer to the center. Through experiments with two IR tasks, we show the potential benefits for geometric representations, including a geometry-based pseudo-relevance feedback method that outperforms state-of-the-art techniques.
1835494	Using statistical decision theory and relevance models for query-performance prediction We present a novel framework for the query-performance prediction task. That is, estimating the effectiveness of a search performed in response to a query in lack of relevance judgments. Our approach is based on using statistical decision theory for estimating the utility that a document ranking provides with respect to an information need expressed by the query. To address the uncertainty in inferring the information need, we estimate utility by the expected similarity between the given ranking and those induced by relevance models ; the impact of a relevance model is based on its presumed representativeness of the information need. Specific query-performance predictors instantiated from the framework substantially outperform state-of-the-art predictors over five TREC corpora.
1835495	Active learning for ranking through expected loss optimization Learning to rank arises in many information retrieval applications, ranging from Web search engine, online advertising to recommendation system. In learning to rank, the performance of a ranking model is strongly affected by the number of labeled examples in the training set; on the other hand, obtaining labeled examples for training data is very expensive and time-consuming. This presents a great need for the active learning approaches to select most informative examples for ranking learning; however, in the literature there is still very limited work to address active learning for ranking. In this paper, we propose a general active learning framework, Expected Loss Optimization (ELO), for ranking. The ELO framework is applicable to a wide range of ranking functions. Under this framework, we derive a novel algorithm, Expected DCG Loss Optimization (ELO-DCG), to select most informative examples. Furthermore, we investigate both query and document level active learning for raking and propose a two-stage ELO-DCG algorithm which incorporate both query and document selection into active learning. Extensive experiments on real-world Web search data sets have demonstrated great potential and effective-ness of the proposed framework and algorithms.
1835497	Image search by concept map In this paper, we present a novel image search system, image search by concept map . This system enables users to indicate not only what semantic concepts are expected to appear but also how these concepts are spatially distributed in the desired images. To this end, we propose a new image search interface to enable users to formulate a query, called concept map , by intuitively typing textual queries in a blank canvas to indicate the desired spatial positions of the concepts. In the ranking process, by interpreting each textual concept as a set of representative visual instances, the concept map query is translated into a visual instance map , which is then used to evaluate the relevance of the image in the database. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed system.
1835498	Generalized syntactic and semantic models of query reformulation We present a novel approach to query reformulation which combines syntactic and semantic information by means of generalized Levenshtein distance algorithms where the substitution operation costs are based on probabilistic term rewrite functions. We investigate unsupervised, compact and efficient models, and provide empirical evidence of their effectiveness. We further explore a generative model of query reformulation and supervised combination methods providing improved performance at variable computational costs. Among other desirable properties, our similarity measures incorporate information-theoretic interpretations of taxonomic relations such as specification and generalization.
1835499	Evaluating verbose query processing techniques Verbose or long queries are a small but significant part of the query stream in web search, and are common in other applications such as collaborative question answering (CQA). Current search engines perform well with keyword queries but are not, in general, effective for verbose queries. In this paper, we examine query processing techniques which can be applied to verbose queries prior to submission to a search engine in order to improve the search engine's results. We focus on verbose queries that have sentence-like structure, but are not simple "wh-" questions, and assume the search engine is a "black box." We evaluated the output of two search engines using queries from a CQA service and our results show that, among a broad range of techniques, the most effective approach is to simply reduce the length of the query. This can be achieved effectively by removing "stop structure" instead of only stop words. We show that the process of learning and removing stop structure from a query can be effectively automated.
1835501	SED: supervised experimental design and its application to text classification In recent years, active learning methods based on experimental design achieve state-of-the-art performance in text classification applications. Although these methods can exploit the distribution of unlabeled data and support batch selection, they cannot make use of labeled data which often carry useful information for active learning. In this paper, we propose a novel active learning method for text classification, called supervised experimental design (SED), which seamlessly incorporates label information into experimental design. Experimental results show that SED outperforms its counterparts which either discard the label information even when it is available or fail to exploit the distribution of unlabeled data.
1835502	Temporally-aware algorithms for document classification Automatic Document Classification (ADC) is still one of the major information retrieval problems. It usually employs a supervised learning strategy, where we first build a classification model using pre-classified documents and then use this model to classify unseen documents. The majority of supervised algorithms consider that all documents provide equally important information. However, in practice, a document may be considered more or less important to build the classification model according to several factors, such as its timeliness, the venue where it was published in, its authors, among others. In this paper, we are particularly concerned with the impact that temporal effects may have on ADC and how to minimize such impact. In order to deal with these effects, we introduce a temporal weighting function (TWF) and propose a methodology to determine it for document collections. We applied the proposed methodology to ACM-DL and Medline and found that the TWF of both follows a lognormal. We then extend three ADC algorithms (namely kNN, Rocchio and Naïve Bayes) to incorporate the TWF. Experiments showed that the temporally-aware classifiers achieved significant gains, outperforming (or at least matching) state-of-the-art algorithms.
1835503	Multilabel classification with meta-level features Effective learning in multi-label classification (MLC) requires an appropriate level of abstraction for representing the relationship between each instance and multiple categories. Current MLC methods have been focused on learning-to-map from instances to ranked lists of categories in a relatively high-dimensional space. The fine-grained features in such a space may not be sufficiently expressive for characterizing discriminative patterns, and worse, make the model complexity unnecessarily high. This paper proposes an alternative approach by transforming conventional representations of instances and categories into a relatively small set of link-based meta-level features, and leveraging successful learning-to-rank retrieval algorithms (e.g., SVM-MAP) over this reduced feature space. Controlled experiments on multiple benchmark datasets show strong empirical evidence for the strength of the proposed approach, as it significantly outperformed several state-of-the-art methods, including Rank-SVM, ML-kNN and IBLR-ML (Instance-based Logistic Regression for Multi-label Classification) in most cases.
1835505	Estimation of statistical translation models based on mutual information for ad hoc information retrieval As a principled approach to capturing semantic relations of words in information retrieval, statistical translation models have been shown to outperform simple document language models which rely on exact matching of words in the query and documents. A main challenge in applying translation models to ad hoc information retrieval is to estimate a translation model without training data. Existing work has relied on training on synthetic queries generated based on a document collection. However, this method is computationally expensive and does not have a good coverage of query words. In this paper, we propose an alternative way to estimate a translation model based on normalized mutual information between words, which is less computationally expensive and has better coverage of query words than the synthetic query method of estimation. We also propose to regularize estimated translation probabilities to ensure sufficient probability mass for self-translation. Experiment results show that the proposed mutual information-based estimation method is not only more efficient, but also more effective than the synthetic query-based method, and it can be combined with pseudo-relevance feedback to further improve retrieval accuracy. The results also show that the proposed regularization strategy is effective and can improve retrieval accuracy for both synthetic query-based estimation and mutual information-based estimation.
1835506	DivQ : diversification for keyword search over structured databases Keyword queries over structured databases are notoriously ambiguous. No single interpretation of a keyword query can satisfy all users, and multiple interpretations may yield overlapping results. This paper proposes a scheme to balance the relevance and novelty of keyword search results over structured databases. Firstly, we present a probabilistic model which effectively ranks the possible interpretations of a keyword query over structured data. Then, we introduce a scheme to diversify the search results by re-ranking query interpretations, taking into account redundancy of query results. Finally, we propose ?-nDCG-W and WS-recall, an adaptation of ?-nDCG and S-recall metrics, taking into account graded relevance of subtopics. Our evaluation on two real-world datasets demonstrates that search results obtained using the proposed diversification algorithms better characterize possible answers available in the database than the results of the initial relevance ranking.
1835507	Finding support sentences for entities We study the problem of finding sentences that explain the relationship between a named entity and an ad-hoc query, which we refer to as entity support sentences . This is an important sub-problem of entity ranking which, to the best of our knowledge, has not been addressed before. In this paper we give the first formalization of the problem, how it can be evaluated, and present a full evaluation dataset. We propose several methods to rank these sentences, namely retrieval-based, entity-ranking based and position-based. We found that traditional bag-of-words models perform relatively well when there is a match between an entity and a query in a given sentence, but they fail to find a support sentence for a substantial portion of entities. This can be improved by incorporating small windows of context sentences and ranking them appropriately.
1835508	Estimating probabilities for effective data fusion Data Fusion is the combination of a number of independent search results, relating to the same document collection, into a single result to be presented to the user. A number of probabilistic data fusion models have been shown to be effective in empirical studies. These typically attempt to estimate the probability that particular documents will be relevant, based on training data. However, little attempt has been made to gauge how the accuracy of these estimations affect fusion performance. The focus of this paper is twofold: firstly, that accurate estimation of the probability of relevance results in effective data fusion; and secondly, that an effective approximation of this probability can be made based on less training data that has previously been employed. This is based on the observation that the distribution of relevant documents follows a similar pattern in most high-quality result sets. Curve fitting suggests that this can be modelled by a simple function that is less complex than other models that have been proposed. The use of existing IR evaluation metrics is proposed as a substitution for probability calculations. Mean Average Precision is used to demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach, with evaluation results demonstrating competitive performance when compared with related algorithms with more onerous requirements for training data.
1835510	Incorporating post-click behaviors into a click model Much work has attempted to model a user's click-through behavior by mining the click logs. The task is not trivial due to the well-known position bias problem. Some break-throughs have been made: two newly proposed click models, DBN and CCM, addressed this problem and improved document relevance estimation. However, to further improve the estimation, we need a model that can capture more sophisticated user behaviors. In particular, after clicking a search result, a user's behavior (such as the dwell time on the clicked document, and whether there are further clicks on the clicked document) can be highly indicative of the relevance of the document. Unfortunately, such measures have not been incorporated in previous click models. In this paper, we introduce a novel click model, called the post-click click model (PCC), which provides an unbiased estimation of document relevance through leveraging both click behaviors on the search page and post-click behaviors beyond the search page. The PCC model is based on the Bayesian approach, and because of its incremental nature, it is highly scalable to large scale and constantly growing log data. Extensive experimental results illustrate that the proposed method significantly outperforms the state of the art methods merely relying on click logs.
1835511	Interactive retrieval based on faceted feedback Motivated by the commonly used faceted search interface in e-commerce, this paper investigates interactive relevance feedback mechanism based on faceted document metadata. In this mechanism, the system recommends a group of document facet-value pairs, and lets users select relevant ones to restrict the returned documents. We propose four facet-value pair recommendation approaches and two retrieval models that incorporate user feedback on document facets. Evaluated based on user feedback collected through Amazon Mechanical Turk, our experimental results show that the Boolean filtering approach, which is widely used in faceted search in e-commerce, doesn't work well for text document retrieval, due to the incompleteness (low recall) of metadata assignment in semi-structured text documents. Instead, a soft model performs more effectively. The faceted feedback mechanism can also be combined with document-based relevance feedback and pseudo relevance feedback to further improve the retrieval performance.
1835512	A comparison of general vs personalised affective models for the prediction of topical relevance Information retrieval systems face a number of challenges, originating mainly from the semantic gap problem. Implicit feedback techniques have been employed in the past to address many of these issues. Although this was a step towards the right direction, a need to personalise and tailor the search experience to the user-specific needs has become evident. In this study we examine ways of personalising affective models trained on facial expression data. Using personalised data we adapt these models to individual users and compare their performance to a general model. The main goal is to determine whether the behavioural differences of users have an impact on the models' ability to determine topical relevance and if, by personalising them, we can improve their accuracy. For modelling relevance we extract a set of features from the facial expression data and classify them using Support Vector Machines. Our initial evaluation indicates that accounting for individual differences and applying personalisation introduces, in most cases, a noticeable improvement in the models' performance.
1835513	Understanding web browsing behaviors through Weibull analysis of dwell time Dwell time on Web pages has been extensively used for various information retrieval tasks. However, some basic yet important questions have not been sufficiently addressed, eg, what distribution is appropriate to model the distribution of dwell times on a Web page, and furthermore, what the distribution tells us about the underlying browsing behaviors. In this paper, we draw an analogy between abandoning a page during Web browsing and a system failure in reliability analysis, and propose to model the dwell time using the Weibull distribution. Using this distribution provides better goodness-of-fit to real world data, and it uncovers some interesting patterns of user browsing behaviors not previously reported. For example, our analysis reveals that Web browsing in general exhibits a significant "negative aging" phenomenon, which means that some initial screening has to be passed before a page is examined in detail, giving rise to the browsing behavior that we call "screen-and-glean." In addition, we demonstrate that dwell time distributions can be reasonably predicted purely based on low-level page features, which broadens the possible applications of this study to situations where log data may be unavailable.
1835515	Segmentation of multi-sentence questions: towards effective question retrieval in cQA services Existing question retrieval models work relatively well in finding similar questions in community-based question answering (cQA) services. However, they are designed for single-sentence queries or bag-of-word representations, and are not sufficient to handle multi-sentence questions complemented with various contexts. Segmenting questions into parts that are topically related could assist the retrieval system to not only better understand the user's different information needs but also fetch the most appropriate fragments of questions and answers in cQA archive that are relevant to user's query. In this paper, we propose a graph based approach to segmenting multi-sentence questions. The results from user studies show that our segmentation model outperforms traditional systems in question segmentation by over 30% in user's satisfaction. We incorporate the segmentation model into existing cQA question retrieval framework for more targeted question matching, and the empirical evaluation results demonstrate that the segmentation boosts the question retrieval performance by up to 12.93% in Mean Average Precision and 11.72% in Top One Precision. Our model comes with a comprehensive question detector equipped with both lexical and syntactic features.
1835516	Mining the blogosphere for top news stories identification The analysis of query logs from blog search engines show that news-related queries occupy a significant portion of the logs. This raises a interesting research question on whether the blogosphere can be used to identify important news stories. In this paper, we present novel approaches to identify important news story headlines from the blogosphere for a given day. The proposed system consists of two components based on the language model framework, the query likelihood and the news headline prior. For the query likelihood, we propose several approaches to estimate the query language model and the news headline language model. We also suggest several criteria to evaluate the news headline prior that is the prior belief about the importance or newsworthiness of the news headline for a given day. Experimental results show that our system significantly outperforms a baseline system. Specifically, the proposed approach gives 2.62% and 10.19% further increases in MAP and P@5 over the best performing result of the TREC'09 Top Stories Identification Task.
1835517	Proximity-based opinion retrieval Blog post opinion retrieval aims at finding blog posts that are relevant and opinionated about a user's query. In this paper we propose a simple probabilistic model for assigning relevant opinion scores to documents. The key problem is how to capture opinion expressions in the document, that are related to the query topic. Current solutions enrich general opinion lexicons by finding query-specific opinion lexicons using pseudo-relevance feedback on external corpora or the collection itself. In this paper we use a general opinion lexicon and propose using proximity information in order to capture opinion term relatedness to the query. We propose a proximity-based opinion propagation method to calculate the opinion density at each point in a document. The opinion density at the position of a query term in the document can then be considered as the probability of opinion about the query term at that position. The effect of different kernels for capturing the proximity is also discussed. Experimental results on the BLOG06 dataset show that the proposed method provides significant improvement over standard TREC baselines and achieves a 2.5% increase in MAP over the best performing run in the TREC 2008 blog track.
1835518	Evaluating and predicting answer quality in community QA Question answering (QA) helps one go beyond traditional keywords-based querying and retrieve information in more precise form than given by a document or a list of documents. Several community-based QA (CQA) services have emerged allowing information seekers pose their information need as questions and receive answers from their fellow users. A question may receive multiple answers from multiple users and the asker or the community can choose the best answer. While the asker can thus indicate if he was satisfied with the information he received, there is no clear way of evaluating the quality of that information. We present a study to evaluate and predict the quality of an answer in a CQA setting. We chose Yahoo! Answers as such CQA service and selected a small set of questions, each with at least five answers. We asked Amazon Mechanical Turk workers to rate the quality of each answer for a given question based on 13 different criteria. Each answer was rated by five different workers. We then matched their assessments with the actual asker's rating of a given answer. We show that the quality criteria we used faithfully match with asker's perception of a quality answer. We furthered our investigation by extracting various features from questions, answers, and the users who posted them, and training a number of classifiers to select the best answer using those features. We demonstrate a high predictability of our trained models along with the relative merits of each of the features for such prediction. These models support our argument that in case of CQA, contextual information such as a user's profile, can be critical in evaluating and predicting content quality.
1835520	Adaptive near-duplicate detection via similarity learning In this paper, we present a novel near-duplicate document detection method that can easily be tuned for a particular domain. Our method represents each document as a real-valued sparse k -gram vector, where the weights are learned to optimize for a specified similarity function, such as the cosine similarity or the Jaccard coefficient. Near-duplicate documents can be reliably detected through this improved similarity measure. In addition, these vectors can be mapped to a small number of hash-values as document signatures through the locality sensitive hashing scheme for efficient similarity computation. We demonstrate our approach in two target domains: Web news articles and email messages. Our method is not only more accurate than the commonly used methods such as Shingles and I-Match, but also shows consistent improvement across the domains, which is a desired property lacked by existing methods.
1835521	A content based approach for discovering missing anchor text for web search Although anchor text provides very useful information for web search, a large portion of web pages have few or no incoming hyperlinks (anchors), which is known as the anchor text sparsity problem. In this paper, we propose a language modeling based technique for overcoming anchor text sparsity by discovering a web page's plausible missing anchor text from its similar web pages' in-link anchor text. We design experiments with two publicly available TREC web corpora (GOV2 and ClueWeb09) to evaluate different approaches for discovering missing anchor text. Experimental results show that our approach can effectively discover plausible missing anchor terms. We then use the web named page finding task in the TREC Terabyte track to explore the utility of missing anchor text information discovered by our approach for helping retrieval. Experimental results show that our approach can statistically significantly improve retrieval performance, compared with several approaches that only use anchor text aggregated over the web graph.
1835522	Uncovering social spammers: social honeypots + machine learning Web-based social systems enable new community-based opportunities for participants to engage, share, and interact. This community value and related services like search and advertising are threatened by spammers, content polluters, and malware disseminators. In an effort to preserve community value and ensure longterm success, we propose and evaluate a honeypot-based approach for uncovering social spammers in online social systems. Two of the key components of the proposed approach are: (1) The deployment of social honeypots for harvesting deceptive spam profiles from social networking communities; and (2) Statistical analysis of the properties of these spam profiles for creating spam classifiers to actively filter out existing and new spammers. We describe the conceptual framework and design considerations of the proposed approach, and we present concrete observations from the deployment of social honeypots in MySpace and Twitter. We find that the deployed social honeypots identify social spammers with low false positive rates and that the harvested spam data contains signals that are strongly correlated with observable profile features (e.g., content, friend information, posting patterns, etc.). Based on these profile features, we develop machine learning based classifiers for identifying previously unknown spammers with high precision and a low rate of false positives.
1835524	Studying trailfinding algorithms for enhanced web search Search engines return ranked lists of Web pages in response to queries. These pages are starting points for post-query navigation, but may be insufficient for search tasks involving multiple steps. Search trails mined from toolbar logs start with a query and contain pages visited by one user during post-query navigation. Implicit endorsements from many trails can enhance result ranking. Rather than using trails solely to improve ranking, it may also be worth providing trail information directly to users. In this paper, we quantify the benefit that users currently obtain from trail-following and compare different methods for finding the best trail for a given query and each top-ranked result. We compare the relevance, topic coverage, topic diversity, and utility of trails selected using different methods, and break out findings by factors such as query type and origin relevance. Our findings demonstrate value in trails, highlight interesting differences in the performance of trailfinding algorithms, and show we can find best-trails for a query that outperform the trails most users follow. Findings have implications for enhancing Web information seeking using trails.
1835525	Context-aware ranking in web search The context of a search query often provides a search engine meaningful hints for answering the current query better. Previous studies on context-aware search were either focused on the development of context models or limited to a relatively small scale investigation under a controlled laboratory setting. Particularly, about context-aware ranking for Web search, the following two critical problems are largely remained unsolved. First, how can we take advantage of different types of contexts in ranking? Second, how can we integrate context information into a ranking model? In this paper, we tackle the above two essential problems analytically and empirically. We develop different ranking principles for different types of contexts. Moreover, we adopt a learning-to-rank approach and integrate the ranking principles into a state-of-the-art ranking model by encoding the context information as features of the model. We empirically test our approach using a large search log data set obtained from a major commercial search engine. Our evaluation uses both human judgments and implicit user click data. The experimental results clearly show that our context-aware ranking approach improves the ranking of a commercial search engine which ignores context information. Furthermore, our method outperforms a baseline method which considers context information in ranking.
1835526	Collecting high quality overlapping labels at low cost This paper studies quality of human labels used to train search engines' rankers. Our specific focus is performance improvements obtained by using overlapping relevance labels, which is by collecting multiple human judgments for each training sample. The paper explores whether, when, and for which samples one should obtain overlapping training labels, as well as how many labels per sample are needed. The proposed selective labeling scheme collects additional labels only for a subset of training samples, specifically for those that are labeled relevant by a judge. Our experiments show that this labeling scheme improves the NDCG of two Web search rankers on several real-world test sets, with a low labeling overhead of around 1.4 labels per sample. This labeling scheme also outperforms several methods of using overlapping labels, such as simple k-overlap, majority vote, the highest labels, etc. Finally, the paper presents a study of how many overlapping labels are needed to get the best improvement in retrieval accuracy.
1835528	Multi-style language model for web scale information retrieval Web documents are typically associated with many text streams, including the body, the title and the URL that are determined by the authors, and the anchor text or search queries used by others to refer to the documents. Through a systematic large scale analysis on their cross entropy, we show that these text streams appear to be composed in different language styles, and hence warrant respective language models to properly describe their properties. We propose a language modeling approach to Web document retrieval in which each document is characterized by a mixture model with components corresponding to the various text streams associated with the document. Immediate issues for such a mixture model arise as all the text streams are not always present for the documents, and they do not share the same lexicon, making it challenging to properly combine the statistics from the mixture components. To address these issues, we introduce an 'open-vocabulary' smoothing technique so that all the component language models have the same cardinality and their scores can simply be linearly combined. To ensure that the approach can cope with Web scale applications, the model training algorithm is designed to require no labeled data and can be fully automated with few heuristics and no empirical parameter tunings. The evaluation on Web document ranking tasks shows that the component language models indeed have varying degrees of capabilities as predicted by the cross-entropy analysis, and the combined mixture model outperforms the state-of-the-art BM25F based system.
1835529	Combining coregularization and consensus-based self-training for multilingual text categorization We investigate the problem of learning document classifiers in a multilingual setting, from collections where labels are only partially available. We address this problem in the framework of multiview learning, where different languages correspond to different views of the same document, combined with semi-supervised learning in order to benefit from unlabeled documents. We rely on two techniques, coregularization and consensus-based self-training, that combine multiview and semi-supervised learning in different ways. Our approach trains different monolingual classifiers on each of the views, such that the classifiers' decisions over a set of unlabeled examples are in agreement as much as possible, and iteratively labels new examples from another unlabeled training set based on a consensus across language-specific classifiers. We derive a boosting-based training algorithm for this task, and analyze the impact of the number of views on the semi-supervised learning results on a multilingual extension of the Reuters RCV1/RCV2 corpus using five different languages. Our experiments show that coregularization and consensus-based self-training are complementary and that their combination is especially effective in the interesting and very common situation where there are few views (languages) and few labeled documents available.
1835530	Towards subjectifying text clustering Although it is common practice to produce only a single clustering of a dataset, in many cases text documents can be clustered along different dimensions. Unfortunately, not only do traditional text clustering algorithms fail to produce multiple clusterings of a dataset, the only clustering they produce may not be the one that the user desires. In this paper, we propose a simple active clustering algorithm that is capable of producing multiple clusterings of the same data according to user interest. In comparison to previous work on feedback-oriented clustering, the amount of user feedback required by our algorithm is minimal. In fact, the feedback turns out to be as simple as a cursory look at a list of words. Experimental results are very promising: our system is able to generate clusterings along the user-specified dimensions with reasonable accuracies on several challenging text classification tasks, thus providing suggestive evidence that our approach is viable.
1835532	EUSUM: extracting easy-to-understand english summaries for non-native readers In this paper we investigate a novel and important problem in multi-document summarization, i.e., how to extract an easy-to-understand English summary for non-native readers. Existing summarization systems extract the same kind of English summaries from English news documents for both native and non-native readers. However, the non-native readers have different English reading skills because they have different English education and learning backgrounds. An English summary which can be easily understood by native readers may be hardly understood by non-native readers. We propose to add the dimension of reading easiness or difficulty to multi-document summarization, and the proposed EUSUM system can produce easy-to-understand summaries according to the English reading skills of the readers. The sentence-level reading easiness (or difficulty) is predicted by using the SVM regression method. And the reading easiness score of each sentence is then incorporated into the summarization process. Empirical evaluation and user study have been performed and the results demonstrate that the EUSUM system can produce more easy-to-understand summaries for non-native readers than existing summarization systems, with very little sacrifice of the summary's informativeness.
1835533	Visual summarization of web pages Visual summarization is a attractive new scheme to summarize web pages, which can help achieve a more friendly user experience in search and re-finding tasks by allowing users quickly get the idea of what the web page is about and helping users recall the visited web page. In this paper, we perform a careful study on the recently proposed visual summarization approaches, including the thumbnail of the web page snapshot, the internal image in the web page which is representative of the content in the page, and the visual snippet which is a synthesized image based on the internal image, the title, and the logo found in the web page. Moreover, since the internal image based summarization approach hardly works when the representative internal images are unavailable, we propose a new strategy, which retrieves the representative image from the external to summarize the web page. The experimental results suggest that the various summarization approaches have respective advantages on different types of web pages. While internal images and thumbnails can provide a reliable summarization on web pages with dominant images and web pages with simple structure respectively, the external images are regarded as a useful information to complement the internal images and are demonstrated very useful in helping users understanding new web pages . The visual snippet performs well on the re-finding tasks since it incorporates the title and logo which are advantageous on identifying the visited web pages.
1835534	Learning more powerful test statistics for click-based retrieval evaluation Interleaving experiments are an attractive methodology for evaluating retrieval functions through implicit feedback. Designed as a blind and unbiased test for eliciting a preference between two retrieval functions, an interleaved ranking of the results of two retrieval functions is presented to the users. It is then observed whether the users click more on results from one retrieval function or the other. While it was shown that such interleaving experiments reliably identify the better of the two retrieval functions, the naive approach of counting all clicks equally leads to a suboptimal test. We present new methods for learning how to score different types of clicks so that the resulting test statistic optimizes the statistical power of the experiment. This can lead to substantial savings in the amount of data required for reaching a target confidence level. Our methods are evaluated on an operational search engine over a collection of scientific articles.
1835536	Query similarity by projecting the query-flow graph Defining a measure of similarity between queries is an interesting and difficult problem. A reliable query-similarity measure can be used in a variety of applications such as query recommendation, query expansion, and advertising. In this paper, we exploit the information present in query logs in order to develop a measure of semantic similarity between queries. Our approach relies on the concept of the query-flow graph. The query-flow graph aggregates query reformulations from many users: nodes in the graph represent queries, and two queries are connected if they are likely to appear as part of the same search goal. Our query similarity measure is obtained by projecting the graph (or appropriate subgraphs of it) on a low-dimensional Euclidean space. Our experiments show that the measure we obtain captures a notion of semantic similarity between queries and it is useful for diversifying query recommendations.
1835537	The demographics of web search How does the web search behavior of "rich" and "poor" people differ? Do men and women tend to click on difffferent results for the same query? What are some queries almost exclusively issued by African Americans? These are some of the questions we address in this study. Our research combines three data sources: the query log of a major US-based web search engine, profile information provided by 28 million of its users (birth year, gender and ZIP code), and US-census information including detailed demographic information aggregated at the level of ZIP code. Through this combination we can annotate each query with, e.g. the average per-capita income in the ZIP code it originated from. Though conceptually simple, this combination immediately creates a powerful user modeling tool. The main contributions of this work are the following. First, we provide a demographic description of a large sample of search engine users in the US and show that it agrees well with the distribution of the US population. Second, we describe how different segments of the population differ in their search behavior, e.g. with respect to the queries they formulate or the URLs they click. Third, we explore applications of our methodology to improve web search relevance and to provide better query suggestions. These results enable a wide range of applications including improving web search and advertising where, for instance, targeted advertisements for "family vacations" could be adapted to the (expected) income.
1835538	A user behavior model for average precision and its generalization to graded judgments We explore a set of hypothesis on user behavior that are potentially at the origin of the (Mean) Average Precision (AP) metric. This allows us to propose a more realistic version of AP where users click non-deterministically on relevant documents and where the number of relevant documents in the collection needs not be known in advance. We then depart from the assumption that a document is either relevant or irrelevant and we use instead relevance judgment similar to editorial labels used for Discounted Cumulated Gain (DCG). We assume that clicked documents provide users with a certain level of "utility" and that a user ends a search when she gathered enough utility. Based on the query logs of a commercial search engine we show how to evaluate the utility associated with a label from the record of past user interactions with the search engine and we show how the two different user models can be evaluated based on their ability to predict accurately future clicks. Finally, based on these user models, we propose a measure that captures the relative quality of two rankings.
1835540	The effect of assessor error on IR system evaluation Recent efforts in test collection building have focused on scaling back the number of necessary relevance judgments and then scaling up the number of search topics. Since the largest source of variation in a Cranfield-style experiment comes from the topics, this is a reasonable approach. However, as topic set sizes grow, and researchers look to crowdsourcing and Amazon's Mechanical Turk to collect relevance judgments, we are faced with issues of quality control. This paper examines the robustness of the TREC Million Query track methods when some assessors make significant and systematic errors. We find that while averages are robust, assessor errors can have a large effect on system rankings.
1835541	Reusable test collections through experimental design Portable, reusable test collections are a vital part of research and development in information retrieval. Reusability is difficult to assess, however. The standard approach--simulating judgment collection when groups of systems are held out, then evaluating those held-out systems--only works when there is a large set of relevance judgments to draw on during the simulation. As test collections adapt to larger and larger corpora, it becomes less and less likely that there will be sufficient judgments for such simulation experiments. Thus we propose a methodology for information retrieval experimentation that collects evidence for or against the reusability of a test collection while judgments are being made. Using this methodology along with the appropriate statistical analyses, researchers will be able to estimate the reusability of their test collections while building them and implement "course corrections" if the collection does not seem to be achieving desired levels of reusability. We show the robustness of our design to inherent sources of variance, and provide a description of an actual implementation of the framework for creating a large test collection.
1835542	Do user preferences and evaluation measures line up? This paper presents results comparing user preference for search engine rankings with measures of effectiveness computed from a test collection. It establishes that preferences and evaluation measures correlate: systems measured as better on a test collection are preferred by users. This correlation is established for both "conventional web retrieval" and for retrieval that emphasizes diverse results. The nDCG measure is found to correlate best with user preferences compared to a selection of other well known measures. Unlike previous studies in this area, this examination involved a large population of users, gathered through crowd sourcing, exposed to a wide range of retrieval systems, test collections and search tasks. Reasons for user preferences were also gathered and analyzed. The work revealed a number of new results, but also showed that there is much scope for future work refining effectiveness measures to better capture user preferences.
1835544	Estimating advertisability of tail queries for sponsored search Sponsored search is one of the major sources of revenue for search engines on the World Wide Web. It has been observed that while showing ads for every query maximizes short-term revenue, irrelevant ads lead to poor user experience and less revenue in the long-term. Hence, it is in search engines' interest to place ads only for queries that are likely to attract ad-clicks. Many algorithms for estimating query advertisability exist in literature, but most of these methods have been proposed for and tested on the frequent or "head" queries. Since query frequencies on search engine are known to be distributed as a power-law, this leaves a huge fraction of the queries uncovered. In this paper we focus on the more challenging problem of estimating query advertisability for infrequent or "tail" queries. These require fundamentally different methods than head queries: for e.g., tail queries are almost all unique and require the estimation method to be online and inexpensive. We show that previously proposed methods do not apply to tail queries, and when modified for our scenario they do not work well. Further, we give a simple, yet effective, approach, which estimates query advertisability using only the words present in the queries. We evaluate our approach on a real-world dataset consisting of search engine queries and user clicks. Our results show that our simple approach outperforms a more complex one based on regularized regression.
1835545	Exploring reductions for long web queries Long queries form a difficult, but increasingly important segment for web search engines. Query reduction, a technique for dropping unnecessary query terms from long queries, improves performance of ad-hoc retrieval on TREC collections. Also, it has great potential for improving long web queries (upto 25% improvement in NDCG@5). However, query reduction on the web is hampered by the lack of accurate query performance predictors and the constraints imposed by search engine architectures and ranking algorithms. In this paper, we present query reduction techniques for long web queries that leverage effective and efficient query performance predictors. We propose three learning formulations that combine these predictors to perform automatic query reduction. These formulations enable trading of average improvements for the number of queries impacted, and enable easy integration into the search engine's architecture for rank-time query reduction. Experiments on a large collection of long queries issued to a commercial search engine show that the proposed techniques significantly outperform baselines, with more than 12% improvement in NDCG@5 in the impacted set of queries. Extension to the formulations such as result interleaving further improves results. We find that the proposed techniques deliver consistent retrieval gains where it matters most: poorly performing long web queries.
1835546	Positional relevance model for pseudo-relevance feedback Pseudo-relevance feedback is an effective technique for improving retrieval results. Traditional feedback algorithms use a whole feedback document as a unit to extract words for query expansion, which is not optimal as a document may cover several different topics and thus contain much irrelevant information. In this paper, we study how to effectively select from feedback documents those words that are focused on the query topic based on positions of terms in feedback documents. We propose a positional relevance model (PRM) to address this problem in a unified probabilistic way. The proposed PRM is an extension of the relevance model to exploit term positions and proximity so as to assign more weights to words closer to query words based on the intuition that words closer to query words are more likely to be related to the query topic. We develop two methods to estimate PRM based on different sampling processes. Experiment results on two large retrieval datasets show that the proposed PRM is effective and robust for pseudo-relevance feedback, significantly outperforming the relevance model in both document-based feedback and passage-based feedback.
1835548	Assessing the scenic route: measuring the value of search trails in web logs Search trails mined from browser or toolbar logs comprise queries and the post-query pages that users visit. Implicit endorsements from many trails can be useful for search result ranking, where the presence of a page on a trail increases its query relevance. Follow-ing a search trail requires user effort, yet little is known about the benefit that users obtain from this activity versus, say, sticking with the clicked search result or jumping directly to the destination page at the end of the trail. In this paper, we present a log-based study estimating the user value of trail following. We compare the relevance, topic coverage, topic diversity, novelty, and utility of full trails over that provided by sub-trails, trail origins (landing pages), and trail destinations (pages where trails end). Our findings demonstrate significant value to users in following trails, especially for certain query types. The findings have implications for the design of search systems, including trail recommendation systems that display trails on search result pages.
1835549	Human performance and retrieval precision revisited Several studies have found that the Cranfield approach to evaluation can report significant performance differences between retrieval systems for which little to no performance difference is found for humans completing tasks with these systems. We revisit the relationship between precision and performance by measuring human performance on tightly controlled search tasks and with user interfaces offering limited interaction. We find that human performance and retrieval precision are strongly related. We also find that users change their relevance judging behavior based on the precision of the results. This change in behavior coupled with the well-known lack of perfect inter-assessor agreement can reduce the measured performance gains predicted by increased precision.
1835550	Extending average precision to graded relevance judgments Evaluation metrics play a critical role both in the context of comparative evaluation of the performance of retrieval systems and in the context of learning-to-rank (LTR) as objective functions to be optimized. Many different evaluation metrics have been proposed in the IR literature, with average precision (AP) being the dominant one due a number of desirable properties it possesses. However, most of these measures, including average precision, do not incorporate graded relevance. In this work, we propose a new measure of retrieval effectiveness, the Graded Average Precision (GAP). GAP generalizes average precision to the case of multi-graded relevance and inherits all the desirable characteristics of AP: it has a nice probabilistic interpretation, it approximates the area under a graded precision-recall curve and it can be justified in terms of a simple but moderately plausible user model. We then evaluate GAP in terms of its informativeness and discriminative power. Finally, we show that GAP can reliably be used as an objective metric in learning to rank by illustrating that optimizing for GAP using SoftRank and LambdaRank leads to better performing ranking functions than the ones constructed by algorithms tuned to optimize for AP or NDCG even when using AP or NDCG as the test metrics.
1835551	PRES: a score metric for evaluating recall-oriented information retrieval applications Information retrieval (IR) evaluation scores are generally designed to measure the effectiveness with which relevant documents are identified and retrieved. Many scores have been proposed for this purpose over the years. These have primarily focused on aspects of precision and recall, and while these are often discussed with equal importance, in practice most attention has been given to precision focused metrics. Even for recall-oriented IR tasks of growing importance, such as patent retrieval, these precision based scores remain the primary evaluation measures. Our study examines different evaluation measures for a recall-oriented patent retrieval task and demonstrates the limitations of the current scores in comparing different IR systems for this task. We introduce PRES, a novel evaluation metric for this type of application taking account of recall and the user's search effort. The behaviour of PRES is demonstrated on 48 runs from the CLEF-IP 2009 patent retrieval track. A full analysis of the performance of PRES shows its suitability for measuring the retrieval effectiveness of systems from a recall focused perspective taking into account the user's expected search effort.
1835553	Content-enriched classifier for web video classification With the explosive growth of online videos, automatic real-time categorization of Web videos plays a key role for organizing, browsing and retrieving the huge amount of videos on the Web. Previous work shows that, in addition to text features, content features of videos are also useful for Web video classification. Unfortunately, extracting content features is computationally prohibitive for real-time video classification. In this paper we propose a novel video classification framework that is able to exploit both content and text features for video classification while avoiding the expensive computation of extracting content features at classification time. The main idea of our approach is to utilize the content features extracted from training data to enrich the text based semantic kernels, yielding content-enriched semantic kernels. The content-enriched semantic kernels enable to utilize both content and text features for classifying new videos without extracting their content features. The experimental results show that our approach significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art video classification methods.
1835554	Robust audio identification for MP3 popular music Audio identification via fingerprint has been an active research field with wide applications for years. Many technical papers were published and commercial software systems were also employed. However, most of these previously reported methods work on the raw audio format in spite of the fact that nowadays compressed format audio, especially MP3 music, has grown into the dominant way to store on personal computers and transmit on the Internet. It would be interesting if a compressed unknown audio fragment is able to be directly recognized from the database without the fussy and time-consuming decompression-identification-recompression procedure. So far, very few algorithms run directly in the compressed domain for music information retrieval, and most of them take advantage of MDCT coefficients or derived energy type of features. As a first attempt, we propose in this paper utilizing compressed-domain spectral entropy as the audio feature to implement a novel audio fingerprinting algorithm. The compressed songs stored in a music database and the possibly distorted compressed query excerpts are first partially decompressed to obtain the MDCT coefficients as the intermediate result. Then by grouping granules into longer blocks, remapping the MDCT coefficients into 192 new frequency lines to unify the frequency distribution of long and short windows, and defining 9 new subbands which cover the main frequency bandwidth of popular songs in accordance with the scale-factor bands of short windows, we calculate the spectral entropy of all consecutive blocks and come to the final fingerprint sequence by means of magnitude relationship modeling. Experiments show that such fingerprints exhibit strong robustness against various audio signal distortions like recompression, noise interference, echo addition, equalization, band-pass filtering, pitch shifting, and slight time-scale modification etc. For 5s-long query examples which might be severely degraded, an average top-five retrieval precision rate of more than 90% can be obtained in our test data set composed of 1822 popular songs.
1835555	Effective music tagging through advanced statistical modeling Music information retrieval (MIR) holds great promise as a technology for managing large music archives. One of the key components of MIR that has been actively researched into is music tagging. While significant progress has been achieved, most of the existing systems still adopt a simple classification approach, and apply machine learning classifiers directly on low level acoustic features. Consequently, they suffer the shortcomings of (1) poor accuracy, (2) lack of comprehensive evaluation results and the associated analysis based on large scale datasets, and (3) incomplete content representation, arising from the lack of multimodal and temporal information integration. In this paper, we introduce a novel system called MMTagger that effectively integrates both multimodal and temporal information in the representation of music signal. The carefully designed multilayer architecture of the proposed classification framework seamlessly combines Multiple Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) and Support Vector Machine (SVM) into a single framework. The structure preserves more discriminative information, leading to more accurate and robust tagging. Experiment results obtained with two large music collections highlight the various advantages of our multilayer framework over state of the art techniques.
1835556	Properties of optimally weighted data fusion in CBMIR Content-Based Multimedia Information Retrieval (CBMIR) systems which leverage multiple retrieval experts ( E n ) often employ a weighting scheme when combining expert results through data fusion. Typically however a query will comprise multiple query images ( I m ) leading to potentially N × M weights to be assigned. Because of the large number of potential weights, existing approaches impose a hierarchy for data fusion, such as uniformly combining query image results from a single retrieval expert into a single list and then weighting the results of each expert. In this paper we will demonstrate that this approach is sub-optimal and leads to the poor state of CBMIR performance in benchmarking evaluations. We utilize an optimization method known as Coordinate Ascent to discover the optimal set of weights (| E n | ? | I m |) which demonstrates a dramatic difference between known results and the theoretical maximum. We find that imposing common combinatorial hierarchies for data fusion will half the optimal performance that can be achieved. By examining the optimal weight sets at the topic level, we observe that approximately 15% of the weights (from set | E n | ? | I m |) for any given query, are assigned 70%-82% of the total weight mass for that topic. Furthermore we discover that the ideal distribution of weights follows a log-normal distribution. We find that we can achieve up to 88% of the performance of fully optimized query using just these 15% of the weights. Our investigation was conducted on TRECVID evaluations 2003 to 2007 inclusive and ImageCLEFPhoto 2007, totalling 181 search topics optimized over a combined collection size of 661,213 images and 1,594 topic images.
1835558	To translate or not to translate? Query translation is an important task in cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) aiming to translate queries into languages used in documents. The purpose of this paper is to investigate the necessity of translating query terms, which might differ from one term to another. Some untranslated terms cause irreparable performance drop while others do not. We propose an approach to estimate the translation probability of a query term, which helps decide if it should be translated or not. The approach learns regression and classification models based on a rich set of linguistic and statistical properties of the term. Experiments on NTCIR-4 and NTCIR-5 English-Chinese CLIR tasks demonstrate that the proposed approach can significantly improve CLIR performance. An in-depth analysis is also provided for discussing the impact of untranslated out-of-vocabulary (OOV) query terms and translation quality of non-OOV query terms on CLIR performance.
1835559	Multilingual PRF: english lends a helping hand In this paper, we present a novel approach to Pseudo-Relevance Feedback (PRF) called Multilingual PRF (MultiPRF). The key idea is to harness multilinguality. Given a query in a language, we take the help of another language to ameliorate the well known problems of PRF, viz. (a) The expansion terms from PRF are primarily based on co-occurrence relationships with query terms, and thus other terms which are lexically and semantically related, such as morphological variants and synonyms, are not explicitly captured, and (b) PRF is quite sensitive to the quality of the initially retrieved top k documents and is thus not robust. In MultiPRF, given a query in language L1, it is translated into language L2 and PRF is performed on a collection in language L2 and the resultant feedback model is translated from L2 back into L1. The final feedback model is obtained by combining the translated model with the original feedback model of the query in L1. Experiments were performed on standard CLEF collections in languages with widely differing characteristics, viz., French, German, Finnish and Hungarian with English as the assisting language. We observe that MultiPRF outperforms PRF and is more robust with consistent and significant improvements in the above widely differing languages. A thorough analysis of the results reveal that the second language helps in obtaining both co-occurrence based conceptual terms as well as lexically and semantically related terms. Additionally, the use of the second language collection reduces the sensitivity to performance of initial retrieval, thereby making it more robust.
1835560	Comparing the sensitivity of information retrieval metrics Information retrieval effectiveness is usually evaluated using measures such as Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG), Mean Average Precision (MAP) and Precision at some cutoff (Precision@k) on a set of judged queries. Recent research has suggested an alternative, evaluating information retrieval systems based on user behavior. Particularly promising are experiments that interleave two rankings and track user clicks. According to a recent study, interleaving experiments can identify large differences in retrieval effectiveness with much better reliability than other click-based methods. We study interleaving in more detail, comparing it with traditional measures in terms of reliability, sensitivity and agreement. To detect very small differences in retrieval effectiveness, a reliable outcome with standard metrics requires about 5,000 judged queries, and this is about as reliable as interleaving with 50,000 user impressions. Amongst the traditional measures, NDCG has the strongest correlation with interleaving. Finally, we present some new forms of analysis, including an approach to enhance interleaving sensitivity.
1835562	Efficient partial-duplicate detection based on sequence matching With the ever-increasing growth of the Internet, numerous copies of documents become serious problem for search engine, opinion mining and many other web applications. Since partial-duplicates only contain a small piece of text taken from other sources and most existing near-duplicate detection approaches focus on document level, partial duplicates can not be dealt with well. In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm to realize the partial-duplicate detection task. Besides the similarities between documents, our proposed algorithm can simultaneously locate the duplicated parts. The main idea is to divide the partial-duplicate detection task into two subtasks: sentence level near-duplicate detection and sequence matching. For evaluation, we compare the proposed method with other approaches on both English and Chinese web collections. Experimental results appear to support that our proposed method is effectively and efficiently to detect both partial-duplicates on large web collections.
1835563	Discriminative models of integrating document evidence and document-candidate associations for expert search Generative models such as statistical language modeling have been widely studied in the task of expert search to model the relationship between experts and their expertise indicated in supporting documents. On the other hand, discriminative models have received little attention in expert search research, although they have been shown to outperform generative models in many other information retrieval and machine learning applications. In this paper, we propose a principled relevance-based discriminative learning framework for expert search and derive specific discriminative models from the framework. Compared with the state-of-the-art language models for expert search, the proposed research can naturally integrate various document evidence and document-candidate associations into a single model without extra modeling assumptions or effort. An extensive set of experiments have been conducted on two TREC Enterprise track corpora (i.e., W3C and CERC) to demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed framework.
1835564	Vertical selection in the presence of unlabeled verticals Vertical aggregation is the task of incorporating results from specialized search engines or verticals (e.g., images, video, news) into Web search results. Vertical selection is the subtask of deciding, given a query, which verticals, if any, are relevant. State of the art approaches use machine learned models to predict which verticals are relevant to a query. When trained using a large set of labeled data, a machine learned vertical selection model outperforms baselines which require no training data. Unfortunately, whenever a new vertical is introduced, a costly new set of editorial data must be gathered. In this paper, we propose methods for reusing training data from a set of existing (source) verticals to learn a predictive model for a new (target) vertical. We study methods for learning robust, portable, and adaptive cross-vertical models. Experiments show the need to focus on different types of features when maximizing portability (the ability for a single model to make accurate predictions across multiple verticals) than when maximizing adaptability (the ability for a single model to make accurate predictions for a specific vertical). We demonstrate the efficacy of our methods through extensive experimentation for 11 verticals
1835566	iCollaborate: harvesting value from enterprise web usage We are in a phase of 'Participatory Web' in which users add value' to the information on the web by publishing, tagging and sharing. The Participatory Web has enormous potential for an enterprise because unlike the users of the internet an enterprise is a community that shares common goals, assumptions, vocabulary and interest and has reliable user identification and mutual trust along with a central governance and incentives to collaborate. Everyday, the employees of an organization locate content relevant to their work on the web. Finding this information takes time, expertise and creativity, which costs an organization money. That is, the web pages employees find are knowledge assets owned by the enterprise. This investment in web-based knowledge assets is lost every time the enterprise fails to capture and reuse them. iCollaborate is tooled to capture user's web interaction, persist and analyze it, and feed that interaction back into the community - the enterprise.
1835567	Exploring desktop resources based on user activity analysis Relocation in personal desktop resources is an interesting and promising research topic. This demonstration illustrates a new perspective in exploring desktop resources to help users re-find expected data resources more effectively. Different from existing works, our prototype OrientSpace has two features: automatically extract and maintain user tasks to support task-based exploration, and support vague search by exploiting associations between desktop resources.
1835568	A data-parallel toolkit for information retrieval An abstract is not available.
1835569	Finding and filtering information for children Children face several challenges when using information access systems. These include formulating queries, judging the relevance of documents, and focusing attention on interface cues, such as query suggestions, while typing queries. It has also been shown that children want a personalised Web experience and prefer content presented to them that matches their long-term entertainment and education needs. To this end, we have developed an interaction-based information filtering system to address these challenges.
1835570	Automatic content linking: speech-based just-in-time retrieval for multimedia archives The Automatic Content Linking Device monitors a conversation and uses automatically recognized words to retrieve documents that are of potential use to the participants. The document set includes project related reports or emails, transcribed snippets of past meetings, and websites. Retrieval results are displayed at regular intervals.
1835571	Si-Fi: interactive similar item finder An abstract is not available.
1835572	Suggesting related topics in web search Suggesting topics that are related to user's goal or interest is very important in web search. However, search engines today focus on suggesting mainly reformulations and lexical variants of the query mined from query logs. In this demonstration, we show a system that can suggest related topics for a query based on the top search results for the query. It can help users in exploring the topics related to their information need. The topic suggestion system can be integrated with any search engine or it can be easily installed on the client machine as a browser plugin.
1835573	Agro-Gator: digesting experts, logs, and N-grams As research includes more and larger user studies, a significant problem lies in combining the many types of data files into a single table suitable for analysis by common statistical tools. We have developed a data-aggregation tool that combines user logs, expert scoring, and task/session attributes. The tool also integrates the n-grams derived from a given sequence of actions in the user tasks. The tool provides a GUI for quick and easy configuration.
1835574	Medical search and classification tools for recommendation their patients' records from paper to computer, enormous amounts of electronic medical records (EMR) have become available for medical research. Some of the EMR data are well-structured, for which traditional database management systems can provide effective retrieval and management functions. However, most of the EMR data (such as progress notes and consultation letters) are in free text formats. How to effectively and efficiently retrieve and discover useful information from the vast amount of such semi-structured data is a challenge faced by medical professionals. Without proper tools, the rich information and knowledge buried in the medical health records are unavailable for clinical research and decision-making. The objective of our research is to develop text analytics tools that are capable of parsing clinical medical data so that predefined search subjects that correspond to a list of medical diagnoses can be extracted. In addition to this particular core functionality, it is also desired that several important assets should be present within the text-analytics tools in order to improve its overall ability to be used as recommendation tools. In this research, we work with research scientists at the Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences (ICES) in Toronto and examine a number of techniques for structuring and processing free text documents in order to effectively and efficiently search and analyze vast amount of medical records. We implement several powerful medical text analytics tools for clinical data searching and classification. For data classification, our tools sort through a great amount of patientrecords to identify the likelihood of a patient having myocardial infarction (MI) or hypertension (HTN), and classify the patients accordingly. Our tools can also identify the likelihood of a patient being a smoker, previous smoker or non-smoker based on the text data of medical records.
1835575	Multilingual people search People Search is an important search service with multiple applications (eg. looking up a friend on Facebook, finding colleagues in corporate email directories etc). With the proportion of non-English users on a steady rise, people search services are being used by users from diverse language demographics. Users may issue name search queries against these directories in languages other than the language of the directory, in which case the present monolingual name search approaches will not work. In this demo, we present a Multilingual People Search system capable of performing fast name lookups on large user directories, independent of the directory language. Our system has applications in areas like social networking, enterprise search and email address book search.
1835577	Closed form solution of similarity algorithms Algorithms defining similarities between objects of an information network are important of many IR tasks. SimRank algorithm and its variations are popularly used in many applications. Many fast algorithms are also developed. In this note, we first reformulate them as random walks on the network and express them using forward and backward transition probably in a matrix form. Second, we show that P-Rank (SimRank is only the special case of P-Rank) has a unique solution of eeT when decay factor c is equal to 1. We also show that SimFusion algorithm is a special case of P-Rank algorithm and prove that the similarity matrix of SimFusion is the product of PageRank vector. Our experiments on the web datasets show that for P-Rank the decay factor c doesn't seriously affect the similarity accuracy and accuracy of P-Rank is also higher than SimFusion and SimRank.
1835578	Blog snippets: a comments-biased approach In the last years Blog Search has been a new exciting task in Information Retrieval. The presence of user generated information with valuable opinions makes this field of huge interest. In this poster we use part of this information, the readers' comments, to improve the quality of post snippets with the objective of enhancing the user access to the relevant posts in a result list. We propose a simple method for snippet generation based on sentence selection, using the comments to guide the selection process. We evaluated our approach with standard TREC methodology in the Blogs06 collection showing significant improvements up to 32% in terms of MAP over the baseline.
1835579	SIGIR: scholar vs. scholars' interpretation Google Scholar allows researchers to search through a free and extensive source of information on scientific publications. In this paper we show that within the limited context of SIGIR proceedings, the rankings created by Google Scholar are both significantly different and very negatively correlated with those of domain experts.
1835580	Effective query expansion with the resistance distance based term similarity metric In this paper, we define a new query expansion method that relies on term similarity metric derived from the electric resistance network. This proposed metric lets us measure the mutual relevancy in between terms and between their groups. This paper shows how to define this metric automatically from the document collection, and then apply it in query expansion for document retrieval tasks. The experiments show this method can be used to find good expansion terms of search queries and improve document retrieval performance on two TREC genomic track datasets.
1835581	A method to automatically construct a user knowledge model in a forum environment Having a mechanism to validate the opinions and to identify experts in a forum could help people to favor one opinion against another. To achieve this, some solutions have already been introduced, including social network analysis techniques and reputation modeling. However, neither of these solutions considers the users' knowledge to identify an expert. In this paper, a novel method is proposed which estimates users' knowledge based on the forum itself, and identifies the possible areas of expertise associated with each user.
1835582	Learning to rank audience for behavioral targeting Behavioral Targeting (BT) is a recent trend of online advertising market. However, some classical BT solutions, which predefine the user segments for BT ads delivery, are sometimes too large to numerous long-tail advertisers, who cannot afford to buy any large user segments due to budget consideration. In this extend abstract, we propose to rank users according to their probability of interest in an advertisement in a learning to rank framework. We propose to extract three types of features between user behaviors such as search queries, ad click history etc and the ad content provided by advertisers. Through this way, a long-tail advertiser can select a certain number of top ranked users as needed from the user segments for ads delivery. In the experiments, we use a 30-days' ad click-through log from a commercial search engine. The results show that using our proposed features under a learning to rank framework, we can well rank users who potentially interest in an advertisement.
1835583	Multi-modal query expansion for web video search Query expansion is an effective method to improve the usability of multimedia search. Most existing multimedia search engines are able to automatically expand a list of textual query terms based on text search techniques, which can be called textual query expansion (TQE). However, the annotations (title and tag) around web videos are generally noisier for text-only query expansion and search matching. In this paper, we propose a novel multi-modal query expansion (MMQE) framework for web video search to solve the issue. Compared with traditional methods, MMQE provides a more intuitive query suggestion by transforming tex-tual query to visual presentation based on visual clustering. Paral-lel to this, MMQE can enhance the process of search matching with strong pertinence of intent-specific query by joining textual, visual and social cues from both metadata and content of videos. Experimental results on real web videos from YouTube demon-strate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
1835584	Context aware query classification using dynamic query window and relationship net The context of the user queries, preceding a given query, is utilized to improve the effectiveness of query classification. Earlier efforts utilize fixed number of preceding queries to derive such context information. We propose and evaluate an approach (DQW) that identifies a set of unambiguous preceding queries in a dynamically determined window to utilize in classifying an ambiguous query. Furthermore, utilizing a relationship-net (R-net) that represents relationships among known categories, we improve the classification effectiveness for those ambiguous queries whose predicted category in this relationship-net is related to the category of a query within the window. Our results indicate that the hybrid approach (DQW+R-net) statistically significantly improves the Conditional Random Field (CRF) query classification approach when static query windowing and hierarchical taxonomy are used (SQW+Tax), in terms of precision (10.8%), recall (13.2%), and F1 measure (11.9%).
1835585	Predicting query potential for personalization, classification or regression? The goal of predicting query potential for personalization is to determine which queries can benefit from personalization. In this paper, we investigate which kind of strategy is better for this task: classification or regression. We quantify the potential benefits of personalizing search results using two implicit click-based measures: Click entropy and Potential@N. Meanwhile, queries are characterized by query features and history features. Then we build C-SVM classification model and epsilon-SVM regression model respectively according to these two measures. The experimental results show that the classification model is a better choice for predicting query potential for personalization.
1835586	The impact of collection size on relevance and diversity It has been observed that precision increases with collection size. One explanation could be that the redundancy of information increases, making it easier to find multiple documents conveying the same information. Arguably, a user has no interest in reading the same information over and over, but would prefer a set of diverse search results covering multiple aspects of the search topic. In this paper, we look at the impact of the collection size on the relevance and diversity of retrieval results by down-sampling the collection. Our main finding is that we can we can improve diversity by randomly removing the majority of the results--this will significantly reduce the redundancy and only marginally affect the subtopic coverage.
1835587	Spatial relationships in visual graph modeling for image categorization In this paper, a language model adapted to graph-based representation of image content is proposed and assessed. The full indexing and retrieval processes are evaluated on two different image corpora. We show that using the spatial relationships with graph model has a positive impact on the results of standard Language Model (LM) and outperforms the baseline built upon the current state-of-the-art Support Vector Machine (SVM) classification method.
1835588	A picture is worth a thousand search results: finding child-oriented multimedia results with collAge We present a simple and effective approach to complement search results for children's web queries with child-oriented multimedia results, such as coloring pages and music sheets. Our approach determines appropriate media types for a query by searching Google's database of frequent queries for co-occurrences of a query's terms (e.g., "dinosaurs") with preselected multimedia terms (e.g., "coloring pages"). We show the effectiveness of this approach through an online user evaluation.
1835589	Query recovery of short user queries: on query expansion with stopwords User queries to search engines are observed to predominantly contain inflected content words but lack stopwords and capitalization. Thus, they often resemble natural language queries after case folding and stopword removal. Query recovery aims to generate a linguistically well-formed query from a given user query as input to provide natural language processing tasks and cross-language information retrieval (CLIR). The evaluation of query translation shows that translation scores (NIST and BLEU) decrease after case folding, stopword removal, and stemming. A baseline method for query recovery reconstructs capitalization and stopwords, which considerably increases translation scores and significantly increases mean average precision for a standard CLIR task.
1835590	Where to start filtering redundancy?: a cluster-based approach Novelty detection is a difficult task, particularly at sentence level. Most of the approaches proposed in the past consist of re-ordering all sentences following their novelty scores. However, this re-ordering has usually little value. In fact, a naive baseline with no novelty detection capabilities yields often better performance than any state-of-the-art novelty detection mechanism. We argue here that this is because current methods initiate too early the novelty detection process. When few sentences have been seen, it is unlikely that the user is negatively affected by redundancy. Therefore, re-ordering the first sentences may be harmful in terms of performance. We propose here a query-dependent method based on cluster analysis to determine where we must start filtering redundancy.
1835591	Flickr group recommendation based on tensor decomposition Over the last few years, Flickr has gained massive popularity and groups in Flickr are one of the main ways for photo diffusion. However, the huge volume of groups brings troubles for users to decide which group to choose. In this paper, we propose a tensor decomposition-based group recommendation model to suggest groups to users which can help tackle this problem. The proposed model measures the latent associations between users and groups by considering both semantic tags and social relations. Experimental results show the usefulness of the proposed model.
1835592	Robust music identification based on low-order zernike moment in the compressed domain In this paper, we devise a novel robust music identification algorithm utilizing compressed-domain audio Zernike moment adapted from image processing techniques as the pivotal feature. Audio fingerprint derived from this feature exhibits strong robustness against various audio signal distortions including the challenging pitch shifting and time-scale modification. Experiments show that in our test dataset composed of 1822 popular songs, a 5s music query example which might have been severely corrupted is still sufficient to identify its original near-duplicate copy, with more than 90% top five precision rate.
1835593	Estimating interference in the QPRP for subtopic retrieval The Quantum Probability Ranking Principle (QPRP) has been recently proposed, and accounts for interdependent document relevance when ranking. However, to be instantiated, the QPRP requires a method to approximate the "interference" between two documents. In this poster, we empirically evaluate a number of different methods of approximation on two TREC test collections for subtopic retrieval. It is shown that these approximations can lead to significantly better retrieval performance over the state of the art.
1835594	Query quality: user ratings and system predictions Numerous studies have examined the ability of query performance prediction methods to estimate a query's quality for system effectiveness measures (such as average precision). However, little work has explored the relationship between these methods and user ratings of query quality. In this poster, we report the findings from an empirical study conducted on the TREC ClueWeb09 corpus, where we compared and contrasted user ratings of query quality against a range of query performance prediction methods. Given a set of queries, it is shown that user ratings of query quality correlate to both system effectiveness measures and a number of pre-retrieval predictors.
1835595	Multi-field learning for email spam filtering Through the investigation of email document structure, this paper proposes a multi-field learning (MFL) framework, which breaks the multi-field document Text Classification (TC) problem into several sub-document TC problems, and makes the final category prediction by weighted linear combination of several sub-document TC results. Many previous statistical TC algorithms can be easily rebuilt within the MFL framework via turning binary result to spamminess score, which is a real number and reflects the likelihood that the classified email is spam. The experimental results in the TREC spam track show that the performances of many TC algorithms can be improved within the MFL framework.
1835596	Language-model-based pro/con classification of political text Given a controversial political topic, our aim is to classify documents debating the topic into pro or con. Our approach extracts topic related terms, pro/con related terms, and pairs of topic related and pro/con related terms and uses them as the basis for constructing a pro query and a con query. Following standard LM techniques, a document is classified as pro or con depending on which of the query likelihoods is higher for the document. Our experiments show that our approach is promising.
1835597	Intent boundary detection in search query logs Identifying intent boundary in search query logs is important for learning users' behaviors and applying their experiences. Time-based, query-based, and cluster-based approaches are proposed. Experiments show that the integration of intent clusters and dynamic time model performs the best.
1835598	Semi-supervised spam filtering using aggressive consistency learning A graph based semi-supervised method for email spam filtering, based on the local and global consistency method, yields low error rates with very few labeled examples. The motivating application of this method is spam filters with access to very few labeled message. For example, during the initial deployment of a spam filter, only a handful of labeled examples are available but unlabeled examples are plentiful. We demonstrate the performance of our approach on TREC 2007 and CEAS 2008 email corpora. Our results compare favorably with the best-known methods, using as few as just two labeled examples: one spam and one non-spam.
1835599	Entropy descriptor for image classification This paper presents a novel entropy descriptor in the sense of geometric manifolds. With this descriptor, entropy cycles can be easily designed for image classification. Minimizing this entropy leads to an optimal entropy cycle where images are connected in the semantic order. During classification, the training step is to find an optimal entropy cycle in each class. In the test step, an unknown image is grouped into a class if the entropy increase as the result of inserting the image into the cycle of this class is relatively least. The proposed approach can generalize well on difficult image classification problems where images with same objects are taken in multiple views. Experimental results show that this entropy descriptor performs well in image classification and has potential in the image-based modeling retrieval.
1835600	Has portfolio theory got any principles? Recently, Portfolio Theory (PT) has been proposed for Information Retrieval. However, under non-trivial conditions PT violates the original Probability Ranking Principle (PRP). In this poster, we shall explore whether PT upholds a different ranking principle based on Quantum Theory, i.e. the Quantum Probability Ranking Principle (QPRP), and examine the relationship between this new model and the new ranking principle. We make a significant contribution to the theoretical development of PT and show that under certain circumstances PT upholds the QPRP, and thus guarantees an optimal ranking according to the QPRP. A practical implication of this finding is that the parameters of PT can be automatically estimated via the QPRP, instead of resorting to extensive parameter tuning.
1835601	Re-examination on lam% in spam filtering Logistic average misclassification percentage (lam%) is a key measure for the spam filtering performance. This paper demonstrates that a spam filter can achieve a perfect 0.00% in lam%, the minimal value in theory, by simply setting a biased threshold during the classifier modeling. At the same time, the overall classification performance reaches only a low accuracy. The result suggests that the role of lam% for spam filtering evaluation should be re-examined.
1835602	Unsupervised estimation of dirichlet smoothing parameters A standard approach for determining a Dirichlet smoothing parameter is to choose a value which maximizes a retrieval performance metric using training data consisting of queries and relevance judgments. There are, however, situations where training data does not exist or the queries and relevance judgments do not reflect typical user information needs for the application. We propose an unsupervised approach for estimating a Dirichlet smoothing parameter based on collection statistics. We show empirically that this approach can suggest a plausible Dirichlet smoothing parameter value in cases where relevance judgments cannot be used.
1835603	Comparing click-through data to purchase decisions for retrieval evaluation Traditional retrieval evaluation uses explicit relevance judgments which are expensive to collect. Relevance assessments inferred from implicit feedback such as click-through data can be collected inexpensively, but may be less reliable. We compare assessments derived from click-through data to another source of implicit feedback that we assume to be highly indicative of relevance: purchase decisions. Evaluating retrieval runs based on a log of an audio-visual archive, we find agreement between system rankings and purchase decisions to be surprisingly high.
1835604	Personalize web search results with user's location We build a probabilistic model to identify implicit local intent queries, and leverage user's physical location to improve Web search results for these queries. Evaluation on commercial search engine shows significant improvement on search relevance and user experience.
1835605	Using search session context for named entity recognition in query Recently, the problem of Named Entity Recognition in Query (NERQ) is attracting increasingly attention in the field of information retrieval. However, the lack of context information in short queries makes some classical named entity recognition (NER) algorithms fail. In this paper, we propose to utilize the search session information before a query as its context to address this limitation. We propose to improve two classical NER solutions by utilizing the search session context, which are known as Conditional Random Field (CRF) based solution and Topic Model based solution respectively. In both approaches, the relationship between current focused query and previous queries in the same session are used to extract novel context aware features. Experimental results on real user search session data show that the NERQ algorithms using search session context performs significantly better than the algorithms using only information of the short queries.
1835606	Evaluating whole-page relevance Whole page relevance defines how well the surface-level repre-sentation of all elements on a search result page and the corre-sponding holistic attributes of the presentation respond to users' information needs. We introduce a method for evaluating the whole-page relevance of Web search engine results pages. Our key contribution is that the method allows us to investigate aspects of component relevance that are difficult or impossible to judge in isolation. Such aspects include component-level information redundancy and cross-component coherence. The method we describe complements traditional document relevance measurement, affords comparative relevance assessment across multiple search engines, and facilitates the study of important factors such as brand presentation effects and component-level quality.
1835607	Predicting escalations of medical queries based on web page structure and content Logs of users' searches on Web health topics can exhibit signs of escalation of medical concerns, where initial queries about common symptoms are followed by queries about serious, rare illnesses. We present an effort to predict such escalations based on the structure and content of pages encountered during medical search sessions. We construct and then characterize the performance of classifiers that predict whether an escalation will occur after the access of a page. Our findings have implications for ranking algorithms and the design of search interfaces.
1835608	Contextual video advertising system using scene information inferred from video scripts With the rise of digital video consumptions, contextual video advertising demands have been increasing in recent years. This paper presents a novel video advertising system that selects relevant text ads for a given video scene by automatically identifying the situation of the scene. The situation information of video scenes is inferred from available video scripts. Experimental results show that the use of the situation information enhances the accuracy of ad retrieval for video scenes. The proposed system represents one of the pioneer video advertising systems using contextual information obtained from video scripts.
1835609	Cross-language retrieval using link-based language models We propose a cross-language retrieval model that is solely based on Wikipedia as a training corpus. The main contributions of our work are: 1. A translation model based on linked text in Wikipedia and a term weighting method associated with it. 2. A combination scheme to interpolate the link translation model with retrieval based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation. On the CLEF 2000 data we achieve improvement with respect to the best German-English system at the bilingual track (non-significant) and improvement against a baseline based on machine translation (significant).
1835610	Search system requirements of patent analysts Patent search tasks are difficult and challenging, often requiring expert patent analysts to spend hours, even days, sourcing relevant information. To aid them in this process, analysts use Information Retrieval systems and tools to cope with their retrieval tasks. With the growing interest in patent search, it is important to determine their requirements and expectations of the tools and systems that they employ. In this poster, we report a subset of the findings of a survey of patent analysts conducted to elicit their search requirements.
1835611	On performance of topical opinion retrieval We investigate the effectiveness of both the standard evaluation measures and the opinion component for topical opinion retrieval. We analyze how relevance is affected by opinions by perturbing relevance ranking by the outcomes of opinion-only classifiers built by Monte Carlo sampling. Topical opinion rankings are obtained by either re-ranking or filtering the documents of a first-pass retrieval of topic relevance. The proposed approach establishes the correlation between the accuracy and the precision of the classifier and the performance of the topical opinion retrieval. Among other results, it is possible to assess the effectiveness of the opinion component by comparing the effectiveness of the relevance baseline with the topical opinion ranking.
1835612	Improving sentence retrieval with an importance prior The retrieval of sentences is a core task within Information Retrieval. In this poster we employ a Language Model that incorporates a prior which encodes the importance of sentences within the retrieval model. Then, in a set of comprehensive experiments using the TREC Novelty Tracks, we show that including this prior substantially improves retrieval effectiveness, and significantly outperforms the current state of the art in sentence retrieval.
1835613	Focused access to sparsely and densely relevant documents XML retrieval provides a focused access to the relevant content of documents. However, in evaluation, full document retrieval has appeared competitive to focused XML retrieval. We analyze the density of relevance in documents, and show that in sparsely relevant documents focused retrieval performs better, whereas in densely relevant documents the performance of focused and document retrieval is equal.
1835614	Text document clustering with metric learning One reason for semi-supervised clustering fail to deliver satisfactory performance in document clustering is that the transformed optimization problem could have many candidate solutions, but existing methods provide no mechanism to select a suitable one from all those candidates. This paper alleviates this problem by posing the same task as a soft-constrained optimization problem, and introduces the salient degree measure as an information guide to control the searching of an optimal solution. Experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed method in the improvement of the performance, especially when the amount of priori domain knowledge is limited.
1835615	Predicting query performance on the web Predicting the performance of web queries is useful for several applications such as automatic query reformulation and automatic spell correction. In the web environment, accurate performance prediction is challenging because measures such as clarity that work well on homogeneous TREC-like collections, are not as effective and are often expensive to compute. We present Rank-time Performance Prediction (RAPP), an effective and efficient approach for online performance prediction on the web. RAPP uses retrieval scores, and aggregates of the rank-time features used by the document- ranking algorithm to train regressors for query performance prediction. On a set of over 12,000 queries sampled from the query logs of a major search engine, RAPP achieves a linear correlation of 0.78 with DCG@5, and 0.52 with NDCG@5. Analysis of prediction accuracy shows that hard queries are easier to identify while easy queries are harder to identify.
1835616	Hashtag retrieval in a microblogging environment Microblog services let users broadcast brief textual messages to people who "follow" their activity. Often these posts contain terms called hashtags, markers of a post's meaning, audience, etc. This poster treats the following problem: given a user's stated topical interest, retrieve useful hashtags from microblog posts. Our premise is that a user interested in topic x might like to find hashtags that are often applied to posts about x. This poster proposes a language modeling approach to hashtag retrieval. The main contribution is a novel method of relevance feedback based on hashtags. The approach is tested on a corpus of data harvested from twitter.com.
1835617	Crowdsourcing a wikipedia vandalism corpus We report on the construction of the PAN Wikipedia vandalism corpus, PAN-WVC-10, using Amazon's Mechanical Turk. The corpus compiles 32452 edits on 28468 Wikipedia articles, among which 2391 vandalism edits have been identified. 753 human annotators cast a total of 193022 votes on the edits, so that each edit was reviewed by at least 3 annotators, whereas the achieved level of agreement was analyzed in order to label an edit as "regular" or "vandalism." The corpus is available free of charge.
1835618	MEMOSE: search engine for emotions in multimedia documents The MEMOSE (Media Emotion Search) system is a specialized search engine for fundamental emotions in all kinds of emotional-laden documents. We apply a controlled vocabulary for basic emotions, a slide control to adjust the intensities of the emotions and the approach of broad folksonomies. The paper describes the indexing and the retrieval tool of MEMOSE and results from its evaluation.
1835619	Hierarchical pitman-yor language model for information retrieval In this paper, we propose a new application of Bayesian language model based on Pitman-Yor process for information retrieval. This model is a generalization of the Dirichlet distribution. The Pitman-Yor process creates a power-law distribution which is one of the statistical properties of word frequency in natural language. Our experiments on Robust04 indicate that this model improves the document retrieval performance compared to the commonly used Dirichlet prior and absolute discounting smoothing techniques.
1835620	Entity summarization of news articles In this paper we study the problem of entity retrieval for news applications and the importance of the news trail history (i.e. past related articles) to determine the relevant entities in current articles. We construct a novel entity-labeled corpus with temporal information out of the TREC 2004 Novelty collection. We develop and evaluate several features, and show that an article's history can be exploited to improve its summarization.
1835621	The power of naive query segmentation We address the problem of query segmentation: given a keyword query submitted to a search engine, the task is to group the keywords into phrases, if possible. Previous approaches to the problem achieve good segmentation performance on a gold standard but are fairly intricate. Our method is easy to implement and comes with a comparable accuracy.
1835622	Clicked phrase document expansion for sponsored search ad retrieval We present a document expansion approach that uses Conditional Random Field (CRF) segmentation to automatically extract salient phrases from ad titles. We then supplement the ad document with query segments that are probable translations of the document phrases, as learned from a large commercial search engine's click logs. Our approach provides a significant improvement in DCG and interpolated precision and recall on a large set of human labeled query-ad pairs.
1835623	Three web-based heuristics to determine a person's or institution's country of origin We propose three heuristics to determine the country of origin of a person or institution via text-based IE from the Web. We evaluate all methods on a collection of music artists and bands, and show that some heuristics outperform earlier work on the topic by terms of coverage, while retaining similar precision levels. We further investigate an extension using country-specific synonym lists.
1835624	Exploiting click-through data for entity retrieval We present an approach for answering Entity Retrieval queries using click-through information in query log data from a commercial Web search engine. We compare results using click graphs and session graphs and present an evaluation test set making use of Wikipedia "List of" pages.
1835625	Feature subset non-negative matrix factorization and its applications to document understanding In this paper, we propose feature subset non-negative matrix factorization (NMF), which is an unsupervised approach to simultaneously cluster data points and select important features. We apply our proposed approach to various document understanding tasks including document clustering, summarization, and visualization. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach for these tasks.
1835626	Learning to rank query reformulations Query reformulation techniques based on query logs have recently proven to be effective for web queries. However, when initial queries have reasonably good quality, these techniques are often not reliable enough to identify the helpful reformulations among the suggested queries. In this paper, we show that we can use as few as two features to rerank a list of reformulated queries, or expanded queries to be specific, generated by a log-based query reformulation technique. Our results across five TREC collections suggest that there are consistently more useful reformulations in the first two positions in the new ranked list than there were initially, which leads to statistically significant improvements in retrieval effectiveness.
1835627	Many are better than one: improving multi-document summarization via weighted consensus Given a collection of documents, various multi-document summarization methods have been proposed to generate a short summary. However, few studies have been reported on aggregating different summarization methods to possibly generate better summarization results. We propose a weighted consensus summarization method to combine the results from single summarization systems. Experimental results on DUC2004 data sets demonstrate the performance improvement by aggregating multiple summarization systems, and our proposed weighted consensus summarization method outperforms other combination methods.
1835628	Exploring the use of labels to shortcut search trails Search trails comprising queries and Web page views are created as searchers engage in information-seeking activity online. During known-item search (where the objective may be to locate a target Web page), searchers may waste valuable time repeatedly reformulating queries as they attempt to locate an elusive page. Trail shortcuts help users bypass unnecessary queries and get them to their desired destination faster. In this poster we present a comparative oracle study of techniques to shortcut sub-optimal search trails using labels derived from social bookmarking, anchor text, query logs, and a human-computation game. We show that labels can help users reach target pages efficiently, that the label sources perform differently, and that shortcuts are potentially most useful when the target is challenging to find.
1835629	Investigating the suboptimality and instability of pseudo-relevance feedback Although Pseudo-Relevance Feedback (PRF) techniques improve average retrieval performance at the price of high variance, not much is known about their optimality and the reasons for their instability. In this work, we study more than 800 topics from several test collections including the TREC Robust Track and show that PRF techniques are highly suboptimal, i.e. they do not make the fullest utilization of pseudo-relevant documents and under-perform. A careful selection of expansion terms from the pseudo-relevant document with the help of an oracle can actually improve retrieval performance dramatically (by > 60%). Further, we show that instability in PRF techniques is mainly due to wrong selection of expansion terms from the pseudo-relevant documents. Our findings emphasize the need to revisit the problem of term selection to make a break through in PRF.
1835630	From fusion to re-ranking: a semantic approach A number of works have shown that the aggregation of several Information Retrieval (IR) systems works better than each system working individually. Nevertheless, early investigation in the context of CLEF Robust-WSD task, in which semantics is involved, showed that aggregation strategies achieve only slight improvements. This paper proposes a re-ranking approach which relies on inter-document similarities. The novelty of our idea is twofold: the output of a semantic based IR system is exploited to re-weigh documents and a new strategy based on Semantic Vectors is used to compute inter-document similarities.
1835631	High precision opinion retrieval using sentiment-relevance flows Opinion retrieval involves the measuring of opinion score of a document about the given topic. We propose a new method, namely sentiment-relevance flow, that naturally unifies the topic relevance and the opinionated nature of a document. Experiments conducted over a large-scaled Web corpus show that the proposed approach improves performance of opinion retrieval in terms of precision at top ranks.
1835632	Ontology-enriched multi-document summarization in disaster management In this poster, we propose a novel document summarization approach named Ontology-enriched Multi-Document Summarization(OMS) for utilizing background knowledge to improve summarization results. OMS first maps the sentences of input documents onto an ontology, then links the given query to a specific node in the ontology, and finally extracts the summary from the sentences in the subtree rooted at the query node. By using the domain-related ontology, OMS can better capture the semantic relevance between the query and the sentences, and thus lead to better summarization results. As a byproduct, the final summary generated by OMS can be represented as a tree showing the hierarchical relationships of the extracted sentences. Evaluation results on the collection of press releases by Miami-Dade County Department of Emergency Management during Hurricane Wilma in 2005 demonstrate the efficacy of OMS.
1835633	Multi-view clustering of multilingual documents We propose a new multi-view clustering method which uses clustering results obtained on each view as a voting pattern in order to construct a new set of multi-view clusters. Our experiments on a multilingual corpus of documents show that performance increases significantly over simple concatenation and another multi-view clustering technique.
1835634	A stack decoder approach to approximate string matching We present a new efficient algorithm for top-N match retrieval of sequential patterns. Our approach is based on an incremental approximation of the string edit distance using index information and a stack based search. Our approach produces hypotheses with average edit error of about 0.29 edits from the optimal SED result while using only about 5% of the CPU computation.
1835635	Late fusion of compact composite descriptors for retrieval from heterogeneous image databases Compact composite descriptors (CCDs) are global image features, capturing more than one types of information at the same time in a very compact representation. Their quality has so far been evaluated in retrieval from several homogeneous databases containing images of only the type that each CCD is intended for, and has been found better than other descriptors in the literature such as the MPEG-7 descriptors. In this study, we consider heterogeneous databases and investigate query-time fusion techniques for CCDs. The results show that fusion is beneficial, even with simple score normalization and combination methods due to the compatibility of the score distributions produced by the CCDs considered.
1835636	Inferring user intent in web search by exploiting social annotations In this paper, we present a folksonomy-based approach for implicit user intent extraction during a Web search process. We present a number of result re-ranking techniques based on this representation that can be applied to any Web search engine. We perform a user experiment the results of which indicate that this type of representation is better at context extraction than using the actual textual content of the document.
1835637	Query term ranking based on dependency parsing of verbose queries Query term ranking approaches are used to select effective terms from a verbose query by ranking terms. Features used for query term ranking and selection in previous work do not consider grammatical relationships between terms. To address this issue, we use syntactic features extracted from dependency parsing results of verbose queries. We also modify the method for measuring the effectiveness of query terms for query term ranking.
1835638	A ranking approach to target detection for automatic link generation We focus on the task of target detection in automatic link generation with Wikipedia, i.e., given an N-gram in a snippet of text, find the relevant Wikipedia concepts that explain or provide background knowledge for it. We formulate the task as a ranking problem and investigate the effectiveness of learning to rank approaches and of the features that we use to rank the target concepts for a given N-gram. Our experiments show that learning to rank approaches outperform traditional binary classification approaches. Also, our proposed features are effective both in binary classification and learning to rank settings.
1835639	Probabilistic latent maximal marginal relevance Diversity has been heavily motivated in the information retrieval literature as an objective criterion for result sets in search and recommender systems. Perhaps one of the most well-known and most used algorithms for result set diversification is that of Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR). In this paper, we show that while MMR is somewhat ad-hoc and motivated from a purely pragmatic perspective, we can derive a more principled variant via probabilistic inference in a latent variable graphical model. This novel derivation presents a formal probabilistic latent view of MMR (PLMMR) that (a) removes the need to manually balance relevance and diversity parameters, (b) shows that specific definitions of relevance and diversity metrics appropriate to MMR emerge naturally, and (c) formally derives variants of latent semantic indexing (LSI) similarity metrics for use in PLMMR. Empirically, PLMMR outperforms MMR with standard term frequency based similarity and diversity metrics since PLMMR maximizes latent diversity in the results.
1835640	Using local precision to compare search engines in consumer health information retrieval We have conducted a user study to evaluate several generalist and health-specific search engines on health information retrieval. Users evaluated the relevance of the top 30 documents of 4 search engines in two different health information needs. We introduce the concepts of local and global precision and analyze how they affect the evaluation. Results show that Google surpasses the precision of all other engines, including the health-specific ones, and that precision differs with the type of clinical question and its medical specialty.
1835641	multi Searcher: can we support people to get information from text they can't read or understand? The goal of the proposed tool multi Searcher is to answer this research question: can we expect people to be able to get information from text in languages they can not read or understand? The proposed tool multi Searcher provides users with interactive contextual information that describes the translation in the user's own language so that the user has a certain degree of confidence about the translation. Therefore, the user is considered as an integral part of the retrieval process. The tool provides possibilities to interactively select relevant terms from contextual information in order to improve the translation and thus improve the cross lingual information retrieval (CLIR) process.
1835642	Linking wikipedia to the web We investigate the task of finding links from Wikipedia pages to external web pages. Such external links significantly extend the information in Wikipedia with information from the Web at large, while retaining the encyclopedic organization of Wikipedia. We use a language modeling approach to create a full-text and anchor text runs, and experiment with different document priors. In addition we explore whether social bookmarking site Delicious can be exploited to further improve our performance. We have constructed a test collection of 53 topics, which are Wikipedia pages on different entities. Our findings are that the anchor text index is a very effective method to retrieve home pages. Url class and anchor text length priors and their combination leads to the best results. Using Delicious on its own does not lead to very good results, but it does contain valuable information. Combining the best anchor text run and the Delicious run leads to further improvements.
1835643	Short text classification in twitter to improve information filtering In microblogging services such as Twitter, the users may become overwhelmed by the raw data. One solution to this problem is the classification of short text messages. As short texts do not provide sufficient word occurrences, traditional classification methods such as "Bag-Of-Words" have limitations. To address this problem, we propose to use a small set of domain-specific features extracted from the author's profile and text. The proposed approach effectively classifies the text to a predefined set of generic classes such as News, Events, Opinions, Deals, and Private Messages.
1835644	A framework for BM25F-based XML retrieval We evaluate a framework for BM25F-based XML element retrieval. The framework gathers contextual information associated with each XML element into an associated field, which we call a characteristic field . The contents of the element and the contents of the characteristic field are then treated as distinct fields for BM25F weighting purposes. Evidence supporting this framework is drawn from both our own experiments and experiments reported in related work.
1835645	Can search systems detect users' task difficulty?: some behavioral signals In this paper, we report findings on how user behaviors vary in tasks with different difficulty levels as well as of different types. Two behavioral signals: document dwell time and number of content pages viewed per query, were found to be able to help the system detect when users are working with difficult tasks.
1835646	Query log analysis in the context of information retrieval for children In this paper we analyze queries and sessions intended to satisfy children's information needs using a large-scale query log. The aim of this analysis is twofold: i) To identify differences between such queries and sessions, and general queries and sessions; ii) To enhance the query log by including annotations of queries, sessions, and actions for future research on information retrieval for children. We found statistically significant differences between the set of general purpose and queries seeking for content intended for children. We show that our findings are consistent with previous studies on the physical behavior of children using Web search engines.
1835647	Transitive history-based query disambiguation for query reformulation We present a probabilistic model of a user's search history and a target query reformulation. We derive a simple transitive similarity algorithm for disambiguating queries and improving history-based query reformulation accuracy. We compare the merits of this approach to other methods and present results on both examples assessed by human editors and on automatically-labeled click data.
1835648	Using flickr geotags to predict user travel behaviour We propose a method to predict a user's favourite locations in a city, based on his Flickr geotags in other cities. We define a similarity between the geotag distributions of two users based on a Gaussian kernel convolution. The geotags of the most similar users are then combined to rerank the popular locations in the target city personalised for this user. We show that this method can give personalised travel recommendations for users with a clear preference for a specific type of landmark.
1835649	Metrics for assessing sets of subtopics To evaluate the diversity of search results, test collections have been developed that identify multiple intents for each query. Intents are the different meanings or facets that should be covered in a search results list. This means that topic development involves proposing a set of intents for each query. We propose four measurable properties of query-to-intent mappings, allowing for more principled topic development for such test collections.
1835650	Learning to select rankers Combining evidence from multiple retrieval models has been widely studied in the context of of distributed search, metasearch and rank fusion. Much of the prior work has focused on combining retrieval scores (or the rankings) assigned by different retrieval models or ranking algorithms. In this work, we focus on the problem of choosing between retrieval models using performance estimation. We propose modeling the differences in retrieval performance directly by using rank-time features - features that are available to the ranking algorithms - and the retrieval scores assigned by the ranking algorithms. Our experimental results show that when choosing between two rankers, our approach yields significant improvements over the best individual ranker.
1835651	VisualSum: an interactive multi-document summarizationsystem using visualization Given a collection of documents, most of existing multidocument summarization methods automatically generate a static summary for all the users. However, different users may have different opinions on the documents, thus there is a necessity for improving users' interactions in the summarization process. In this paper, we propose an interactive document summarization system using information visualization techniques.
1835652	Web page publication time detection and its application for page rank Publication Time (P-time for short) of Web pages is often required in many application areas. In this paper, we address the issue of P-time detection and its application for page rank. We first propose an approach to extract P-time for a page with explicit P-time displayed on its body. We then present a method to infer P-time for a page without P-time. We further introduce a temporal sensitive page rank model using P-time. Experiments demonstrate that our methods outperform the baseline methods significantly.
1835653	HCC: a hierarchical co-clustering algorithm In this poster, we develop a novel method, called HCC, for hierarchical co-clustering. HCC brings together two interrelated but distinct themes from clustering: hierarchical clustering and co-clustering. The goal of the former theme is to organize clusters into a hierarchy that facilitates browsing and navigation, while the goal of the latter theme is to cluster different types of data simultaneously by making use of the relationship information. Our initial empirical results are promising and they demonstrate that simultaneously attempting both these goals in a single model leads to improvements over models that focus on a single goal.
1835654	Retrieval system evaluation: automatic evaluation versus incomplete judgments In information retrieval (IR), research aiming to reduce the cost of retrieval system evaluations has been conducted along two lines: (i) the evaluation of IR systems with reduced amounts of manual relevance assessments, and (ii) the fully automatic evaluation of IR systems, thus foregoing the need for manual assessments altogether. The proposed methods in both areas are commonly evaluated by comparing their performance estimates for a set of systems to a ground truth (provided for instance by evaluating the set of systems according to mean average precision). In contrast, in this poster we compare an automatic system evaluation approach directly to two evaluations based on incomplete manual relevance assessments. For the particular case of TREC's Million Query track, we show that the automatic evaluation leads to results which are highly correlated to those achieved by approaches relying on incomplete manual judgments.
1835655	Aspect presence verification conditional on other aspects I have shown that the presence of difficult query aspects that are revealed only implicitly (e.g. exploration, opposition, achievements, cooperation, risks) can be improved by taking advantage of the known presence of other, easier to verify query aspects. The approach proceeds by mining a large external corpus and results in substantial improvements in re-ranking the subset of the top retrieved documents.
1835656	The value of visual elements in web search We used eye-tracking equipment to observe 36 participants as they performed three search tasks using three graphically-enhanced web search interfaces (Kartoo, SearchMe and Viewzi). In this poster we describe findings of the study focusing on how the presentation of SERP results influences how the user scans and attends to the results, and the user satisfaction with these search engines.
1835657	Diversification of search results using webgraphs A set of words is often insufficient to express a user's information need. In order to account for various information needs associated with a query, diversification seems to be a reasonable strategy. By diversifying the result set, we increase the probability of results being relevant to the user's information needs when the given query is ambiguous. A diverse result set must contain a set of documents that cover various subtopics for a given query. We propose a graph based method which exploits the link structure of the web to return a ranked list that provides complete coverage for a query. Our method not only provides diversity to the results set, but also avoids excessive redundancy. Moreover, the probability of relevance of a document is conditioned on the documents that appear before it in the result list. We show the effectiveness of our method by comparing it with a query-likelihood model as the baseline.
1835658	Capturing page freshness for web search Freshness has been increasingly realized by commercial search engines as an important criteria for measuring the quality of search results. However, most information retrieval methods focus on the relevance of page content to given queries without considering the recency issue. In this work, we mine page freshness from web user maintenance activities and incorporate this feature into web search. We first quantify how fresh the web is over time from two distinct perspectives--the page itself and its in-linked pages--and then exploit a temporal correlation between two types of freshness measures to quantify the confidence of page freshness. Results demonstrate page freshness can be better quantified when combining with temporal freshness correlation. Experiments on a real-world archival web corpus show that incorporating the combined page freshness into the searching process can improve ranking performance significantly on both relevance and freshness.
1835659	S-PLASA+: adaptive sentiment analysis with application to sales performance prediction Analyzing the large volume of online reviews would produce useful knowledge that could be of economic values to vendors and other interested parties. In particular, the sentiments expressed in the online reviews have been shown to be strongly correlated with the sales performance of products. In this paper, we present an adaptive sentiment analysis model called S-PLSA+, which aims to capture the hidden sentiment factors in the reviews with the capability to be incrementally updated as more data become available. We show how S-PLSA+ can be applied to sales performance prediction using an ARSA model developed in previous literature. A case study is conducted in the movie domain, and results from preliminary experiments confirm the effectiveness of the proposed model.
1835660	Supervised query modeling using wikipedia We use Wikipedia articles to semantically inform the generation of query models. To this end, we apply supervised machine learning to automatically link queries to Wikipedia articles and sample terms from the linked articles to re-estimate the query model. On a recent large web corpus, we observe substantial gains in terms of both traditional metrics and diversity measures.
1835661	A two-stage model for blog feed search We consider blog feed search: identifying relevant blogs for a given topic. An individual's search behavior often involves a combination of exploratory behavior triggered by salient features of the information objects being examined plus goal-directed in-depth information seeking behavior. We present a two-stage blog feed search model that directly builds on this insight. We first rank blog posts for a given topic, and use their parent blogs as selection of blogs that we rank using a blog-based model.
1835662	Machine learned ranking of entity facets The research described in this paper forms the backbone of a service that enables the faceted search experience of the Yahoo! search engine. We introduce an approach for a machine learned ranking of entity facets based on user click feedback and features extracted from three different ranking sources. The objective of the learned model is to predict the click-through rate on an entity facet. In an empirical evaluation we compare the performance of gradient boosted decision trees (GBDT) against a linear combination of features on two different click feedback models using the raw click-through rate (CTR), and click over expected clicks (COEC). The results show a significant improvement in retrieval performance, in terms of discounted cumulated gain, when ranking entity facets with GBDT trained on the COEC model. Most notably this is true when evaluated against the CTR test set.
1835663	User comments for news recommendation in social media Reading and Commenting online news is becoming a common user behavior in social media. Discussion in the form of comments following news postings can be effectively facilitated if the service provider can recommend articles based on not only the original news itself but also the thread of changing comments. This turns the traditional news recommendation to a "discussion moderator" that can intelligently assist online forums. In this work, we present a framework to recommend relevant information in the forum-based social media using user comments. When incorporating user comments, we consider structural and semantic information carried by them. Experiments indicate that our proposed solutions provide an effective recommendation service.
1835664	Incorporating global information into named entity recognition systems using relational context The state-of-the-art in Named Entity Recognition relies on a combination of local features of the text and global knowledge to determine the types of the recognized entities. This is problematic in some cases, resulting in entities being classified as belonging to the wrong type. We show that using global information about the corpus improves the accuracy of type identification. We explore the notion of a global domain frequency that relates relation identifying terms with pairs of entity types which are used in that relation. We use this to identify entities whose types are not compatible with the terms they co-occur in the text. Our results on a large corpus of social media content allows the identification of mistyped entities with 70% accuracy.
1835665	Achieving high accuracy retrieval using intra-document term ranking Most traditional ranking models roughly score the relevance of a given document by observing simple term statistics, such as the occurrence of query terms within the document or within the collection. Intuitively, the relative importance of query terms with regard to other individual non-query terms in a document can also be exploited to promote the ranks of documents in which the query is dedicated as the main topic. In this paper, we introduce a simple technique named intra-document term ranking, which involves ranking all the terms in a document according to their relative importance within that particular document. We demonstrate that the information regarding the rank positions of given query terms within the intra-document term ranking can be useful for enhancing the precision of top-retrieved results by traditional ranking models. Experiments are conducted on three standard TREC test collections.
1835666	Author interest topic model This paper presents a hierarchical topic model that simultaneously captures topics and author's interests. Our proposal, the Author Interest Topic model (AIT), introduces a latent variable with a separate probability distribution over topics into each document. Experiments on a research paper corpus show that the AIT is useful as a generative model.
1835667	On the relationship between effectiveness and accessibility Typically the evaluation of Information Retrieval (IR) systems is focused upon two main system attributes: efficiency and effectiveness. However, it has been argued that it is also important to consider accessibility, i.e. the extent to which the IR system makes information easily accessible. But, it is unclear how accessibility relates to typical IR evaluation, and specifically whether there is a trade-off between accessibility and effectiveness. In this poster, we empirically explore the relationship between effectiveness and accessibility to determine whether the two objectives i.e. maximizing effectiveness and maximizing accessibility, are compatible, or not. To this aim, we empirically examine this relationship using two popular IR models and explore the trade-off between access and performance as these models are tuned.
1835668	Visual concept-based selection of query expansions for spoken content retrieval In this paper we present a novel approach to semantic-theme-based video retrieval that considers entire videos as retrieval units and exploits automatically detected visual concepts to improve the results of retrieval based on spoken content. We deploy a query prediction method that makes use of a coherence indicator calculated on top returned documents and taking into account the information about visual concepts presence in videos to make a choice between query expansion methods. The main contribution of our approach is in its ability to exploit noisy shot-level concept detection to improve semantic-theme-based video retrieval. Strikingly, improvement is possible using an extremely limited set of concepts. In the experiments performed on TRECVID 2007 and 2008 datasets our approach shows an interesting performance improvement compared to the best performing baseline.
1835669	Mining adjacent markets from a large-scale ads video collection for image advertising The research on image advertising is still in its infancy. Most previous approaches suggest ads by directly matching an ad to a query image, which lacks the power to identify ads from adjacent market. In this paper, we tackle the problem by mining knowledge on adjacent markets from ads videos with a novel Multi-Modal Dirichlet Process Mixture Sets model, which is a unified model of (video frames) clustering and (ads) ranking. Our approach is not only capable of discovering relevant ads (e.g. car ads for a query car image), but also suggesting ads from adjacent markets (e.g. tyre ads). Experimental results show that our proposed approach is fairly effective.
1835670	A co-learning framework for learning user search intents from rule-generated training data Learning to understand user search intents from their online behaviors is crucial for both Web search and online advertising. However, it is a challenging task to collect and label a sufficient amount of high quality training data for various user intents such as "compare products", "plan a travel", etc. Motivated by this bottleneck, we start with some user common sense, i.e. a set of rules, to generate training data for learning to predict user intents. The rule-generated training data are however hard to be used since these data are generally imperfect due to the serious data bias and possible data noises. In this paper, we introduce a Co-learning Framework (CLF) to tackle the problem of learning from biased and noisy rule-generated training data. CLF firstly generates multiple sets of possibly biased and noisy training data using different rules, and then trains the individual user search intent classifiers over different training datasets independently. The intermediate classifiers are then used to categorize the training data themselves as well as the unlabeled data. The confidently classified data by one classifier are added to other training datasets and the incorrectly classified ones are instead filtered out from the training datasets. The algorithmic performance of this iterative learning procedure is theoretically guaranteed.
1835671	Learning the click-through rate for rare/new ads from similar ads Ads on the search engine (SE) are generally ranked based on their Click-through rates (CTR). Hence, accurately predicting the CTR of an ad is of paramount importance for maximizing the SE's revenue. We present a model that inherits the click information of rare/new ads from other semantically related ads. The semantic features are derived from the query ad click-through graphs and advertisers account information. We show that the model learned using these features give a very good prediction for the CTR values.
1835672	Graphical models for text: a new paradigm for text representation and processing Almost all text applications use the well known vector-space model for text representation and analysis. While the vector-space model has proven itself to be an effective and efficient representation for mining purposes, it does not preserve information about the ordering of the words in the representation. In this paper, we will introduce the concept of distance graph representations of text data. Such representations preserve distance and ordering information between the words, and provide a much richer representation of the underlying text. This approach enables knowledge discovery from text which is not possible with the use of a pure vector-space representation, because it loses much less information about the ordering of the underlying words. Furthermore, this representation does not require the development of new mining and management techniques. This is because the technique can also be converted into a structural version of the vector-space representation, which allows the use of all existing tools for text. In addition, existing techniques for graph and XML data can be directly leveraged with this new representation. Thus, a much wider spectrum of algorithms is available for processing this representation.
1835673	A survival modeling approach to biomedical search result diversification using wikipedia In this paper, we propose a probabilistic survival model derived from the survival analysis theory for measuring aspect novelty. The retrieved documents' query-relevance and novelty are combined at the aspect level for re-ranking. Experiments conducted on the TREC 2006 and 2007 Genomics collections demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach in promoting ranking diversity for biomedical information retrieval.
1835675	Low cost evaluation in information retrieval Search corpora are growing larger and larger: over the last 10 years, the IR research community has moved from the several hundred thousand documents on the TREC disks to the tens of millions of U.S. government web pages of GOV2 to the one billion general-interest web pages in the new ClueWeb09 collection. But traditional means of acquiring relevance judgments and evaluating - e.g. pooling documents to calculate average precision - do not seem to scale well to these new large collections. They require substantially more cost in human assessments for the same reliability in evaluation; if the additional cost goes over the assessing budget, errors in evaluation are inevitable. Some alternatives to pooling that support low-cost and reliable evaluation have recently been proposed. A number of them have already been used in TREC and other evaluation forums (TREC Million Query, Legal, Chemical, Web, Relevance Feedback Tracks, CLEF Patent IR, INEX). Evaluation via implicit user feedback (e.g. clicks) and crowdsourcing have also recently gained attention in the community. Thus it is important that the methodologies, the analysis they support, and their strengths and weaknesses are well-understood by the IR community. Furthermore, these approaches can support small research groups attempting to start investigating new tasks on new corpora with relatively low cost. Even groups that do not participate in TREC, CLEF, or other evaluation conferences can benefit from understanding how these methods work, how to use them, and what they mean as they build test collections for tasks they are interested in. The goal of this tutorial is to provide attendees with a comprehensive overview of techniques to perform low cost (in terms of judgment effort) evaluation. A number of topics will be covered, including alternatives to pooling, evaluation measures robust to incomplete judgments, evaluating with no relevance judgments, statistical inference of evaluation metrics, inference of relevance judgments, query selection, techniques to test the reliability of the evaluation and reusability of the constructed collections. The tutorial should be of interest to a wide range of attendees. Those new to the field will come away with a solid understanding of how low cost evaluation methods can be applied to construct inexpensive test collections and evaluate new IR technology, while those with intermediate knowledge will gain deeper insights and further understand the risks and gains of low cost evaluation. Attendees should have a basic knowledge of the traditional evaluation framework (Cranfield) and metrics (such as average precision and nDCG), along with some basic knowledge on probability theory and statistics. More advanced concepts will be explained during the tutorial.
1835676	Learning to rank for information retrieval This tutorial is concerned with a comprehensive introduction to the research area of learning to rank for information retrieval. In the first part of the tutorial, we will introduce three major approaches to learning to rank, i.e., the pointwise, pairwise, and listwise approaches, analyze the relationship between the loss functions used in these approaches and the widely-used IR evaluation measures, evaluate the performance of these approaches on the LETOR benchmark datasets, and demonstrate how to use these approaches to solve real ranking applications. In the second part of the tutorial, we will discuss some advanced topics regarding learning to rank, such as relational ranking, diverse ranking, semi-supervised ranking, transfer ranking, query-dependent ranking, and training data preprocessing. In the third part, we will briefly mention the recent advances on statistical learning theory for ranking, which explain the generalization ability and statistical consistency of different ranking methods. In the last part, we will conclude the tutorial and show several future research directions.
1835677	Introduction to probabilistic models in IR Most of today's state-of-the-art retrieval models, including BM25 and language modeling, are grounded in probabilistic principles. Having a working understanding of these principles can help researchers understand existing retrieval models better and also provide industrial practitioners with an understanding of how such models can be applied to real world problems. This half-day tutorial will cover the fundamentals of two dominant probabilistic frameworks for Information Retrieval: the classical probabilistic model and the language modeling approach. The elements of the classical framework will include the probability ranking principle, the binary independence model, the 2-Poisson model, and the widely used BM25 model. Within language modeling framework, we will discuss various distributional assumptions and smoothing techniques. Special attention will be devoted to the event spaces and independence assumptions underlying each approach. The tutorial will outline several techniques for modeling term dependence and addressing vocabulary mismatch. We will also survey applications of probabilistic models in the domains of cross-language and multimedia retrieval. The tutorial will conclude by suggesting a set of open problems in probabilistic models of IR. Attendees should have a basic familiarity with probability and statistics. A brief refresher of basic concepts, including random variables, event spaces, conditional probabilities, and independence will be given at the beginning of the tutorial. In addition to slides, some hands on exercises and examples will be used throughout the tutorial.
1835678	Multimedia information retrieval This tutorial is concerned with creating the best possible multimedia search experience. The intriguing bit here is that the query itself can be a multimedia excerpt: For example, when you walk around in an unknown place and stumble across an interesting landmark, would it not be great if you could just take a picture with your mobile phone and send it to a service that finds a similar picture in a database and tells you more about the building - and about its significance for that matter? The ideas for this type of search have been around for a decade, but this tutorial will look at recent successes and take stock of the state-of-the-art. It examines the full matrix of a variety of query modes versus document types. How do you retrieve a music piece by humming? What if you want to find news video clips on forest fires using a still image? The tutorial discusses underlying techniques and common approaches to facilitate multimedia search engines: metadata driven search; piggy-back text search where automated processes create text surrogates for multimedia; automated image annotation; content-based search. The latter is studied in more depth looking at features and distances, and how to effectively combine them for efficient retrieval, to a point where the participants have the ingredients and recipe in their hands for building their own visual search engines. Supporting users in their resource discovery mission when hunting for multimedia material is not a technological indexing problem alone. We will briefly look at interactive ways of engaging with repositories through browsing and relevance feedback, roping in geographical context, and providing visual summaries for videos. The tutorial emphasises state-of-the-art research in the area of multimedia information retrieval, which gives an indication of the research and development trends and, thereby, a glimpse of the future world.
1835679	Web retrieval: the role of users Web retrieval methods have evolved through three major steps in the last decade or so. They started from standard document-centric IR in the early days of the Web, then made a major step forward by leveraging the structure of the Web, using link analysis techniques in both crawling and ranking challenges. A more recent, no less important but maybe more discrete step forward, has been to enter the user in this equation in two ways: (1) implicitly, through the analysis of usage data captured by query logs, and session and click information in general, the goal being to improve ranking as well as to measure user's happiness and engagement; (2) explicitly, by offering novel interactive features; the goal here being to better answer users' needs. In this tutorial, we will cover the user-related challenges associated with the implicit and explicit role of users in Web retrieval. We will review and discuss challenges associated with two types of activities, namely: usage data analysis and metrics and user interaction. The goal of this tutorial is to teach the key principles and technologies behind the activities and challenges briefly outlined above, bring new understanding and insights to the attendees, and hopefully foster future research.
1835680	Information retrieval challenges in computational advertising Computational advertising is an emerging scientific sub-discipline, at the intersection of large scale search and text analysis, information retrieval, statistical modeling, machine learning, classification, optimization, and microeconomics. The central challenge of computational advertising is to find the "best match" between a given user in a given context and a suitable advertisement. The aim of this tutorial is to present the state of the art in Computational Advertising, in particular in its IR-related aspects, and to expose the participants to the current research challenges in this field. The tutorial does not assume any prior knowledge of Web advertising, and will begin with a comprehensive background survey. Going deeper, our focus will be on using a textual representation of the user context to retrieve relevant ads. At first approximation, this process can be reduced to a conventional setup by constructing a query that describes the user context and executing the query against a large inverted index of ads. We show how to augment this approach using query expansion and text classification techniques tuned for the ad-retrieval problem. In particular, we show how to use the Web as a repository of query-specific knowledge and use the Web search results retrieved by the query as a form of a relevance feedback and query expansion. We also present solutions that go beyond the conventional bag of words indexing by constructing additional features using a large external taxonomy and a lexicon of named entities obtained by analyzing the entire Web as a corpus. The last part of the tutorial will be devoted to a potpourri of recent research results and open problems inspired by Computational Advertising challenges in text summarization, natural language generation, named entity recognition, computer-human interaction, and other SIGIR-relevant areas.
1835681	Extraction of open-domain class attributes from text: building blocks for faceted search Knowledge automatically extracted from text captures instances, classes of instances and relations among them. In particular, the acquisition of class attributes (e.g., "top speed", "body style" and "number of cylinders" for the class of "sports cars") from text is a particularly appealing task and has received much attention recently, given its natural fit as a building block towards the far-reaching goal of constructing knowledge bases from text. This tutorial provides an overview of extraction methods developed in the area of Web-based information extraction, with the purpose of acquiring attributes of open-domain classes. The attributes are extracted for classes organized either as a flat set or hierarchically. The extraction methods operate over unstructured or semi-structured text available within collections of Web documents, or over relatively more intriguing data sources consisting of anonymized search queries. The methods take advantage of weak supervision provided in the form of seed examples or small amounts of annotated data, or draw upon knowledge already encoded within human-compiled resources (e.g., Wikipedia). The more ambitious methods, aiming at acquiring as many accurate attributes from text as possible for hundreds or thousands of classes covering a wide range of domains of interest, need to be designed to scale to Web collections. This restriction has significant consequences on the overall complexity and choice of underlying tools, in order for the extracted attributes to ultimately aid information retrieval in general and Web search in particular, by producing relevant attributes for open-domain classes, along with other types of relations among instances or among classes.
1835682	From federated to aggregated search Federated search refers to the brokered retrieval of content from a set of auxiliary retrieval systems instead of from a single, centralized retrieval system. Federated search tasks occur in, for example, digital libraries (where documents from several retrieval systems must be seamlessly merged) or peer-to-peer information retrieval (where documents distributed across a network of local indexes must be retrieved). In the context of web search, aggregated search refers to the integration of non-web content (e.g. images, videos, news articles, maps, tweets) into a web search result page. This is in contrast with classic web search where users are presented with a ranked list consisting exclusively of general web documents. As in other federated search situations, the non-web content is often retrieved from auxiliary retrieval systems (e.g. image or video databases, news indexes). Although aggregated search can be seen as an instance of federated search, several aspects make aggregated search a unique and compelling research topic. These include large sources of evidence (e.g. click logs) for deciding what non-web items to return, constrained interfaces (e.g. mobile screens), and a very heterogeneous set of available auxiliary resources (e.g. images, videos, maps, news articles). Each of these aspects introduces problems and opportunities not addressed in the federated search literature. Aggregated search is an important future research direction for information retrieval. All major search engines now provide aggregated search results. As the number of available auxiliary resources grows, deciding how to effectively surface content from each will become increasingly important. The goal of this tutorial is to provide an overview of federated search and aggregated search techniques for an intermediate information retrieval researcher. At the same time, the content will be valuable for practitioners in industry. We will take the audience through the most influential work in these areas and describe how they relate to real world aggregated search systems. We will also list some of the new challenges confronted in aggregated search and discuss directions for future work.
1835683	Estimating the query difficulty for information retrieval Many information retrieval (IR) systems suffer from a radical variance in performance when responding to users' queries. Even for systems that succeed very well on average, the quality of results returned for some of the queries is poor. Thus, it is desirable that IR systems will be able to identify "difficult" queries in order to handle them properly. Understanding why some queries are inherently more difficult than others is essential for IR, and a good answer to this important question will help search engines to reduce the variance in performance, hence better servicing their customer needs. The high variability in query performance has driven a new research direction in the IR field on estimating the expected quality of the search results, i.e. the query difficulty, when no relevance feedback is given. Estimating the query difficulty is a significant challenge due to the numerous factors that impact retrieval performance. Many prediction methods have been proposed recently. However, as many researchers observed, the prediction quality of state-of-the-art predictors is still too low to be widely used by IR applications. The low prediction quality is due to the complexity of the task, which involves factors such as query ambiguity, missing content, and vocabulary mismatch. The goal of this tutorial is to expose participants to the current research on query performance prediction (also known as query difficulty estimation). Participants will become familiar with states-of-the-art performance prediction methods, and with common evaluation methodologies for prediction quality. We will discuss the reasons that cause search engines to fail for some of the queries, and provide an overview of several approaches for estimating query difficulty. We then describe common methodologies for evaluating the prediction quality of those estimators, and some experiments conducted recently with their prediction quality, as measured over several TREC benchmarks. We will cover a few potential applications that can utilize query difficulty estimators by handling each query individually and selectively based on its estimated difficulty. Finally we will summarize with a discussion on open issues and challenges in the field.
1835684	Search and browse log mining for web information retrieval: challenges, methods, and applications Huge amounts of search log data have been accumulated in various search engines. Currently, a commercial search engine receives billions of queries and collects tera-bytes of log data on any single day. Other than search log data, browse logs can be collected by client-side browser plug-ins, which record the browse information if users' permissions are granted. Such massive amounts of search/browse log data, on the one hand, provide great opportunities to mine the wisdom of crowds and improve search results as well as online advertisement. On the other hand, designing effective and efficient methods to clean, model, and process large scale log data also presents great challenges. In this tutorial, we focus on mining search and browse log data for Web information retrieval. We consider a Web information retrieval system consisting of four components, namely, query understanding, document understanding, query-document matching, and user understanding. Accordingly, we organize the tutorial materials along these four aspects. For each aspect, we will survey the major tasks, challenges, fundamental principles, and state-of-the-art methods. The goal of this tutorial is to provide a systematic survey on large-scale search/browse log mining to the IR community. It will help IR researchers to get familiar with the core challenges and promising directions in log mining. At the same time, this tutorial may also serve the developers of Web information retrieval systems as a comprehensive and in-depth reference to the advanced log mining techniques.
1835685	Information retrieval for e-discovery Discovery, the process under which parties to legal cases must reveal documents relevant to the disputed issues is a core aspect of trials in the United States, and a lesser but important factor in other countries. Discovery on documents stored in computerized systems (known variously as electronic discovery, e-discovery, e-disco, EDD, and ED) is increasingly the major factor in discovery, and has become a multi-billion dollar industry. I will discuss the basics of e-discovery, the scale and diversity of the materials involved, and the economics of identifying and reviewing potentially responsive material. I will then focus on three major IR areas of interest: search, supervised machine learning (including text classification and relevance feedback), and interface support for manual relevance assessment. For each, I will discuss technologies currently used in e-discovery, the evaluation methods applicable to measuring effectiveness, and existing research results not yet seeing commercial practice. I will also outline research directions that, if successfully pursued, would potentially be of great interest in e-discovery applications. A particular focus will be on areas where researchers can make progress without access to operational e-discovery environments or "realistic" test collections. Connections will be drawn with the use of IR in related tasks, such as enterprise search, criminal investigations, intelligence analysis, historical research, truth and reconciliation commissions, and freedom of information (open records or sunshine law) requests.
1835687	On the mono- and cross-language detection of text reuse and plagiarism Plagiarism, the unacknowledged reuse of text, has increased in recent years due to the large amount of texts readily available. For instance, recent studies claim that nowadays a high rate of student reports include plagiarism, making manual plagiarism detection practically infeasible. Automatic plagiarism detection tools assist experts to analyse documents for plagiarism. Nevertheless, the lack of standard collections with cases of plagiarism has prevented accurate comparing models, making differences hard to appreciate. Seminal efforts on the detection of text reuse [2] have fostered the composition of standard resources for the accurate evaluation and comparison of methods. The aim of this PhD thesis is to address three of the main problems in the development of better models for automatic plagiarism detection: (i) the adequate identification of good potential sources for a given suspicious text; (ii) the detection of plagiarism despite modifications, such as words substitution and paraphrasing (special stress is given to cross-language plagiarism); and (iii) the generation of standard collections of cases of plagiarism and text reuse in order to provide a framework for accurate comparison of models. Regarding difficulties (i) and (ii) , we have carried out preliminary experiments over the METER corpus [2]. Given a suspicious document dq and a collection of potential source documents D, the process is divided in two steps. First, a small subset of potential source documents D* in D is retrieved. The documents d in D* are the most related to dq and, therefore, the most likely to include the source of the plagiarised fragments in it. We performed this stage on the basis of the Kullback-Leibler distance, over a subsample of document's vocabularies. Afterwards, a detailed analysis is carried out comparing dq to every d in D* in order to identify potential cases of plagiarism and their source. This comparison was made on the basis of word n-grams, by considering n = {2, 3}. These n-gram levels are flexible enough to properly retrieve plagiarised fragments and their sources despite modifications [1]. The result is offered to the user to take the final decision. Further experiments were done in both stages in order to compare other similarity measures, such as the cosine measure, the Jaccard coefficient and diverse fingerprinting and probabilistic models. One of the main weaknesses of currently available models is that they are unable to detect cross-language plagiarism. Approaching the detection of this kind of plagiarism is of high relevance, as the most of the information published is written in English, and authors in other languages may find it attractive to make use of direct translations. Our experiments, carried out over parallel and a comparable corpora, show that models of "standard" cross-language information retrieval are not enough. In fact, if the analysed source and target languages are related in some way (common linguistic ancestors or technical vocabulary), a simple comparison based on character n-grams seems to be the option. However, in those cases where the relation between the implied languages is weaker, other models, such as those based on statistical machine translation, are necessary [3]. We plan to perform further experiments, mainly to approach the detection of cross-language plagiarism. In order to do that, we will use the corpora developed under the framework of the PAN competition on plagiarism detection (cf. PAN@CLEF: http://pan.webis.de). Models that consider cross-language thesauri and comparison of cognates will also be applied.
1835688	User interface designs to support the social transfer of web search expertise While there are many ways to develop search expertise, I maintain that most members of the general public do so in an inefficient manner. One reason is that, with current tools, is difficult to observe experts as a means of acquiring search expertise in a scalable fashion. This calls for a redesign of computer-mediated communication tools to make individual search strategies visible to other users. I present a research agenda to investigate this claim, which draws upon theories of social learning. I use design-based research to build novel systems that enable imitation-based learning of search expertise.
1835689	Leveraging user interaction and collaboration for improving multilingual information access in digital libraries The goal of interactive cross-lingual information retrieval systems is to support users in formulating effective queries and selecting the documents which satisfy their information needs regardless of the language of these documents. This dissertation aims at harnessing user-system interaction, extracting the added value and integrating it back into the system to improve cross-lingual information retrieval for successive users. To achieve this, user input at different interaction points will be evaluated. This will, among others, include interaction during user-assisted query translations, implicit and explicit relevance feedback and social tags. To leverage this input, explorative studies need to be conducted to determine beneficial user input and the methods of extracting it.
1835690	Entity information management in complex networks Entity information management (EIM) deals with organizing, processing and delivering information about entities. Its emergence is a result of satisfying more sophisticated information needs that go beyond document search. In the recent years, entity retrieval has attracted much attention in the IR community. INEX has started the XML Entity Ranking track since 2007 and TREC has launched the Entity track since 2009 to investigate the problem of related entity finding. Some EIM problems go beyond retrieval and ranking such as: 1) entity profiling, which is about characterizing a specific entity, and 2) entity distillation, which is about discovering the trend about an entity. These problems have received less attention while they have many important applications. On the other hand, the entities in the real world or in the Web environment are usually not isolated. They are connected or related with each other in one way or another. For example, the coauthorship makes the authors with similar research interests be connected. The emergence of social media such as Facebook, Twitter and Youtube has further interweaved the related entities in a much larger scale. Millions of users in these sites can become friends, fans or followers of others, or taggers or commenters of different types of entities (e.g., bookmarks, photos and videos). These networks are complex in the sense that they are heterogeneous with multiple types of entities and of interactions, they are large-scale, they are multi-lingual, and they are dynamic. These features of the complex networks go beyond traditional social network analysis and require further research. In this proposed research, I investigate entity information management in the environment of complex networks. The main research question is: how can the EIM tasks be facilitated by modeling the content and structure of complex networks? The research is in the intersection of content based information retrieval and complex network analysis, which deals with both unstructured text data and structured networks. The specific targeting EIM tasks are entity retrieval, entity profiling and entity distillation. In addition to the main research question, the following questions are considered: How can we accomplish a EIM task involving diverse entity and interaction types? How to model the evolution of entity profiles as well as the underlying complex networks? How can the existing cross-language IR work be leveraged to build entity profiles with multi-lingual evidence? I propose to use probabilistic models and discriminative models in particular to address the above research questions. In my research, I have developed discriminative models for expert search to integrate arbitrary document features [3] and to learn flexible combination strategies to rank experts in heterogeneous information sources [1]. Discriminative graphical models are proposed to jointly discover homepages by inference on the homepage dependence network [2]. The dependence of table elements is exploited to collectively perform the entity retrieval task [4]. These works have shown the power of discriminative models for entity search and the benefits of utilizing the dependencies among related entities. What I would like to do next is to develop a unified probabilistic framework to investigate the research questions raised in this proposal.
1835691	Finding people and their utterances in social media Since its introduction, social media, "a group of internet-based applications that (...) allow the creation and exchange of user generated content" [1], has attracted more and more users. Over the years, many platforms have arisen that allow users to publish information, communicate with others, connect to like-minded, and share anything a users wants to share. Text-centric examples are mailing lists, forums, blogs, community question answering, collaborative knowledge sources, social networks, and microblogs, with new platforms starting all the time. Given the volume of information available in social media, ways of accessing this information intelligently are needed; this is the scope of my research. Why should we care about information in social media? Here are three examples that motivate my interest. (A) Viewpoint research; someone wants to take note of the viewpoints on a particular issue. (B) Answers to problems; many problems have been encountered before, and people have shared solutions. (C) Product development; gaining insight into how people use a product and what features they wish for, eases the development of new products. Looking at these examples of information need in social media, we observe that they revolve not just around relevance in the traditional sense (i.e., objects relevant to a given topic), but also around criteria like credibility, authority, viewpoints, expertise, and experiences. However, these additional aspects are typically conditioned on the topical relevance of information objects. In social media, "information objects" come in several types but many are utterances created by people (blog posts, emails, questions, answers, tweets). People and their utterances offer two natural entry points to information contained in social media: utterances that are relevant and people that are of interest. I focus on three tasks in which the interaction between the two is key.
1835692	Leveraging user-generated content for news search Over the last few years both availability and accessibility of current news stories on the Web have dramatically improved. In particular, users can now access news from a variety of sources hosted on the Web, from newswire presences such as the New York Times, to integrated news search within Web search engines. However, of central interest is the emerging impact that user-generated content (UGC) is having on this online news landscape. Indeed, the emergence of Web 2.0 has turned a static news consumer base into a dynamic news machine, where news stories are summarised and commented upon. In summary, value is being added to each news story in terms of additional content. Importantly, however, while there has been movement in commercial circles to exploit this extra value to enrich online news, there has been little research from the academic community on how can be achieved. Indeed, the main purpose of this thesis is to research practical techniques for the integration of UGC to improve the news search component of the most ubiquitous of Web tools, i.e the Web search engine.
1835693	User centered story tracking Using data collections available on the Internet has for many people became the main medium for staying informed about the world. Many of these collections are in nature dynamic, evolving as the subjects they describe change. The goal of different research areas is to identify and highlight these changes to better enable readers to track stories. In this work we restrict ourselves to news collections and investigate "real-life" effectiveness and usability of temporal text mining (TTM) story tracking methods. We propose a new story tracking method and build a tool to support it. Additionally, we investigate the effectiveness and usability of story tracking methods and define a new frameworks for automatic and user oriented evaluation. We built methods and tools which allow for understanding, discovery, and search through user interaction. Although there are many TTM methods developed there is a lack of common evaluation procedure. Therefore, we propose an evaluation framework for measuring how different TTM methods discover novel "facts". Apart from the automatic evaluation we are interested in how can users interact with pattens and learn about the underlying subjects of the story they track. For this purpose we propose a user testing environment that measures speed and accuracy in which users can use story tracking methods to discover predefined sets of ground-truth sentences.
1835694	Reverse annotation based retrieval from large document image collections A number of projects are dedicated to creating digital libraries from scanned books, such as Google Books, UDL, Digital Library of India (DLI), etc. The ability to search in the content of document images is essential for the usability and popularity of these DLs. In this work, we aim toward building a retrieval system over 120K document images coming from 1000 scanned books of Telugu literature. This is a challenge because: i) OCRs are not robust enough for Indian languages, especially the Telugu script, ii) the document images contain large number of degradations and artifacts, iii) scalability to large collections is hard. Moreover, users expect that the search system accept text queries and retrieve relevant results in interactive times. We propose a Reverse Annotation framework [1], that labels word-images by their equivalent text label in the offline phase. Reverse Annotation applies a retrieval based approach to recognition. Unlike traditional annotation/recognition that identifies keywords for data, Reverse Annotation identifies data that corresponds to a given keyword. It first selects a set of keywords which are considered useful for labeling and retrieval, such as those that repeat often, and ignoring stopwords and rare-words. Exemplars are obtained for each word from a crude OCR or human annotations. The labels are then propagated across the rest of the collection by matching words in the image-feature space. Since such a matching is computationally expensive, scalability is achieved using a fast approximate nearest neighbor technique based on Hierarchical K-Means. Once text labels are assigned, each document image is considered a bag-of-words over the labeled keywords. A standard search engine is used to build a search index for quick online retrieval. An example query and the retrieved results are shown in Figure 1. We are unaware of any conventional OCRs which can retrieve such images for the given query. There are three major contributions of our work: i) recognizing the entire document collection together, instead of one-at-a-time; this means that the repetition of words in the test set is effectively used for improving accuracy, ii) speeding up recognition by clustering multiple instances of a given word, iii) recognising at the word-level, avoiding the pitfalls of character segmentation and recognition. Other OCR techniques that use word-level context still rely on inaccurate component-level classification. Using the techniques developed from this work, we were able to successfully build a retrieval system over our challenging dataset. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest collection of document images that has been made searchable for any Indian language. Our algorithm is easily scalable to larger collections, and directly applicable to documents from other language scripts. The first issue to discuss, is the fraction of word-images that remain unrecognized at the end of the Reverse Annotation phase. Rare-words, nouns etc. are not labeled in the test set. It is important to estimate the cost of not being able to answer such queries. If this cost is indeed high, we need to explore methods to label such infrequently occurring words in the collection. Needless to say, such methods should be computationally efficient without compromising on accuracy. The other major issue to discuss is the evaluation of retrieval results. The true recall of the retrieval system cannot be computed, since it is impossible to identify every occurrence of the given query in such large data. Questions to be considered include: whether precision alone is a sufficient indicator of retrieval performance; whether there is some better document-level effectiveness assessment possible; and how best to estimate the relative satisfaction of the user's information need.
1835695	Learning hidden variable models for blog retrieval We describe probabilistic models that leverage individual blog post evidence to improve blog seed retrieval performances. Our model offers a intuitive and principled method to combine multiple posts in scoring a whole blog site by treating individual posts as hidden variables. When applied to the seed retrieval task, our model yields state-of-the-art results on the TREC 2007 Blog Distillation Task dataset.
1835696	Investigation on smoothing and aggregation methods in blog retrieval Recently, user generated data is growing rapidly and becoming one of the most important source of information in the web. Blogosphere (the collection of blogs on the web) is one of the main source of information in this category. In my work for my PhD, I mainly focussed on the blog distillation task which is: given a user query find the blogs that are most related to the query topic [3]. There are some properties of blogs that make blog analysis different from usual text analysis. One of these properties is related to the time stamp assigned to each post; it is possible that the topics of a blog change over the time and this can affect blog relevance to the query. Also each post in a blog can have viewer generated comments that can change the relevance of the blog to the query if these are considered as part of the content of the blog. Another property is related to the meaning of the links between blogs which are different than links between websites. Finally, blog distillation is different from traditional ad-hoc search since the retrieval unit is a blog (a collection of posts), instead of a single document. With this view, blog distillation is similar to the task of resource selection in federated search [1]. Researchers have applied different methods from similar problems to blog distillation like ad-hoc search methods, expert search algorithms or methods from resource selection in distributed information retrieval. Based on our preliminary experiments, I decided to divide the blog distillation problem into two sub-problems. First of all, I want to use mentioned properties of blogs to retrieve the most relevant posts for a given query. This part is very similar to the ad hoc retrieval. After that, I want to aggregate relevance of posts in each blog and calculate relevance of the blog. This part requires the development of a cross-modal aggregation model that combines the different blog relevance clues found in the blogosphere. We use structure based smoothing methods for improving posts retrieval. The idea behind these smoothing methods is to change the score of a document based on the score of its similar or related documents. We model the blogosphere as a single graph that represents relations between posts and terms [2]. The idea is that in accordance with the Clustering Hypothesis, related documents should have similar scores for the same query . To model the relatedness between posts, we define a new measure which takes into account both content similarity and temporal distance. In more recent work, in the aggregation part of the problem, we model each post as evidence about relevance of a blog to the query, and use aggregation methods like Ordered Weighted Averaging operators to combine the evidence. The ordered weighted averaging operator, commonly called OWA operator, was introduced by Yager [4]. OWA provides a parametrized class of mean type aggregation operators, that can generate OR operator ( Max ), AND operator ( Min ) and any other aggregation operator between them. For the next steps, I'm thinking about capturing the temporal properties of the blogs. Bloggers can change their interests over the time or write about different topics periodically. Capturing these changes and using them in the retrieval is one the future woks that I'm interested in. Also, studying the relations between blogs and news and their effect on each other is an interesting problem.
1835697	Aiming for user experience in information retrieval: towards user-centered relevance (UCR) An abstract is not available.
2009918	Future of the web and search No one doubts that we have only scratched the surface of what is possible with the Web. The day is coming fast when the Web will become almost a virtual mind reader. Your intent, interests, and needs will be instantly perceived and the information you want will be promptly delivered -- whether you ask for it directly or not -- based on a deep understanding of the meaning of words in your query, knowledge of your preferences and patterns, what others have done before you, your location, and more. In this talk, I will share some of my thoughts about where the Web is heading and how search will be transformed to align to this new Web, laying out some specifics behind Microsoft's vision to empower people with knowledge.
2009920	Beyond search: statistical topic models for text analysis Search is generally a means to the end of finishing a task. While the current search engines are useful to users for finding relevant information, they offer little help to users for further digesting and analyzing the overwhelming found information needed for finishing a complex task. In this talk, I will discuss how statistical topic models can be used to help users analyze and digest the found relevant information and turn search results into actionable knowledge needed to complete a task. I will present several general statistical topic models for extracting and analyzing topics and their patterns in text, and show sample applications of such models in tasks such as opinion integration, comparative summarization, contextual topic trend analysis, and event impact analysis. The talk will conclude with a discussion of novel challenges raised in extending a search engine to an analysis engine that can go beyond search to provide more complete support for users to finish their tasks.
2009922	Modeling and analysis of cross-session search tasks The information needs of search engine users vary in complexity, depending on the task they are trying to accomplish. Some simple needs can be satisfied with a single query, whereas others require a series of queries issued over a longer period of time. While search engines effectively satisfy many simple needs, searchers receive little support when their information needs span session boundaries. In this work, we propose methods for modeling and analyzing user search behavior that extends over multiple search sessions. We focus on two problems: (i) given a user query, identify all of the related queries from previous sessions that the same user has issued, and (ii) given a multi-query task for a user, predict whether the user will return to this task in the future. We model both problems within a classification framework that uses features of individual queries and long-term user search behavior at different granularity. Experimental evaluation of the proposed models for both tasks indicates that it is possible to effectively model and analyze cross-session search behavior. Our findings have implications for improving search for complex information needs and designing search engine features to support cross-session search tasks.
2009923	The economics in interactive information retrieval Searching is inherently an interactive process usually requiring numerous iterations of querying and assessing in order to find the desired amount of relevant information. Essentially, the search process can be viewed as a combination of inputs (queries and assessments) which are used to "produce" output (relevance). Under this view, it is possible to adapt microeconomic theory to analyze and understand the dynamics of Interactive Information Retrieval. In this paper, we approach the search process as an economics problem and conduct extensive simulations on TREC test collections analyzing various combinations of inputs in the "production" of relevance. The analysis reveals that the total Cumulative Gain (output) obtained during the course of a search session is functionally related to querying and assessing (inputs), and this can be characterized mathematically by the Cobbs-Douglas production function. Further analysis using cost models, that are grounded using cognitive load as the cost, reveals which search strategies minimize the cost of interaction for a given level of output. This paper demonstrates how economics can be applied to formally model the search process. This development establishes the theoretical foundations of Interactive Information Retrieval, providing numerous directions for empirical experimentation that are motivated directly from theory.
2009924	Seeding simulated queries with user-study data forpersonal search evaluation In this paper we perform a lab-based user study (n=21) of email re-finding behaviour, examining how the characteristics of submitted queries change in different situations. A number of logistic regression models are developed on the query data to explore the relationship between user- and contextual- variables and query characteristics including length, field submitted to and use of named entities. We reveal several interesting trends and use the findings to seed a simulated evaluation of various retrieval models. Not only is this an enhancement of existing evaluation methods for Personal Search, but the results show that different models are more effective in different situations, which has implications both for the design of email search tools and for the way algorithms for Personal Search are evaluated.
2009925	Understanding re-finding behavior in naturalistic email interaction logs In this paper we present a longitudinal, naturalistic study of email behavior (n=47) and describe our efforts at isolating re-finding behavior in the logs through various qualitative and quantitative analyses. The presented work underlines the methodological challenges faced with this kind of research, but demonstrates that it is possible to isolate re-finding behavior from email interaction logs with reasonable accuracy. Using the approaches developed we uncover interesting aspects of email re-finding behavior that have so far been impossible to study, such as how various features of email-clients are used in re-finding and the difficulties people encounter when using these. We explain how our findings could influence the design of email-clients and outline our thoughts on how future, more in depth analyses, can build on the work presented here to achieve a fuller understanding of email behavior and the support that people need.
2009927	People searching for people: analysis of a people search engine log Recent years show an increasing interest in vertical search: searching within a particular type of information. Understanding what people search for in these "verticals" gives direction to research and provides pointers for the search engines themselves. In this paper we analyze the search logs of one particular vertical: people search engines. Based on an extensive analysis of the logs of a search engine geared towards finding people, we propose a classification scheme for people search at three levels: (a) queries, (b) sessions, and (c) users. For queries, we identify three types, (i) event-based high-profile queries (people that become "popular" because of an event happening), (ii) regular high-profile queries (celebrities), and (iii) low-profile queries (other, less-known people). We present experiments on automatic classification of queries. On the session level, we observe five types: (i) family sessions (users looking for relatives), (ii) event sessions (querying the main players of an event), (iii) spotting sessions (trying to "spot" different celebrities online), (iv) polymerous sessions (sessions without a clear relation between queries), and (v) repetitive sessions (query refinement and copying). Finally, for users we identify four types: (i) monitors, (ii) spotters, (iii) followers, and (iv) polymers. Our findings not only offer insight into search behavior in people search engines, but they are also useful to identify future research directions and to provide pointers for search engine improvements.
2009928	Learning search tasks in queries and web pages via graph regularization As the Internet grows explosively, search engines play a more and more important role for users in effectively accessing online information. Recently, it has been recognized that a query is often triggered by a search task that the user wants to accomplish. Similarly, many web pages are specifically designed to help accomplish a certain task. Therefore, learning hidden tasks behind queries and web pages can help search engines return the most useful web pages to users by task matching. For instance, the search task that triggers query "thinkpad T410 broken" is to maintain a computer, and it is desirable for a search engine to return the Lenovo troubleshooting page on the top of the list. However, existing search engine technologies mainly focus on topic detection or relevance ranking, which are not able to predict the task that triggers a query and the task a web page can accomplish. In this paper, we propose to simultaneously classify queries and web pages into the popular search tasks by exploiting their content together with click-through logs. Specifically, we construct a taskoriented heterogeneous graph among queries and web pages. Each pair of objects in the graph are linked together as long as they potentially share similar search tasks. A novel graph-based regularization algorithm is designed for search task prediction by leveraging the graph. Extensive experiments in real search log data demonstrate the effectiveness of our method over state-of-the-art classifiers, and the search performance can be significantly improved by using the task prediction results as additional information.
2009929	Intentions and attention in exploratory health search We study information goals and patterns of attention in explorato-ry search for health information on the Web, reporting results of a large-scale log-based study. We examine search activity associated with the goal of diagnosing illness from symptoms versus more general information-seeking about health and illness. We decom-pose exploratory health search into evidence-based and hypothe-sis-directed information seeking. Evidence-based search centers on the pursuit of details and relevance of signs and symptoms. Hypothesis-directed search includes the pursuit of content on one or more illnesses, including risk factors, treatments, and therapies for illnesses, and on the discrimination among different diseases under the uncertainty that exists in advance of a confirmed diag-nosis. These different goals of exploratory health search are not independent, and transitions can occur between them within or across search sessions. We construct a classifier that identifies medically-related search sessions in log data. Given a set of search sessions flagged as health-related, we show how we can identify different intentions persisting as foci of attention within those sessions. Finally, we discuss how insights about foci dynamics can help us better understand exploratory health search behavior and better support health search on the Web.
2009930	User behavior in zero-recall ecommerce queries User expectation and experience for web search and eCommerce (product) search are quite different. Product descriptions are concise as compared to typical web documents. User expectation is more specific to find the right product. The difference in the publisher and searcher vocabulary (in case of product search the seller and the buyer vocabulary) combined with the fact that there are fewer products to search over than web documents result in observable numbers of searches that return no results (zero recall searches). In this paper we describe a study of zero recall searches. Our study is focused on eCommerce search and uses data from a leading eCommerce site's user click stream logs. There are 3 main contributions of our study: 1) The cause of zero recall searches; 2) A study of user's reaction and recovery from zero recall; 3) A study of differences in behavior of power users versus novice users to zero recall searches.
2009932	Bagging gradient-boosted trees for high precision, low variance ranking models Recent studies have shown that boosting provides excellent predictive performance across a wide variety of tasks. In Learning-to-rank, boosted models such as RankBoost and LambdaMART have been shown to be among the best performing learning methods based on evaluations on public data sets. In this paper, we show how the combination of bagging as a variance reduction technique and boosting as a bias reduction technique can result in very high precision and low variance ranking models. We perform thousands of parameter tuning experiments for LambdaMART to achieve a high precision boosting model. Then we show that a bagged ensemble of such LambdaMART boosted models results in higher accuracy ranking models while also reducing variance as much as 50%. We report our results on three public learning-to-rank data sets using four metrics. Bagged LamdbaMART outperforms all previously reported results on ten of the twelve comparisons, and bagged LambdaMART outperforms non-bagged LambdaMART on all twelve comparisons. For example, wrapping bagging around LambdaMART increases NDCG@1 from 0.4137 to 0.4200 on the MQ2007 data set; the best prior results in the literature for this data set is 0.4134 by RankBoost.
2009933	Learning to rank for freshness and relevance Freshness of results is important in modern web search. Failing to recognize the temporal aspect of a query can negatively affect the user experience, and make the search engine appear stale. While freshness and relevance can be closely related for some topics (e.g., news queries), they are more independent in others (e.g., time insensitive queries). Therefore, optimizing one criterion does not necessarily improve the other, and can even do harm in some cases. We propose a machine-learning framework for simultaneously optimizing freshness and relevance, in which the trade-off is automatically adaptive to query temporal characteristics. We start by illustrating different temporal characteristics of queries, and the features that can be used for capturing these properties. We then introduce our supervised framework that leverages the temporal profile of queries (inferred from pseudo-feedback documents) along with the other ranking features to improve both freshness and relevance of search results. Our experiments on a large archival web corpus demonstrate the efficacy of our techniques.
2009934	A cascade ranking model for efficient ranked retrieval There is a fundamental tradeoff between effectiveness and efficiency when designing retrieval models for large-scale document collections. Effectiveness tends to derive from sophisticated ranking functions, such as those constructed using learning to rank, while efficiency gains tend to arise from improvements in query evaluation and caching strategies. Given their inherently disjoint nature, it is difficult to jointly optimize effectiveness and efficiency in end-to-end systems. To address this problem, we formulate and develop a novel cascade ranking model, which unlike previous approaches, can simultaneously improve both top k ranked effectiveness and retrieval efficiency. The model constructs a cascade of increasingly complex ranking functions that progressively prunes and refines the set of candidate documents to minimize retrieval latency and maximize result set quality. We present a novel boosting algorithm for learning such cascades to directly optimize the tradeoff between effectiveness and efficiency. Experimental results show that our cascades are faster and return higher quality results than comparable ranking models.
2009935	Relevant knowledge helps in choosing right teacher: active query selection for ranking adaptation Learning to adapt in a new setting is a common challenge to our knowledge and capability. New life would be easier if we actively pursued supervision from the right mentor chosen with our relevant but limited prior knowledge. This variant principle of active learning seems intuitively useful to many domain adaptation problems. In this paper, we substantiate its power for advancing automatic ranking adaptation, which is important in web search since it's prohibitive to gather enough labeled data for every search domain for fully training domain-specific rankers. For the cost-effectiveness, it is expected that only those most informative instances in target domain are collected to annotate while we can still utilize the abundant ranking knowledge in source domain. We propose a unified ranking framework to mutually reinforce the active selection of informative target-domain queries and the appropriate weighting of source training data as related prior knowledge. We select to annotate those target queries whose documents' order most disagrees among the members of a committee built on the mixture of source training data and the already selected target data. Then the replenished labeled set is used to adjust the importance of source queries for enhancing their rank transfer. This procedure iterates until labeling budget exhausts. Based on LETOR3.0 and Yahoo! Learning to Rank Challenge data sets, our approach significantly outperforms the random query annotation commonly used in ranking adaptation and the active rank learner on target-domain data only.
2009937	SCENE: a scalable two-stage personalized news recommendation system Recommending news articles has become a promising research direction as the Internet provides fast access to real-time information from multiple sources around the world. Traditional news recommendation systems strive to adapt their services to individual users by virtue of both user and news content information. However, the latent relationships among different news items, and the special properties of new articles, such as short shelf lives and value of immediacy, render the previous approaches inefficient. In this paper, we propose a scalable two-stage personalized news recommendation approach with a two-level representation, which considers the exclusive characteristics (e.g., news content, access patterns, named entities, popularity and recency) of news items when performing recommendation. Also, a principled framework for news selection based on the intrinsic property of user interest is presented, with a good balance between the novelty and diversity of the recommended result. Extensive empirical experiments on a collection of news articles obtained from various news websites demonstrate the efficacy and efficiency of our approach.
2009938	Inferring and using location metadata to personalize web search Personalization of search results offers the potential for significant improvements in Web search. Among the many observable user attributes, approximate user location is particularly simple for search engines to obtain and allows personalization even for a first-time Web search user. However, acting on user location information is difficult, since few Web documents include an address that can be interpreted as constraining the locations where the document is relevant. Furthermore, many Web documents -- such as local news stories, lottery results, and sports team fan pages -- may not correspond to physical addresses, but the location of the user still plays an important role in document relevance. In this paper, we show how to infer a more general location relevance which uses not only physical location but a more general notion of locations of interest for Web pages. We compute this information using implicit user behavioral data, characterize the most location-centric pages, and show how location information can be incorporated into Web search ranking. Our results show that a substantial fraction of Web search queries can be significantly improved by incorporating location-based features.
2009939	Active learning to maximize accuracy vs. effort in interactive information retrieval We consider an interactive information retrieval task in which the user is interested in finding several to many relevant documents with minimal effort. Given an initial document ranking, user interaction with the system produces relevance feedback (RF) which the system then uses to revise the ranking. This interactive process repeats until the user terminates the search. To maximize accuracy relative to user effort, we propose an active learning strategy. At each iteration, the document whose relevance is maximally uncertain to the system is slotted high into the ranking in order to obtain user feedback for it. Simulated feedback on the Robust04 TREC collection shows our active learning approach dominates several standard RF baselines relative to the amount of feedback provided by the user. Evaluation on Robust04 under noisy feedback and on LETOR collections further demonstrate the effectiveness of active learning, as well as value of negative feedback in this task scenario.
2009941	CRTER: using cross terms to enhance probabilistic information retrieval Term proximity retrieval rewards a document where the matched query terms occur close to each other. Although term proximity is known to be effective in many Information Retrieval (IR) applications, the within-document distribution of each individual query term and how the query terms associate with each other, are not fully considered. In this paper, we introduce a pseudo term, namely Cross Term, to model term proximity for boosting retrieval performance. An occurrence of a query term is assumed to have an impact towards its neighboring text, which gradually weakens with the increase of the distance to the place of occurrence. We use a shape function to characterize such an impact. A Cross Term occurs when two query terms appear close to each other and their impact shape functions have an intersection. We propose a Cross Term Retrieval (CRTER) model that combines the Cross Terms' information with basic probabilistic weighting models to rank the retrieved documents. Extensive experiments on standard TREC collections illustrate the effectiveness of our proposed CRTER model.
2009942	A boosting approach to improving pseudo-relevance feedback Pseudo-relevance feedback has proven effective for improving the average retrieval performance. Unfortunately, many experiments have shown that although pseudo-relevance feedback helps many queries, it also often hurts many other queries, limiting its usefulness in real retrieval applications. Thus an important, yet difficult challenge is to improve the overall effectiveness of pseudo-relevance feedback without sacrificing the performance of individual queries too much. In this paper, we propose a novel learning algorithm, FeedbackBoost, based on the boosting framework to improve pseudo-relevance feedback through optimizing the combination of a set of basis feedback algorithms using a loss function defined to directly measure both robustness and effectiveness. FeedbackBoost can potentially accommodate many basis feedback methods as features in the model, making the proposed method a general optimization framework for pseudo-relevance feedback. As an application, we apply FeedbackBoost to improve pseudo feedback based on language models through combining different document weighting strategies. The experiment results demonstrate that FeedbackBoost can achieve better average precision and meanwhile dramatically reduce the number and magnitude of feedback failures as compared to three representative pseudo feedback methods and a standard learning to rank approach for pseudo feedback.
2009943	Enhancing ad-hoc relevance weighting using probability density estimation Classical probabilistic information retrieval (IR) models, e.g. BM25, deal with document length based on a trade-off between the Verbosity hypothesis, which assumes the independence of a document's relevance of its length, and the Scope hypothesis, which assumes the opposite. Despite the effectiveness of the classical probabilistic models, the potential relationship between document length and relevance is not fully explored to improve retrieval performance. In this paper, we conduct an in-depth study of this relationship based on the Scope hypothesis that document length does have its impact on relevance. We study a list of probability density functions and examine which of the density functions fits the best to the actual distribution of the document length. Based on the studied probability density functions, we propose a length-based BM25 relevance weighting model, called BM25L, which incorporates document length as a substantial weighting factor. Extensive experiments conducted on standard TREC collections show that our proposed BM25L markedly outperforms the original BM25 model, even if the latter is optimized.
2009945	Who should share what?: item-level social influence prediction for users and posts ranking People and information are two core dimensions in a social network. People sharing information (such as blogs, news, albums, etc.) is the basic behavior. In this paper, we focus on predicting item-level social influence to answer the question Who should share What, which can be extended into two information retrieval scenarios: (1) Users ranking: given an item, who should share it so that its diffusion range can be maximized in a social network; (2) Web posts ranking: given a user, what should she share to maximize her influence among her friends. We formulate the social influence prediction problem as the estimation of a user-post matrix, in which each entry represents the strength of influence of a user given a web post. We propose a Hybrid Factor Non-Negative Matrix Factorization (HF-NMF) approach for item-level social influence modeling, and devise an efficient projected gradient method to solve the HF-NMF problem. Intensive experiments are conducted and demonstrate the advantages and characteristics of the proposed method.
2009946	Mining tags using social endorsement networks Entities on social systems, such as users on Twitter, and images on Flickr, are at the core of many interesting applications: they can be ranked in search results, recommended to users, or used in contextual advertising. Such applications assume knowledge of an entity's nature and characteristic attributes. An effective way to encode such knowledge is in the form of tags. An untagged entity is practically inaccessible, since it is hard to retrieve or interact with. To address this, some platforms allow users to manually tag entities. However,while such tags can be informative, they can oftentimes be inadequate, trivial, ambiguous, or even plain false. Numerous automated tagging methods have been proposed to address these issues. However,most of them require pre-existing high-quality tags or descriptive texts for every entity that needs to be tagged. In our work, we propose a method based on social endorsements that is free from such constraints. Virtually every major social networking platform allows users to endorse entities that they find appealing. Examples include "following" Twitter users or "favoriting" Flickr photos. These endorsements are abundant and directly capture the preferences of users. In this paper, we pose and solve the problem of using the underlying social endorsement network to extract useful tags for entities in a social system. Our work leverages techniques from topic modeling to capture the interests of users and then uses them to extract relevant and descriptive tags for the entities they endorse. We perform an extensive evaluation of our proposed approach on real large-scale datasets from both Twitter and Flickr, and show that it significantly outperforms meaningful and competitive baselines.
2009947	Crowdsourcing for book search evaluation: impact of hit design on comparative system ranking The evaluation of information retrieval (IR) systems over special collections, such as large book repositories, is out of reach of traditional methods that rely upon editorial relevance judgments. Increasingly, the use of crowdsourcing to collect relevance labels has been regarded as a viable alternative that scales with modest costs. However, crowdsourcing suffers from undesirable worker practices and low quality contributions. In this paper we investigate the design and implementation of effective crowdsourcing tasks in the context of book search evaluation. We observe the impact of aspects of the Human Intelligence Task (HIT) design on the quality of relevance labels provided by the crowd. We assess the output in terms of label agreement with a gold standard data set and observe the effect of the crowdsourced relevance judgments on the resulting system rankings. This enables us to observe the effect of crowdsourcing on the entire IR evaluation process. Using the test set and experimental runs from the INEX 2010 Book Track, we find that varying the HIT design, and the pooling and document ordering strategies leads to considerable differences in agreement with the gold set labels. We then observe the impact of the crowdsourced relevance label sets on the relative system rankings using four IR performance metrics. System rankings based on MAP and Bpref remain less affected by different label sets while the Precision@10 and nDCG@10 lead to dramatically different system rankings, especially for labels acquired from HITs with weaker quality controls. Overall, we find that crowdsourcing can be an effective tool for the evaluation of IR systems, provided that care is taken when designing the HITs.
2009949	A site oriented method for segmenting web pages Information about how to segment a Web page can be used nowadays by applications such as segment aware Web search, classification and link analysis. In this research, we propose a fully automatic method for page segmentation and evaluate its application through experiments with four separate Web sites. While the method may be used in other applications, our main focus in this article is to use it as input to segment aware Web search systems. Our results indicate that the proposed method produces better segmentation results when compared to the best segmentation method we found in literature. Further, when applied as input to a segment aware Web search method, it produces results close to those produced when using a manual page segmentation method.
2009950	Composite hashing with multiple information sources Similarity search applications with a large amount of text and image data demands an efficient and effective solution. One useful strategy is to represent the examples in databases as compact binary codes through semantic hashing, which has attracted much attention due to its fast query/search speed and drastically reduced storage requirement. All of the current semantic hashing methods only deal with the case when each example is represented by one type of features. However, examples are often described from several different information sources in many real world applications. For example, the characteristics of a webpage can be derived from both its content part and its associated links. To address the problem of learning good hashing codes in this scenario, we propose a novel research problem -- Composite Hashing with Multiple Information Sources (CHMIS). The focus of the new research problem is to design an algorithm for incorporating the features from different information sources into the binary hashing codes efficiently and effectively. In particular, we propose an algorithm CHMIS-AW (CHMIS with Adjusted Weights) for learning the codes. The proposed algorithm integrates information from several different sources into the binary hashing codes by adjusting the weights on each individual source for maximizing the coding performance, and enables fast conversion from query examples to their binary hashing codes. Experimental results on five different datasets demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed method against several other state-of-the-art semantic hashing techniques.
2009951	Detecting outlier sections in us congressional legislation Reading congressional legislation, also known as bills, is often tedious because bills tend to be long and written in complex language. In IBM Many Bills, an interactive web-based visualization of legislation, users of different backgrounds can browse bills and quickly explore parts that are of interest to them. One task users have is to be able to locate sections that don't seem to fit with the overall topic of the bill. In this paper, we present novel techniques to determine which sections within a bill are likely to be outliers by employing approaches from information retrieval. The most promising techniques first detect the most topically relevant parts of a bill by ranking its sections, followed by a comparison between these topically relevant parts and the remaining sections in the bill. To compare sections we use various dissimilarity metrics based on Kullback-Leibler Divergence. The results indicate that these techniques are more successful than a classification based approach. Finally, we analyze how the dissimilarity metrics succeed in discriminating between sections that are strong outliers versus those that are 'milder' outliers.
2009952	DOM based content extraction via text density In addition to the main content, most web pages also contain navigation panels, advertisements and copyright and disclaimer notices. This additional content, which is also known as noise, is typically not related to the main subject and may hamper the performance of web data mining, and hence needs to be removed properly. In this paper, we present Content Extraction via Text Density (CETD) a fast, accurate and general method for extracting content from diverse web pages, and using DOM (Document Object Model) node text density to preserve the original structure. For this purpose, we introduce two concepts to measure the importance of nodes: Text Density and Composite Text Density. In order to extract content intact, we propose a technique called DensitySum to replace Data Smoothing. The approach was evaluated with the CleanEval benchmark and with randomly selected pages from well-known websites, where various web domains and styles are tested. The average F1-scores with our method were 8.79% higher than the best scores among several alternative methods.
2009954	Social context summarization We study a novel problem of social context summarization for Web documents. Traditional summarization research has focused on extracting informative sentences from standard documents. With the rapid growth of online social networks, abundant user generated content (e.g., comments) associated with the standard documents is available. Which parts in a document are social users really caring about? How can we generate summaries for standard documents by considering both the informativeness of sentences and interests of social users? This paper explores such an approach by modeling Web documents and social contexts into a unified framework. We propose a dual wing factor graph (DWFG) model, which utilizes the mutual reinforcement between Web documents and their associated social contexts to generate summaries. An efficient algorithm is designed to learn the proposed factor graph model.Experimental results on a Twitter data set validate the effectiveness of the proposed model. By leveraging the social context information, our approach obtains significant improvement (averagely +5.0%-17.3%) over several alternative methods (CRF, SVM, LR, PR, and DocLead) on the performance of summarization.
2009955	Probabilistic factor models for web site recommendation Due to the prevalence of personalization and information filtering applications, modeling users' interests on the Web has become increasingly important during the past few years. In this paper, aiming at providing accurate personalized Web site recommendations for Web users, we propose a novel probabilistic factor model based on dimensionality reduction techniques. We also extend the proposed method to collective probabilistic factor modeling, which further improves model performance by incorporating heterogeneous data sources. The proposed method is general, and can be applied to not only Web site recommendations, but also a wide range of Web applications, including behavioral targeting, sponsored search, etc. The experimental analysis on Web site recommendation shows that our method outperforms other traditional recommendation approaches. Moreover, the complexity analysis indicates that our approach can be applied to very large datasets since it scales linearly with the number of observations.
2009956	Efficiently collecting relevance information from clickthroughs for web retrieval system evaluation Various click models have been recently proposed as a principled approach to infer the relevance of documents from the clickthrough data. The inferred document relevance is potentially useful in evaluating the Web retrieval systems. In practice, it generally requires to acquire the accurate evaluation results within minimal users' query submissions. This problem is important for speeding up search engine development and evaluation cycle and acquiring reliable evaluation results on tail queries. In this paper, we propose a reordering framework for efficient evaluation problem in the context of clickthrough based Web retrieval evaluation. The main idea is to move up the documents that contribute more for the evaluation task. In this framework, we propose four intuitions and formulate them as an optimization problem. Both user study and TREC data based experiments validate that the reordering framework results in much fewer query submissions to get accurate evaluation results with only a little harm to the users' utility.
2009957	Unsupervised query segmentation using clickthrough for information retrieval Query segmentation is an important task toward understanding queries accurately, which is essential for improving search results. Existing segmentation models either use labeled data to predict the segmentation boundaries, for which the training data is expensive to collect, or employ unsupervised strategy based on a large text corpus, which might be inaccurate because of the lack of relevant information. In this paper, we propose a probabilistic model to exploit clickthrough data for query segmentation, where the model parameters are estimated via an efficient EM algorithm. We further study how to properly interpret the segmentation results and utilize them to improve retrieval accuracy. Specifically, we propose an integrated language model based on the standard bigram language model to exploit the probabilistic structure obtained through query segmentation. Experiment results on two datasets show that our segmentation model outperforms existing segmentation models. Furthermore, extensive experiments on a large retrieval dataset reveals that the results of query segmentation can be leveraged to improve retrieval relevance by using the proposed integrated language model.
2009959	Collaborative competitive filtering: learning recommender using context of user choice While a user's preference is directly reflected in the interactive choice process between her and the recommender, this wealth of information was not fully exploited for learning recommender models. In particular, existing collaborative filtering (CF) approaches take into account only the binary events of user actions but totally disregard the contexts in which users' decisions are made. In this paper, we propose Collaborative Competitive Filtering (CCF), a framework for learning user preferences by modeling the choice process in recommender systems. CCF employs a multiplicative latent factor model to characterize the dyadic utility function. But unlike CF, CCF models the user behavior of choices by encoding a local competition effect. In this way, CCF allows us to leverage dyadic data that was previously lumped together with missing data in existing CF models. We present two formulations and an efficient large scale optimization algorithm. Experiments on three real-world recommendation data sets demonstrate that CCF significantly outperforms standard CF approaches in both offline and online evaluations.
2009960	CLR: a collaborative location recommendation framework based on co-clustering GPS data tracked on mobile devices contains rich information about human activities and preferences. In this paper, GPS data is used in location-based services (LBSs) to provide collaborative location recommendations. We observe that most existing LBSs provide location recommendations by clustering the User-Location matrix. Since the User-Location matrix created based on GPS data is huge, there are two major problems with these methods. First, the number of similar locations that need to be considered in computing the recommendations can be numerous. As a result, the identification of truly relevant locations from numerous candidates is challenging. Second, the clustering process on large matrix is time consuming. Thus, when new GPS data arrives, complete re-clustering of the whole matrix is infeasible. To tackle these two problems, we propose the Collaborative Location Recommendation (CLR) framework for location recommendation. By considering activities (i.e., temporal preferences) and different user classes (i.e., Pattern Users, Normal Users, and Travelers) in the recommendation process, CLR is capable of generating more precise and refined recommendations to the users compared to the existing methods. Moreover, CLR employs a dynamic clustering algorithm CADC to cluster the trajectory data into groups of similar users, similar activities and similar locations efficiently by supporting incremental update of the groups when new GPS trajectory data arrives. We evaluate CLR with a real-world GPS dataset, and confirm that the CLR framework provides more accurate location recommendations compared to the existing methods.
2009961	Functional matrix factorizations for cold-start recommendation A key challenge in recommender system research is how to effectively profile new users, a problem generally known as cold-start recommendation. Recently the idea of progressively querying user responses through an initial interview process has been proposed as a useful new user preference elicitation strategy. In this paper, we present functional matrix factorization (fMF), a novel cold-start recommendation method that solves the problem of initial interview construction within the context of learning user and item profiles. Specifically, fMF constructs a decision tree for the initial interview with each node being an interview question, enabling the recommender to query a user adaptively according to her prior responses. More importantly, we associate latent profiles for each node of the tree --- in effect restricting the latent profiles to be a function of possible answers to the interview questions --- which allows the profiles to be gradually refined through the interview process based on user responses. We develop an iterative optimization algorithm that alternates between decision tree construction and latent profiles extraction as well as a regularization scheme that takes into account of the tree structure. Experimental results on three benchmark recommendation data sets demonstrate that the proposed fMF algorithm significantly outperforms existing methods for cold-start recommendation.
2009962	Exploiting geographical influence for collaborative point-of-interest recommendation In this paper, we aim to provide a point-of-interests (POI) recommendation service for the rapid growing location-based social networks (LBSNs), e.g., Foursquare, Whrrl, etc. Our idea is to explore user preference, social influence and geographical influence for POI recommendations. In addition to deriving user preference based on user-based collaborative filtering and exploring social influence from friends, we put a special emphasis on geographical influence due to the spatial clustering phenomenon exhibited in user check-in activities of LBSNs. We argue that the geographical influence among POIs plays an important role in user check-in behaviors and model it by power law distribution. Accordingly, we develop a collaborative recommendation algorithm based on geographical influence based on naive Bayesian. Furthermore, we propose a unified POI recommendation framework, which fuses user preference to a POI with social influence and geographical influence. Finally, we conduct a comprehensive performance evaluation over two large-scale datasets collected from Foursquare and Whrrl. Experimental results with these real datasets show that the unified collaborative recommendation approach significantly outperforms a wide spectrum of alternative recommendation approaches.
2009964	Why searchers switch: understanding and predicting engine switching rationales Search engine switching is the voluntary transition between Web search engines. Engine switching can occur for a number of reasons, including user dissatisfaction with search results, a desire for broader topic coverage or verification, user preferences, or even unintentionally. An improved understanding of switching rationales allows search providers to tailor the search experience according to the different causes. In this paper we study the reasons behind search engine switching within a session. We address the challenge of identifying switching rationales by designing and implementing client-side instrumentation to acquire in-situ feedbacks from users. Using this feedback, we investigate in detail the reasons that users switch engines within a session. We also study the relationship between implicit behavioral signals and the switching causes, and develop and evaluate models to predict the reasons for switching. In addition, we collect editorial judgments of switching rationales by third-party judges and show that we can recover switching causes a posteriori. Our findings provide valuable insights into why users switch search engines in a session and demonstrate the relationship between search behavior and switching motivations. The findings also reveal sufficient behavioral consistency to afford accurate prediction of switching rationale, which can be used to dynamically adapt the search experience and derive more accurate competitive metrics.
2009965	Find it if you can: a game for modeling different types of web search success using interaction data A better understanding of strategies and behavior of successful searchers is crucial for improving the experience of all searchers. However, research of search behavior has been struggling with the tension between the relatively small-scale, but controlled lab studies, and the large-scale log-based studies where the searcher intent and many other important factors have to be inferred. We present our solution for performing controlled, yet realistic, scalable, and reproducible studies of searcher behavior. We focus on difficult informational tasks, which tend to frustrate many users of the current web search technology. First, we propose a principled formalization of different types of "success" for informational search, which encapsulate and sharpen previously proposed models. Second, we present a scalable game-like infrastructure for crowdsourcing search behavior studies, specifically targeted towards capturing and evaluating successful search strategies on informational tasks with known intent. Third, we report our analysis of search success using these data, which confirm and extends previous findings. Finally, we demonstrate that our model can predict search success more effectively than the existing state-of-the-art methods, on both our data and on a different set of log data collected from regular search engine sessions. Together, our search success models, the data collection infrastructure, and the associated behavior analysis techniques, significantly advance the study of success in web search.
2009966	Measuring improvement in user search performance resulting from optimal search tips Web search performance can be improved by either improving the search engine itself or by educating the user to search more efficiently. There is a large amount of literature describing techniques for measuring the former; whereas, improvements resulting from the latter are more difficult to quantify. In this paper we demonstrate an experimental methodology that proves to successfully quantify improvements from user education. The user education in our study is realized in the form of tactical search feature tips that expand user awareness of task-relevant tools and features of the search application. Initially, these tips are presented in an idealized situation: each tip is shown at the same time as the study participants are given a task that is constructed to benefit from the specific tip. However, we also present a follow-up study roughly one week later in which the search tips are no longer presented but the study participants who previously were shown search tips still demonstrate improved search efficiency compared to the control group. This research has implications for search user interface designers and the study of information retrieval systems.
2009967	ViewSer: enabling large-scale remote user studies of web search examination and interaction Web search behaviour studies, including eye-tracking studies of search result examination, have resulted in numerous insights to improve search result quality and presentation. Yet, eye tracking studies have been restricted in scale, due to the expense and the effort required. Furthermore, as the reach of the Web expands, it becomes increasingly important to understand how searchers around the world see and interact with the search results. To address both challenges, we introduce ViewSer, a novel methodology for performing web search examination studies remotely, at scale, and without requiring eye-tracking equipment. ViewSer operates by automatically modifying the appearance of a search engine result page, to clearly show one search result at a time as if through a "viewport", while partially blurring the rest and allowing the participant to move the viewport naturally with a computer mouse or trackpad. Remarkably, the resulting result viewing and clickthrough patterns agree closely with unrestricted viewing of results, as measured by eye-tracking equipment, validated by a study with over 100 participants. We also explore applications of ViewSer to practical search tasks, such as analyzing the search result summary (snip- pet) attractiveness, result re-ranking, and evaluating snippet quality. These experiments could have only be done previously by tracking the eye movements for a small number of subjects in the lab. In contrast, our study was performed with over 100 participants, allowing us to reproduce and extend previous findings, establishing ViewSer as a valuable tool for large-scale search behavior experiments.
2009969	CrowdLogging: distributed, private, and anonymous search logging We describe CrowdLogging, an approach for distributed search log collection, storage, and mining, with the dual goals of preserving privacy and making the mined information broadly available. Most search log mining approaches and most privacy enhancing schemes have focused on centralized search logs and methods for disseminating them to third parties. In our approach, a user's search log is encrypted and shared in such a way that (a) the source of a search behavior artifact, such as a query, is unknown and (b) extremely rare artifacts---that is, artifacts more likely to contain private information---are not revealed. The approach works with any search behavior artifact that can be extracted from a search log, including queries, query reformulations, and query-click pairs. In this work, we: (1) present a distributed search log collection, storage, and mining framework; (2) compare several privacy policies, including differential privacy, showing the trade-offs between strong guarantees and the utility of the released data; (3) demonstrate the impact of our approach using two existing research query logs; and (4) describe a pilot study for which we implemented a version of the framework.
2009970	Out of sight, not out of mind: on the effect of social and physical detachment on information need The information needs of users and the documents which answer it are frequently contingent on the different characteristics of users. This is especially evident during natural disasters, such as earthquakes and violent weather incidents, which create a strong transient information need. In this paper we investigate how the information need of users is affected by their physical detachment, as estimated by their physical location in relation to that of the event, and by their social detachment, as quantified by the number of their acquaintances who may be affected by the event. Drawing on large-scale data from three major events, we show that social and physical detachment levels of users are a major influence on their information needs, as manifested by their search engine queries. We demonstrate how knowing social and physical detachment levels can assist in improving retrieval for two applications: identifying search queries related to events and ranking results in response to event-related queries. We find that the average precision in identifying relevant search queries improves by approximately 18%, and that the average precision of ranking that uses detachment information improves by 10%.
2009971	Scalable multi-dimensional user intent identification using tree structured distributions The problem of identifying user intent has received considerable attention in recent years, particularly in the context of improving the search experience via query contextualization. Intent can be characterized by multiple dimensions, which are often not observed from query words alone. Accurate identification of Intent from query words remains a challenging problem primarily because it is extremely difficult to discover these dimensions. The problem is often significantly compounded due to lack of representative training sample. We present a generic, extensible framework for learning the multi-dimensional representation of user intent from the query words. The approach models the latent relationships between facets using tree structured distribution which leads to an efficient and convergent algorithm, FastQ, for identifying the multi-faceted intent of users based on just the query words. We also incorporated WordNet to extend the system capabilities to queries which contain words that do not appear in the training data. Empirical results show that FastQ yields accurate identification of intent when compared to a gold standard.
2009972	Social annotation in query expansion: a machine learning approach Automatic query expansion technologies have been proven to be effective in many information retrieval tasks. Most existing approaches are based on the assumption that the most informative terms in top-retrieved documents can be viewed as context of the query and thus can be used for query expansion. One problem with these approaches is that some of the expansion terms extracted from feedback documents are irrelevant to the query, and thus may hurt the retrieval performance. In social annotations, users provide different keywords describing the respective Web pages from various aspects. These features may be used to boost IR performance. However, to date, the potential of social annotation for this task has been largely unexplored. In this paper, we explore the possibility and potential of social annotation as a new resource for extracting useful expansion terms. In particular, we propose a term ranking approach based on social annotation resource. The proposed approach consists of two phases: (1) in the first phase, we propose a term-dependency method to choose the most likely expansion terms; (2) in the second phase, we develop a machine learning method for term ranking, which is learnt from the statistics of the candidate expansion terms, using ListNet. Experimental results on three TREC test collections show that the retrieval performance can be improved when the term ranking method is used. In addition, we also demonstrate that terms selected by the term-dependency method from social annotation resources are beneficial to improve the retrieval performance.
2009974	Predicting web searcher satisfaction with existing community-based answers Community-based Question Answering (CQA) sites, such as Yahoo! Answers, Baidu Knows, Naver, and Quora, have been rapidly growing in popularity. The resulting archives of posted answers to questions, in Yahoo! Answers alone, already exceed in size 1 billion, and are aggressively indexed by web search engines. In fact, a large number of search engine users benefit from these archives, by finding existing answers that address their own queries. This scenario poses new challenges and opportunities for both search engines and CQA sites. To this end, we formulate a new problem of predicting the satisfaction of web searchers with CQA answers. We analyze a large number of web searches that result in a visit to a popular CQA site, and identify unique characteristics of searcher satisfaction in this setting, namely, the effects of query clarity, query-to-question match, and answer quality. We then propose and evaluate several approaches to predicting searcher satisfaction that exploit these characteristics. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to predict and validate the usefulness of CQA archives for external searchers, rather than for the original askers. Our results suggest promising directions for improving and exploiting community question answering services in pursuit of satisfying even more Web search queries.
2009975	Competition-based user expertise score estimation In this paper, we consider the problem of estimating the relative expertise score of users in community question and answering services (CQA). Previous approaches typically only utilize the explicit question answering relationship between askers and an-swerers and apply link analysis to address this problem. The im-plicit pairwise comparison between two users that is implied in the best answer selection is ignored. Given a question and answering thread, it's likely that the expertise score of the best answerer is higher than the asker's and all other non-best answerers'. The goal of this paper is to explore such pairwise comparisons inferred from best answer selections to estimate the relative expertise scores of users. Formally, we treat each pairwise comparison between two users as a two-player competition with one winner and one loser. Two competition models are proposed to estimate user expertise from pairwise comparisons. Using the NTCIR-8 CQA task data with 3 million questions and introducing answer quality prediction based evaluation metrics, the experimental results show that the pairwise comparison based competition model significantly outperforms link analysis based approaches (PageRank and HITS) and pointwise approaches (number of best answers and best answer ratio) for estimating the expertise of active users. Furthermore, it's shown that pairwise comparison based competi-tion models have better discriminative power than other methods. It's also found that answer quality (best answer) is an important factor to estimate user expertise.
2009976	Learning online discussion structures by conditional random fields Online forum discussions are emerging as valuable information repository, where knowledge is accumulated by the interaction among users, leading to multiple threads with structures. Such replying structure in each thread conveys important information about the discussion content. Unfortunately, not all the online forum sites would explicitly record such replying relationship, making it hard to for both users and computers to digest the information buried in a thread discussion. In this paper, we propose a probabilistic model in the Conditional Random Fields framework to predict the replying structure for a threaded online discussion. Different from previous thread reconstruction methods, most of which fail to consider dependency between the posts, we cast the problem as a supervised structure learning problem to incorporate the features describing the structural dependency among the discussion content and learn their relationship. Experiment results on three different online forums show that the proposed method can well capture the replying structures in online discussion threads, and multiple tasks such as forum search and question answering can benefit from the reconstructed replying structures.
2009977	Mining topics on participations for community discovery Community discovery on large-scale linked document corpora has been a hot research topic for decades. There are two types of links. The first one, which we call d2d-link, indicates connectiveness among different documents, such as blog references and research paper citations. The other one, which we call u2u-link, represents co-occurrences or simultaneous participations of different users in one document and typically each document from u2u-link corpus has more than one user/author. Examples of u2u-link data covers email archives and research paper co-authorship networks. Community discovery in d2d-link data has achieved much success, while methods for that in u2u-link data either make no use of the textual content of the documents or make oversimplified assumptions about the users and the textual content. In this paper we propose a general approach of community discovery for u2u-link data, i.e., multiple user data, by placing topical variables on multiple authors' participations in documents. Experiments on a research proceeding co-authorship corpus and a New York Times news corpus show the effectiveness of our model.
2009979	Authorship classification: a discriminative syntactic tree mining approach In the past, there have been dozens of studies on automatic authorship classification, and many of these studies concluded that the writing style is one of the best indicators for original authorship. From among the hundreds of features which were developed, syntactic features were best able to reflect an author's writing style. However, due to the high computational complexity for extracting and computing syntactic features, only simple variations of basic syntactic features such as function words, POS(Part of Speech) tags, and rewrite rules were considered. In this paper, we propose a new feature set of k-embedded-edge subtree patterns that holds more syntactic information than previous feature sets. We also propose a novel approach to directly mining them from a given set of syntactic trees. We show that this approach reduces the computational burden of using complex syntactic structures as the feature set. Comprehensive experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate that our approach is reliable and more accurate than previous studies.
2009980	On theme location discovery for travelogue services In this paper, we aim to develop a travelogue service that discovers and conveys various travelogue digests, in form of theme locations, geographical scope, traveling trajectory and location snippet, to users. In this service, theme locations in a travelogue are the core information to discover. Thus we aim to address the problem of theme location discovery to enable the above travelogue services. Due to the inherent ambiguity of location relevance, we perform location relevance mining (LRM) in two complementary angles, relevance classification and relevance ranking, to provide comprehensive understanding of locations. Furthermore, we explore the textual (e.g., surrounding words) and geographical (e.g., geographical relationship among locations) features of locations to develop a co-training model for enhancement of classification performance. Built upon the mining result of LRM, we develop a series of techniques for provisioning of the aforementioned travelogue digests in our travelogue system. Finally, we conduct comprehensive experiments on collected travelogues to evaluate the performance of our location relevance mining techniques and demonstrate the effectiveness of the travelogue service.
2009981	Effective sentiment stream analysis with self-augmenting training and demand-driven projection How do we analyze sentiments over a set of opinionated Twitter messages? This issue has been widely studied in recent years, with a prominent approach being based on the application of classification techniques. Basically, messages are classified according to the implicit attitude of the writer with respect to a query term. A major concern, however, is that Twitter (and other media channels) follows the data stream model, and thus the classifier must operate with limited resources, including labeled data for training classification models. This imposes serious challenges for current classification techniques, since they need to be constantly fed with fresh training messages, in order to track sentiment drift and to provide up-to-date sentiment analysis. We propose solutions to this problem. The heart of our approach is a training augmentation procedure which takes as input a small training seed, and then it automatically incorporates new relevant messages to the training data. Classification models are produced on-the-fly using association rules, which are kept up-to-date in an incremental fashion, so that at any given time the model properly reflects the sentiments in the event being analyzed. In order to track sentiment drift, training messages are projected on a demand driven basis, according to the content of the message being classified. Projecting the training data offers a series of advantages, including the ability to quickly detect trending information emerging in the stream. We performed the analysis of major events in 2010, and we show that the prediction performance remains about the same, or even increases, as the stream passes and new training messages are acquired. This result holds for different languages, even in cases where sentiment distribution changes over time, or in cases where the initial training seed is rather small. We derive lower-bounds for prediction performance, and we show that our approach is extremely effective under diverse learning scenarios, providing gains that range from 7% to 58%.
2009983	Hypergeometric language models for republished article finding Republished article finding is the task of identifying instances of articles that have been published in one source and republished more or less verbatim in another source, which is often a social media source. We address this task as an ad hoc retrieval problem, using the source article as a query. Our approach is based on language modeling. We revisit the assumptions underlying the unigram language model taking into account the fact that in our setup queries are as long as complete news articles. We argue that in this case, the underlying generative assumption of sampling words from a document with replacement, i.e., the multinomial modeling of documents, produces less accurate query likelihood estimates. To make up for this discrepancy, we consider distributions that emerge from sampling without replacement: the central and non-central hypergeometric distributions. We present two retrieval models that build on top of these distributions: a log odds model and a bayesian model where document parameters are estimated using the Dirichlet compound multinomial distribution. We analyse the behavior of our new models using a corpus of news articles and blog posts and find that for the task of republished article finding, where we deal with queries whose length approaches the length of the documents to be retrieved, models based on distributions associated with sampling without replacement outperform traditional models based on multinomial distributions.
2009984	Estimation methods for ranking recent information Temporal aspects of documents can impact relevance for certain kinds of queries. In this paper, we build on earlier work of modeling temporal information. We propose an extension to the Query Likelihood Model that incorporates query-specific information to estimate rate parameters, and we introduce a temporal factor into language model smoothing and query expansion using pseudo-relevance feedback. We evaluate these extensions using a Twitter corpus and two newspaper article collections. Results suggest that, compared to prior approaches, our models are more effective at capturing the temporal variability of relevance associated with some topics.
2009985	Query by document via a decomposition-based two-level retrieval approach Retrieving similar documents from a large-scale text corpus according to a given document is a fundamental technique for many applications. However, most of existing indexing techniques have difficulties to address this problem due to special properties of a document query, e.g. high dimensionality, sparse representation and semantic concern. Towards addressing this problem, we propose a two-level retrieval solution based on a document decomposition idea. A document is decomposed to a compact vector and a few document specific keywords by a dimension reduction approach. The compact vector embodies the major semantics of a document, and the document specific keywords complement the discriminative power lost in dimension reduction process. We adopt locality sensitive hashing (LSH) to index the compact vectors, which guarantees to quickly find a set of related documents according to the vector of a query document. Then we re-rank documents in this set by their document specific keywords. In experiments, we obtained promising results on various datasets in terms of both accuracy and performance. We demonstrated that this solution is able to index large-scale corpus for efficient similarity-based document retrieval.
2009987	Integrating hierarchical feature selection and classifier training for multi-label image annotation It is well accepted that using high-dimensional multi-modal visual features for image content representation and classifier training may achieve more sufficient characterization of the diverse visual properties of the images and further result in higher discrimination power of the classifiers. However, training the classifiers in a high-dimensional multi-modal feature space requires a large number of labeled training images, which will further result in the problem of curse of dimensionality . To tackle this problem, a hierarchical feature subset selection algorithm is proposed to enable more accurate image classification, where the processes for feature selection and classifier training are seamlessly integrated in a single framework. First, a feature hierarchy (i.e., concept tree for automatic feature space partition and organization) is used to automatically partition high-dimensional heterogeneous multi-modal visual features into multiple low-dimensional homogeneous single-modal feature subsets according to their certain physical meanings and each of them is used to characterize one certain type of the diverse visual properties of the images. Second, principal component analysis (PCA) is performed on each homogeneous singlemodal feature subset to select the most representative feature dimensions and a weak classifier is learned simultaneously. After the weak classifiers and their representative feature dimensions are available for all these homogeneous single-modal feature subsets, they are combined to generate an ensemble image classifier and achieve hierarchical feature subset selection. Our experiments on a specific domain of natural images have also obtained very positive results.
2009988	Efficient manifold ranking for image retrieval Manifold Ranking (MR), a graph-based ranking algorithm, has been widely applied in information retrieval and shown to have excellent performance and feasibility on a variety of data types. Particularly, it has been successfully applied to content-based image retrieval, because of its outstanding ability to discover underlying geometrical structure of the given image database. However, manifold ranking is computationally very expensive, both in graph construction and ranking computation stages, which significantly limits its applicability to very large data sets. In this paper, we extend the original manifold ranking algorithm and propose a new framework named Efficient Manifold Ranking (EMR). We aim to address the shortcomings of MR from two perspectives: scalable graph construction and efficient computation. Specifically, we build an anchor graph on the data set instead of the traditional k-nearest neighbor graph, and design a new form of adjacency matrix utilized to speed up the ranking computation. The experimental results on a real world image database demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our proposed method. With a comparable performance to the original manifold ranking, our method significantly reduces the computational time, makes it a promising method to large scale real world retrieval problems.
2009989	Mining weakly labeled web facial images for search-based face annotation In this paper, we investigate a search-based face annotation framework by mining weakly labeled facial images that are freely available on the internet. A key component of such a search-based annotation paradigm is to build a database of facial images with accurate labels. This is however challenging since facial images on the WWW are often noisy and incomplete. To improve the label quality of raw web facial images, we propose an effective Unsupervised Label Refinement (ULR) approach for refining the labels of web facial images by exploring machine learning techniques. We develop effective optimization algorithms to solve the large-scale learning tasks efficiently, and conduct an extensive empirical study on a web facial image database with 400 persons and 40,000 web facial images. Encouraging results showed that the proposed ULR technique can significantly boost the performance of the promising search-based face annotation scheme.
2009991	Temporal index sharding for space-time efficiency in archive search Time-travel queries that couple temporal constraints with keyword queries are useful in searching large-scale archives of time-evolving content such as the web archives or wikis. Typical approaches for efficient evaluation of these queries involve slicing either the entire collection [20] or individual index lists [10] along the time-axis. Both these methods are not satisfactory since they sacrifice compactness of index for processing efficiency making them either too big or, otherwise, too slow. We present a novel index organization scheme that shards each index list with almost zero increase in index size but still minimizes the cost of reading index entries during query processing. Based on the optimal sharding thus btained, we develop a practically efficient sharding that takes into account the different costs of random and sequential accesses. Our algorithm merges shards from the optimal solution to allow for a few extra sequential accesses while gaining significantly by reducing the number of random accesses. We empirically establish the effectiveness of our sharding scheme with experiments over the revision history of the English Wikipedia between 2001-2005 (approx 700 GB) and an archive of U.K. governmental web sites (approx 400 GB). Our results demonstrate the feasibility of faster time-travel query processing with no space overhead.
2009992	Inverted indexes for phrases and strings Inverted indexes are the most fundamental and widely used data structures in information retrieval. For each unique word occurring in a document collection, the inverted index stores a list of the documents in which this word occurs. Compression techniques are often applied to further reduce the space requirement of these lists. However, the index has a shortcoming, in that only predefined pattern queries can be supported efficiently. In terms of string documents where word boundaries are undefined, if we have to index all the substrings of a given document, then the storage quickly becomes quadratic in the data size. Also, if we want to apply the same type of indexes for querying phrases or sequence of words, then the inverted index will end up storing redundant information. In this paper, we show the first set of inverted indexes which work naturally for strings as well as phrase searching. The central idea is to exclude document d in the inverted list of a string P if every occurrence of P in d is subsumed by another string of which P is a prefix. With this we show that our space utilization is close to the optimal. Techniques from succinct data structures are deployed to achieve compression while allowing fast access in terms of frequency and document id based retrieval. Compression and speed trade-offs are evaluated for different variants of the proposed index. For phrase searching, we show that our indexes compare favorably against a typical inverted index deploying position-wise intersections. We also show efficient top- k based retrieval under relevance metrics like frequency and tf-idf .
2009993	Faster temporal range queries over versioned text Versioned textual collections are collections that retain multiple versions of a document as it evolves over time. Important large-scale examples are Wikipedia and the web collection of the Internet Archive. Search queries over such collections often use keywords as well as temporal constraints, most commonly a time range of interest. In this paper, we study how to support such temporal range queries over versioned text. Our goal is to process these queries faster than the corresponding keyword-only queries, by exploiting the additional constraint. A simple approach might partition the index into different time ranges, and then access only the relevant parts. However, specialized inverted index compression techniques are crucial for large versioned collections, and a naive partitioning can negatively affect index size and query throughput. We show how to achieve high query throughput by using smart index partitioning techniques that take index compression into account. Experiments on over 85 million versions of Wikipedia articles show that queries can be executed in a few milliseconds on memory-based index structures, and only slightly more time on disk-based structures. We also show how to efficiently support the recently proposed stable top-k search primitive on top of our schemes.
2009994	Indexing strategies for graceful degradation of search quality Large web search engines process billions of queries each day over tens of billions of documents with often very stringent requirements for a user's search experience, in particular, low latency and highly relevant search results. Index generation and serving are key to satisfying both these requirements. For example, the load to search engines can vary drastically when popular events happen around the world. In the case when the load is exceeding what the search engine can serve, queries will get dropped. This results in an un- graceful degradation in search quality. Another example that could increase the query load and affect the user's search experience are ambiguous queries which often result in the execution of multiple query alterations in the back end. In this paper, we look into the problem of designing robust indexing strategies, i.e. strategies that allow for a graceful degradation of search quality in both the above scenarios. We study the problems of index generation and serving using the notions of document allocation, server selection, and document replication. We explore the space of efficient algorithms for these problems and empirically corroborate with existing theory that it is hard to optimally solve the alocation and selection problems without any replication. We propose a greedy replication algorithm and study its performance under different choices of allocation and selection. Further, we show hat under random selection and allocation, our algorithm is optimal.
2009996	Incremental diversification for very large sets: a streaming-based approach Result diversification is an effective method to reduce the risk that none of the returned results satisfies a user's query intention. It has been shown to decrease query abandonment substantially. On the other hand, computing an optimally diverse set is NP-hard for the usual objectives. Existing greedy diversification algorithms require random access to the input set, rendering them impractical in the context of large result sets or continuous data. To solve this issue, we present a novel diversification approach which treats the input as a stream and processes each element in an incremental fashion, maintaining a near-optimal diverse set at any point in the stream. Our approach exhibits a linear computation and constant memory complexity with respect to input size, without significant loss of diversification quality. In an extensive evaluation on several real-world data sets, we show the applicability and efficiency of our algorithm for large result sets as well as for continuous query scenarios such as news stream subscriptions.
2009997	Intent-aware search result diversification Search result diversification has gained momentum as a way to tackle ambiguous queries. An effective approach to this problem is to explicitly model the possible aspects underlying a query, in order to maximise the estimated relevance of the retrieved documents with respect to the different aspects. However, such aspects themselves may represent information needs with rather distinct intents (e.g., informational or navigational). Hence, a diverse ranking could benefit from applying intent-aware retrieval models when estimating the relevance of documents to different aspects. In this paper, we propose to diversify the results retrieved for a given query, by learning the appropriateness of different retrieval models for each of the aspects underlying this query. Thorough experiments within the evaluation framework provided by the diversity task of the TREC 2009 and 2010 Web tracks show that the proposed approach can significantly improve state-of-the-art diversification approaches.
2009998	Parameterized concept weighting in verbose queries The majority of the current information retrieval models weight the query concepts (e.g., terms or phrases) in an unsupervised manner, based solely on the collection statistics. In this paper, we go beyond the unsupervised estimation of concept weights, and propose a parameterized concept weighting model. In our model, the weight of each query concept is determined using a parameterized combination of diverse importance features. Unlike the existing supervised ranking methods, our model learns importance weights not only for the explicit query concepts, but also for the latent concepts that are associated with the query through pseudo-relevance feedback. The experimental results on both newswire and web TREC corpora show that our model consistently and significantly outperforms a wide range of state-of-the-art retrieval models. In addition, our model significantly reduces the number of latent concepts used for query expansion compared to the non-parameterized pseudo-relevance feedback based models.
2009999	UPS: efficient privacy protection in personalized web search In recent years, personalized web search (PWS) has demonstrated effectiveness in improving the quality of search service on the Internet. Unfortunately, the need for collecting private information in PWS has become a major barrier for its wide proliferation. We study privacy protection in PWS engines which capture personalities in user profiles. We propose a PWS framework called UPS that can generalize profiles in for each query according to user-specified privacy requirements. Two predictive metrics are proposed to evaluate the privacy breach risk and the query utility for hierarchical user profile. We develop two simple but effective generalization algorithms for user profiles allowing for query-level customization using our proposed metrics. We also provide an online prediction mechanism based on query utility for deciding whether to personalize a query in UPS. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of our framework.
2010001	Handling data sparsity in collaborative filtering using emotion and semantic based features Collaborative filtering (CF) aims to recommend items based on prior user interaction. Despite their success, CF techniques do not handle data sparsity well, especially in the case of the cold start problem where there is no past rating for an item. In this paper, we provide a framework, which is able to tackle such issues by considering item-related emotions and semantic data. In order to predict the rating of an item for a given user, this framework relies on an extension of Latent Dirichlet Allocation, and on gradient boosted trees for the final prediction. We apply this framework to movie recommendation and consider two emotion spaces extracted from the movie plot summary and the reviews, and three semantic spaces: actor, director, and genre. Experiments with the 100K and 1M MovieLens datasets show that including emotion and semantic information significantly improves the accuracy of prediction and improves upon the state-of-the-art CF techniques. We also analyse the importance of each feature space and describe some uncovered latent groups.
2010002	Fast context-aware recommendations with factorization machines The situation in which a choice is made is an important information for recommender systems. Context-aware recommenders take this information into account to make predictions. So far, the best performing method for context-aware rating prediction in terms of predictive accuracy is Multiverse Recommendation based on the Tucker tensor factorization model. However this method has two drawbacks: (1) its model complexity is exponential in the number of context variables and polynomial in the size of the factorization and (2) it only works for categorical context variables. On the other hand there is a large variety of fast but specialized recommender methods which lack the generality of context-aware methods. We propose to apply Factorization Machines (FMs) to model contextual information and to provide context-aware rating predictions. This approach results in fast context-aware recommendations because the model equation of FMs can be computed in linear time both in the number of context variables and the factorization size. For learning FMs, we develop an iterative optimization method that analytically finds the least-square solution for one parameter given the other ones. Finally, we show empirically that our approach outperforms Multiverse Recommendation in prediction quality and runtime.
2010003	Filtering semi-structured documents based on faceted feedback Existing adaptive filtering systems learn user profiles based on users' relevance judgments on documents. In some cases, users have some prior knowledge about what features are important for a document to be relevant. For example, a Spanish speaker may only want news written in Spanish, and thus a relevant document should contain the feature "Language: Spanish"; a researcher working on HIV knows an article with the medical subject "Subject: AIDS" is very likely to be interesting to him/her. Semi-structured documents with rich faceted metadata are increasingly prevalent over the Internet. Motivated by the commonly used faceted search interface in e-commerce, we study whether users' prior knowledge about faceted features could be exploited for filtering semi-structured documents. We envision two faceted feedback solicitation mechanisms, and propose a novel user profile learning algorithm that can incorporate user feedback on features. To evaluate the proposed work, we use two data sets from the TREC filtering track, and conduct a user study on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Our experimental results show that user feedback on faceted features is useful for filtering. The new user profile learning algorithm can effectively learn from user feedback on faceted features and performs better than several other methods adapted from the feature-based feedback techniques proposed for retrieval and text classification tasks in previous work.
2010004	Learning relevance from heterogeneous social network and its application in online targeting The rise of social networking services in recent years presents new research challenges for matching users with interesting content. While the content-rich nature of these social networks offers many cues on "interests" of a user such as text in user-generated content, the links in the network, and user demographic information, there is a lack of successful methods for combining such heterogeneous data to model interest and relevance. This paper proposes a new method for modeling user interest from heterogeneous data sources with distinct but unknown importance. The model leverages links in the social graph by integrating the conceptual representation of a user's linked objects. The proposed method seeks a scalable relevance model of user interest, that can be discriminatively optimized for various relevance-centric problems, such as Internet advertisement selection, recommendation, and web search personalization. We apply our algorithm to the task of selecting relevant ads for users on Facebook's social network. We demonstrate that our algorithm can be scaled to work with historical data for all users, and learns interesting associations between concept classes automatically. We also show that using the learnt user model to predict the relevance of an ad is the single most important signal in our ranking system for new ads (with no historical clickthrough data), and overall leads to an improvement in the accuracy of the clickthrough rate prediction, a key problem in online advertising.
2010006	ILDA: interdependent LDA model for learning latent aspects and their ratings from online product reviews Today, more and more product reviews become available on the Internet, e.g., product review forums, discussion groups, and Blogs. However, it is almost impossible for a customer to read all of the different and possibly even contradictory opinions and make an informed decision. Therefore, mining online reviews (opinion mining) has emerged as an interesting new research direction. Extracting aspects and the corresponding ratings is an important challenge in opinion mining. An aspect is an attribute or component of a product, e.g. 'screen' for a digital camera. It is common that reviewers use different words to describe an aspect (e.g. 'LCD', 'display', 'screen'). A rating is an intended interpretation of the user satisfaction in terms of numerical values. Reviewers usually express the rating of an aspect by a set of sentiments, e.g. 'blurry screen'. In this paper we present three probabilistic graphical models which aim to extract aspects and corresponding ratings of products from online reviews. The first two models extend standard PLSI and LDA to generate a rated aspect summary of product reviews. As our main contribution, we introduce Interdependent Latent Dirichlet Allocation (ILDA) model. This model is more natural for our task since the underlying probabilistic assumptions (interdependency between aspects and ratings) are appropriate for our problem domain. We conduct experiments on a real life dataset, Epinions.com, demonstrating the improved effectiveness of the ILDA model in terms of the likelihood of a held-out test set, and the accuracy of aspects and aspect ratings.
2010007	Clickthrough-based latent semantic models for web search This paper presents two new document ranking models for Web search based upon the methods of semantic representation and the statistical translation-based approach to information retrieval (IR). Assuming that a query is parallel to the titles of the documents clicked on for that query, large amounts of query-title pairs are constructed from clickthrough data; two latent semantic models are learned from this data. One is a bilingual topic model within the language modeling framework. It ranks documents for a query by the likelihood of the query being a semantics-based translation of the documents. The semantic representation is language independent and learned from query-title pairs, with the assumption that a query and its paired titles share the same distribution over semantic topics. The other is a discriminative projection model within the vector space modeling framework. Unlike Latent Semantic Analysis and its variants, the projection matrix in our model, which is used to map from term vectors into sematic space, is learned discriminatively such that the distance between a query and its paired title, both represented as vectors in the projected semantic space, is smaller than that between the query and the titles of other documents which have no clicks for that query. These models are evaluated on the Web search task using a real world data set. Results show that they significantly outperform their corresponding baseline models, which are state-of-the-art.
2010008	Regularized latent semantic indexing Topic modeling can boost the performance of information retrieval, but its real-world application is limited due to scalability issues. Scaling to larger document collections via parallelization is an active area of research, but most solutions require drastic steps such as vastly reducing input vocabulary. We introduce Regularized Latent Semantic Indexing (RLSI), a new method which is designed for parallelization. It is as effective as existing topic models, and scales to larger datasets without reducing input vocabulary. RLSI formalizes topic modeling as a problem of minimizing a quadratic loss function regularized by l ? and/or l ? norm. This formulation allows the learning process to be decomposed into multiple sub-optimization problems which can be optimized in parallel, for example via MapReduce. We particularly propose adopting l ? norm on topics and l ? norm on document representations, to create a model with compact and readable topics and useful for retrieval. Relevance ranking experiments on three TREC datasets show that RLSI performs better than LSI, PLSI, and LDA, and the improvements are sometimes statistically significant. Experiments on a web dataset, containing about 1.6 million documents and 7 million terms, demonstrate a similar boost in performance on a larger corpus and vocabulary than in previous studies.
2010010	Multimedia answering: enriching text QA with media information Existing community question-answering forums usually provide only textual answers. However, for many questions, pure texts cannot provide intuitive information, while image or video contents are more appropriate. In this paper, we introduce a scheme that is able to enrich text answers with image and video information. Our scheme investigates a rich set of techniques including question/answer classification, query generation, image and video search reranking, etc. Given a question and the community-contributed answer, our approach is able to determine which type of media information should be added, and then automatically collects data from Internet to enrich the textual answer. Different from some efforts that attempt to directly answer questions with image and video data, our approach is built based on the community-contributed textual answers and thus it is more feasible and able to deal with more complex questions. We have conducted empirical study on more than 3,000 QA pairs and the results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.
2010011	Enhancing multi-label music genre classification through ensemble techniques In the field of Music Information Retrieval (MIR), multi-label genre classification is the problem of assigning one or more genre labels to a music piece. In this work, we propose a set of ensemble techniques, which are specific to the task of multi-label genre classification. Our goal is to enhance classification performance by combining multiple classifiers. In addition, we also investigate some existing ensemble techniques from machine learning. The effectiveness of these techniques is demonstrated through a set of empirical experiments and various related issues are discussed. To the best of our knowledge, there has been limited work on applying ensemble techniques to multi-label genre classification in the literature and we consider the results in this work as our initial efforts toward this end. The significance of our work has two folds: (1) proposing a set of ensemble techniques specific to music genre classification and (2) shedding light on further research along this direction.
2010012	Picasso - to sing, you must close your eyes and draw We study the problem of automatically assigning appropriate music pieces to a picture or, in general, series of pictures. This task, commonly referred to as soundtrack suggestion, is non-trivial as it requires a lot of human attention and a good deal of experience, with master pieces distinguished, e.g., with the Academy Award for Best Original Score. We put forward PICASSO to solve this task in a fully automated way. PICASSO makes use of genuine samples obtained from first-class contemporary movies. Hence, the training set can be arbitrarily large and is also inexpensive to obtain but still provides an excellent source of information. At query time, PICASSO employs a three-level algorithm. First, it selects for a given query image a ranking of the most similar screenshots taken, and subsequently, selects for each screenshot the most similar songs to the music played in the movie when the screenshot was taken. Last, it issues a top-K aggregation algorithm to find the overall best suitable songs available. We have created a large training set consisting of over 40,000 image/soundtrack samples obtained from 28 movies and evaluated the suitability of PICASSO by means of a user study.
2010014	Enhanced results for web search "Ten blue links" have defined web search results for the last fifteen years -- snippets of text combined with document titles and URLs. In this paper, we establish the notion of enhanced search results that extend web search results to include multimedia objects such as images and video, intent-specific key value pairs, and elements that allow the user to interact with the contents of a web page directly from the search results page. We show that users express a preference for enhanced results both explicitly, and when observed in their search behavior. We also demonstrate the effectiveness of enhanced results in helping users to assess the relevance of search results. Lastly, we show that we can efficiently generate enhanced results to cover a significant fraction of search result pages.
2010015	Summarizing the differences in multilingual news There usually exist many news articles written in different languages about a hot news event. The news articles in different languages are written in different ways to reflect different standpoints. For example, the Chinese news agencies and the Western news agencies have published many articles to report the same news of "Liu Xiaobo's Nobel Prize" in Chinese and English languages, respectively. The Chinese news articles and the English news articles share something about the news fact in common, but they focus on different aspects in order to reflect different standpoints about the event. In this paper, we investigate the task of multilingual news summarization for the purpose of finding and summarizing the major differences between the news articles about the same event in the Chinese and English languages. We propose a novel constrained co-ranking (C-CoRank) method for addressing this special task. The C-CoRank method adds the constraints between the difference score and the common score of each sentence to the co-ranking process. Evaluation results on the manually labeled test set with 15 news topics show the effectiveness of our proposed method, and the constrained co-ranking method can outperform a few baselines and the typical co-ranking method.
2010016	Evolutionary timeline summarization: a balanced optimization framework via iterative substitution Classic news summarization plays an important role with the exponential document growth on the Web. Many approaches are proposed to generate summaries but seldom simultaneously consider evolutionary characteristics of news plus to traditional summary elements. Therefore, we present a novel framework for the web mining problem named Evolutionary Timeline Summarization (ETS). Given the massive collection of time-stamped web documents related to a general news query, ETS aims to return the evolution trajectory along the timeline, consisting of individual but correlated summaries of each date, emphasizing relevance, coverage, coherence and cross-date diversity . ETS greatly facilitates fast news browsing and knowledge comprehension and hence is a necessity. We formally formulate the task as an optimization problem via iterative substitution from a set of sentences to a subset of sentences that satisfies the above requirements, balancing coherence/diversity measurement and local/global summary quality. The optimized substitution is iteratively conducted by incorporating several constraints until convergence. We develop experimental systems to evaluate on 6 instinctively different datasets which amount to 10251 documents. Performance comparisons between different system-generated timelines and manually created ones by human editors demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed framework in terms of ROUGE metrics.
2010018	Ranking related news predictions We estimate that nearly one third of news articles contain references to future events. While this information can prove crucial to understanding news stories and how events will develop for a given topic, there is currently no easy way to access this information. We propose a new task to address the problem of retrieving and ranking sentences that contain mentions to future events, which we call ranking related news predictions. In this paper, we formally define this task and propose a learning to rank approach based on 4 classes of features: term similarity, entity-based similarity, topic similarity, and temporal similarity. Through extensive evaluations using a corpus consisting of 1.8 millions news articles and 6,000 manually judged relevance pairs, we show that our approach is able to retrieve a significant number of relevant predictions related to a given topic.
2010019	Collective entity linking in web text: a graph-based method Entity Linking (EL) is the task of linking name mentions in Web text with their referent entities in a knowledge base. Traditional EL methods usually link name mentions in a document by assuming them to be independent. However, there is often additional interdependence between different EL decisions, i.e., the entities in the same document should be semantically related to each other. In these cases, Collective Entity Linking, in which the name mentions in the same document are linked jointly by exploiting the interdependence between them, can improve the entity linking accuracy. This paper proposes a graph-based collective EL method, which can model and exploit the global interdependence between different EL decisions. Specifically, we first propose a graph-based representation, called Referent Graph, which can model the global interdependence between different EL decisions. Then we propose a collective inference algorithm, which can jointly infer the referent entities of all name mentions by exploiting the interdependence captured in Referent Graph. The key benefit of our method comes from: 1) The global interdependence model of EL decisions; 2) The purely collective nature of the inference algorithm, in which evidence for related EL decisions can be reinforced into high-probability decisions. Experimental results show that our method can achieve significant performance improvement over the traditional EL methods.
2010020	From one tree to a forest: a unified solution for structured web data extraction Structured data, in the form of entities and associated attributes, has been a rich web resource for search engines and knowledge databases. To efficiently extract structured data from enormous websites in various verticals (e.g., books, restaurants), much research effort has been attracted, but most existing approaches either require considerable human effort or rely on strong features that lack of flexibility. We consider an ambitious scenario -- can we build a system that (1) is general enough to handle any vertical without re-implementation and (2) requires only one labeled example site from each vertical for training to automatically deal with other sites in the same vertical? In this paper, we propose a unified solution to demonstrate the feasibility of this scenario. Specifically, we design a set of weak but general features to characterize vertical knowledge (including attribute-specific semantics and inter-attribute layout relationships). Such features can be adopted in various verticals without redesign; meanwhile, they are weak enough to avoid overfitting of the learnt knowledge to seed sites. Given a new unseen site, the learnt knowledge is first applied to identify page-level candidate attribute values, while inevitably involve false positives. To remove noise, site-level information of the new site is then exploited to boost up the true values. The site-level information is derived in an unsupervised manner, without harm to the applicability of the solution. Promising experimental performance on 80 websites in 8 distinct verticals demonstrated the feasibility and flexibility of the proposed solution.
2010021	Improving local search ranking through external logs The signals used for ranking in local search are very different from web search: in addition to (textual) relevance, measures of (geographic) distance between the user and the search result, as well as measures of popularity of the result are important for effective ranking. Depending on the query and search result, different ways to quantify these factors exist -- for example, it is possible to use customer ratings to quantify the popularity of restaurants, whereas different measures are more appropriate for other types of businesses. Hence, our approach is to capture the different notions of distance/popularity relevant via a number of external data sources (e.g., logs of customer ratings, driving-direction requests, or site accesses). In this paper we will describe the relevant signal contained in a number of such data sources in detail and present methods to integrate these external data sources into the feature generation for local search ranking. In particular, we propose novel backoff methods to alleviate the impact of skew, noise or incomplete data in these logs in a systematic manner. We evaluate our techniques on both human-judged relevance data as well as click-through data from a commercial local search engine.
2010023	Query suggestions in the absence of query logs After an end-user has partially input a query, intelligent search engines can suggest possible completions of the partial query to help end-users quickly express their information needs. All major web-search engines and most proposed methods that suggest queries rely on search engine query logs to determine possible query suggestions. However, for customized search systems in the enterprise domain, intranet search, or personalized search such as email or desktop search or for infrequent queries, query logs are either not available or the user base and the number of past user queries is too small to learn appropriate models. We propose a probabilistic mechanism for generating query suggestions from the corpus without using query logs. We utilize the document corpus to extract a set of candidate phrases. As soon as a user starts typing a query, phrases that are highly correlated with the partial user query are selected as completions of the partial query and are offered as query suggestions. Our proposed approach is tested on a variety of datasets and is compared with state-of-the-art approaches. The experimental results clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in suggesting queries with higher quality.
2010024	Synthesizing high utility suggestions for rare web search queries Search engines are continuously looking into methods to alleviate users' effort in finding desired information. For this, all major search engines employ query suggestions methods to facilitate effective query formulation and reformulation. Providing high quality query suggestions is a critical task for search engines and so far most research efforts have focused on tapping various information available in search query logs to identify potential suggestions. By relying on this single source of information, suggestion providing systems often restrict themselves to only previously observed query sessions. Therefore, a critical challenge faced by query suggestions provision mechanism is that of coverage, i.e., the number of unique queries for which users are provided with suggestions, while keeping the suggestion quality high. To address this problem, we propose a novel way of generating suggestions for user search queries by moving beyond the dependency on search query logs and providing synthetic suggestions for web search queries. The key challenges in providing synthetic suggestions include identifying important concepts in a query and systematically exploring related concepts while ensuring that the resulting suggestions are relevant to the user query and of high utility. We present an end-to-end system to generate synthetic suggestions that builds upon novel query-level operations and combines information available from various textual sources. We evaluate our suggestion system over a large-scale real-world dataset of query logs and show that our methods increase the coverage of query-suggestion pairs by up to 39% without compromising the quality or the utility of the suggestions.
2010025	Post-ranking query suggestion by diversifying search results Query suggestion refers to the process of suggesting related queries to search engine users. Most existing researches have focused on improving the relevance of suggested queries. In this paper, we introduce the concept of diversifying the content of the search results from suggested queries while keeping the suggestion relevant. Our framework first retrieves a set of query candidates from search engine logs using random walk and other techniques. We then re-rank the suggested queries by ranking them in the order which maximizes the diversification function that measures the difference between the original search results and the results from suggested queries. The diversification function we proposed includes features like ODP category, URL and domain similarity and so on. One important outcome from our research which contradicts with most existing researches is that, with the increase of suggestion relevance, the similarity between the queries actually decreases. Experiments are conducted on a large set of human-labeled data, which is randomly sampled from a commercial search engine's log. Results indicate that the post-ranking framework significantly improves the relevance of suggested queries by comparing to existing models.
2010026	Automatic boolean query suggestion for professional search In professional search environments, such as patent search or legal search, search tasks have unique characteristics: 1) users interactively issue several queries for a topic, and 2) users are willing to examine many retrieval results, i.e., there is typically an emphasis on recall. Recent surveys have also verified that professional searchers continue to have a strong preference for Boolean queries because they provide a record of what documents were searched. To support this type of professional search, we propose a novel Boolean query suggestion technique. Specifically, we generate Boolean queries by exploiting decision trees learned from pseudo-labeled documents and rank the suggested queries using query quality predictors. We evaluate our algorithm in simulated patent and medical search environments. Compared with a recent effective query generation system, we demonstrate that our technique is effective and general.
2010028	Improved video categorization from text metadata and user comments We consider the task of assigning categories (e.g., howto/cooking, sports/basketball, pet/dogs) to YouTube videos from video and text signals. We show that two complementary views on the data -- from the video and text perspectives -- complement each other and refine predictions. The contributions of the paper are threefold: (1) we show that a text-based classifier trained on imperfect predictions of the weakly supervised video content-based classifier is not redundant; (2) we demonstrate that a simple model which combines the predictions made by the two classifiers outperforms each of them taken independently; (3) we analyse such sources of text information as video title, description, user tags and viewers' comments and show that each of them provides valuable clues to the topic of the video.
2010029	Multifaceted toponym recognition for streaming news News sources on the Web generate constant streams of information, describing many aspects of the events that shape our world. In particular, geography plays a key role in the news, and enabling geographic retrieval of news articles involves recognizing the textual references to geographic locations (called toponyms) present in the articles, which can be difficult due to ambiguity in natural language. Toponym recognition in news is often accomplished with algorithms designed and tested around small corpora of news articles, but these static collections do not reflect the streaming nature of online news, as evidenced by poor performance in tests. In contrast, a method for toponym recognition is presented that is tuned for streaming news by leveraging a wide variety of recognition components, both rule-based and statistical. An evaluation of this method shows that it outperforms two prominent toponym recognition systems when tested on large datasets of streaming news, indicating its suitability for this domain.
2010030	Enriching document representation via translation for improved monolingual information retrieval Word ambiguity and vocabulary mismatch are critical problems in information retrieval. To deal with these problems, this paper proposes the use of translated words to enrich document representation, going beyond the words in the original source language to represent a document. In our approach, each original document is automatically translated into an auxiliary language, and the resulting translated document serves as a semantically enhanced representation for supplementing the original bag of words. The core of our translation representation is the expected term frequency of a word in a translated document, which is calculated by averaging the term frequencies over all possible translations, rather than focusing on the 1-best translation only. To achieve better efficiency of translation, we do not rely on full-fledged machine translation, but instead use monotonic translation by removing the time-consuming reordering component. Experiments carried out on standard TREC test collections show that our proposed translation representation leads to statistically significant improvements over using only the original language of the document collection.
2010031	A novel corpus-based stemming algorithm using co-occurrence statistics We present a stemming algorithm for text retrieval. The algorithm uses the statistics collected on the basis of certain corpus analysis based on the co-occurrence between two word variants. We use a very simple co-occurrence measure that reflects how often a pair of word variants occurs in a document as well as in the whole corpus. A graph is formed where the word variants are the nodes and two word variants form an edge if they co-occur. On the basis of the co-occurrence measure, a certain edge strength is defined for each of the edges. Finally, on the basis of the edge strengths, we propose a partition algorithm that groups the word variants based on their strongest neighbors, that is, the neighbors with largest strengths. Our stemming algorithm has two static parameters and does not use any other information except the co-occurrence statistics from the corpus. The experiments on TREC, CLEF and FIRE data consisting of four European and two Asian languages show a significant improvement over no-stem strategy on all the languages. Also, the proposed algorithm significantly outperforms a number of strong stemmers including the rule-based ones on a number of languages. For highly inflectional languages, a relative improvement of about 50% is obtained compared to un-normalized words and a relative improvement ranging from 5% to 16% is obtained compared to the rule based stemmer for the concerned language.
2010033	Document clustering with universum Document clustering is a popular research topic, which aims to partition documents into groups of similar objects (i.e., clusters), and has been widely used in many applications such as automatic topic extraction, document organization and filtering. As a recently proposed concept, Universum is a collection of "non-examples" that do not belong to any concept/cluster of interest. This paper proposes a novel document clustering technique -- Document Clustering with Universum, which utilizes the Universum examples to improve the clustering performance. The intuition is that the Universum examples can serve as supervised information and help improve the performance of clustering, since they are known not belonging to any meaningful concepts/clusters in the target domain. In particular, a maximum margin clustering method is proposed to model both target examples and Universum examples for clustering. An extensive set of experiments is conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed algorithm.
2010034	Identifying points of interest by self-tuning clustering Deducing trip related information from web-scale datasets has received very large amounts of attention recently. Identifying points of interest (POIs) in geo-tagged photos is one of these problems. The problem can be viewed as a standard clustering problem of partitioning two dimensional objects. In this work, we study spectral clustering which is the first attempt for the POIs identification. However, there is no unified approach to assign the clustering parameters; especially the features of POIs are immensely varying in different metropolitans and locations. To address this, we are intent to study a self-tuning technique which can properly assign the parameters for the clustering needed. Besides geographical information, web photos inherently store rich information. These information are mutually influenced each others and should be taken into trip related mining tasks. To address this, we study reinforcement which constructs the relationship over multiple sources by iterative learning. At last, we thoroughly demonstrate our findings by web scale datasets collected from Flickr.
2010035	Cluster-based fusion of retrieved lists Methods for fusing document lists that were retrieved in response to a query often use retrieval scores (or ranks) of documents in the lists. We present a novel probabilistic fusion approach that utilizes an additional source of rich information, namely, inter-document similarities. Specifically, our model integrates information induced from clusters of similar documents created across the lists with that produced by some fusion method that relies on retrieval scores (ranks). Empirical evaluation shows that our approach is highly effective for fusion. For example, the performance of our model is consistently better than that of the standard (effective) fusion method that it integrates. The performance also transcends that of standard fusion of re-ranked lists, where list re-ranking is based on clusters created from documents in the list.
2010037	System effectiveness, user models, and user utility: a conceptual framework for investigation There is great interest in producing effectiveness measures that model user behavior in order to better model the utility of a system to its users. These measures are often formulated as a sum over the product of a discount function of ranks and a gain function mapping relevance assessments to numeric utility values. We develop a conceptual framework for analyzing such effectiveness measures based on classifying members of this broad family of measures into four distinct families, each of which reflects a different notion of system utility. Within this framework we can hypothesize about the properties that such a measure should have and test those hypotheses against user and system data. Along the way we present a collection of novel results about specific measures and relationships between them.
2010038	Evaluating the synergic effect of collaboration in information seeking It is typically expected that when people work together, they can often accomplish goals that are difficult or even impossible for individuals. We consider this notion of the group achieving more than the sum of all individuals' achievements to be the synergic effect in collaboration. Similar expectation exists for people working in collaboration for information seeking tasks. We, however, lack a methodology and appropriate evaluation metrics for studying and measuring the synergic effect. In this paper we demonstrate how to evaluate this effect and discuss what it means to various collaborative information seeking (CIS) situations. We present a user study with four different conditions: single user, pair of users at the same computer, pair of users at different computers and co-located, and pair of users remotely located. Each of these individuals or pairs was given the same task of information seeking and usage for the same amount of time. We then combined the outputs of single independent users to form artificial pairs, and compared against the real pairs. Not surprisingly, participants using different computers (co-located or remotely located) were able to cover more information sources than those using a single computer (single user or a pair). But more interestingly, we found that real pairs with their own computers (co-located or remotely located) were able to cover more unique and useful information than that of the artificially created pairs. This indicates that those working in collaboration achieved something greater and better than what could be achieved by adding independent users, thus, demonstrating the synergic effect. Remotely located real teams were also able to formulate a wider range of queries than those pairs that were co-located or artificially created. This shows that the collaborators working remotely were able to achieve synergy while still being able to think and work independently. Through the experiments and measurements presented here, we have also contributed a unique methodology and an evaluation metric for CIS.
2010039	Repeatable and reliable search system evaluation using crowdsourcing The primary problem confronting any new kind of search task is how to boot-strap a reliable and repeatable evaluation campaign, and a crowd-sourcing approach provides many advantages. However, can these crowd-sourced evaluations be repeated over long periods of time in a reliable manner? To demonstrate, we investigate creating an evaluation campaign for the semantic search task of keyword-based ad-hoc object retrieval. In contrast to traditional search over web-pages, object search aims at the retrieval of information from factual assertions about real-world objects rather than searching over web-pages with textual descriptions. Using the first large-scale evaluation campaign that specifically targets the task of ad-hoc Web object retrieval over a number of deployed systems, we demonstrate that crowd-sourced evaluation campaigns can be repeated over time and still maintain reliable results. Furthermore, we show how these results are comparable to expert judges when ranking systems and that the results hold over different evaluation and relevance metrics. This work provides empirical support for scalable, reliable, and repeatable search system evaluation using crowdsourcing.
2010041	Cross-language web page classification via dual knowledge transfer using nonnegative matrix tri-factorization The lack of sufficient labeled Web pages in many languages, especially for those uncommonly used ones, presents a great challenge to traditional supervised classification methods to achieve satisfactory Web page classification performance. To address this, we propose a novel Nonnegative Matrix Tri-factorization (NMTF) based Dual Knowledge Transfer (DKT) approach for cross-language Web page classification, which is based on the following two important observations. First, we observe that Web pages for a same topic from different languages usually share some common semantic patterns, though in different representation forms. Second, we also observe that the associations between word clusters and Web page classes are a more reliable carrier than raw words to transfer knowledge across languages. With these recognitions, we attempt to transfer knowledge from the auxiliary language, in which abundant labeled Web pages are available, to target languages, in which we want classify Web pages, through two different paths: word cluster approximations and the associations between word clusters and Web page classes. Due to the reinforcement between these two different knowledge transfer paths, our approach can achieve better classification accuracy. We evaluate the proposed approach in extensive experiments using a real world cross-language Web page data set. Promising results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach that is consistent with our theoretical analyses.
2010042	No free lunch: brute force vs. locality-sensitive hashing for cross-lingual pairwise similarity This work explores the problem of cross-lingual pairwise similarity, where the task is to extract similar pairs of documents across two different languages. Solutions to this problem are of general interest for text mining in the multi-lingual context and have specific applications in statistical machine translation. Our approach takes advantage of cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) techniques to project feature vectors from one language into another, and then uses locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) to extract similar pairs. We show that effective cross-lingual pairwise similarity requires working with similarity thresholds that are much lower than in typical monolingual applications, making the problem quite challenging. We present a parallel, scalable MapReduce implementation of the sort-based sliding window algorithm, which is compared to a brute-force approach on German and English Wikipedia collections. Our central finding can be summarized as "no free lunch": there is no single optimal solution. Instead, we characterize effectiveness-efficiency tradeoffs in the solution space, which can guide the developer to locate a desirable operating point based on application- and resource-specific constraints.
2010043	An event-centric model for multilingual document similarity Document similarity measures play an important role in many document retrieval and exploration tasks. Over the past decades, several models and techniques have been developed to determine a ranked list of documents similar to a given query document. Interestingly, the proposed approaches typically rely on extensions to the vector space model and are rarely suited for multilingual corpora. In this paper, we present a novel document similarity measure that is based on events extracted from documents. An event is solely described by nearby occurrences of temporal and geographic expressions in a document's text. Thus, a document is modeled as a set of events that can be compared and ranked using temporal and geographic hierarchies. A key feature of our model is that it is term- and language-independent as temporal and geographic expressions mentioned in texts are normalized to a standard format. This also allows to determine similar documents across languages, an important feature in the context of document exploration. Our approach proves to be quite effective, including the discovery of new similarities, as our experiments using different (multilingual) corpora demonstrate.
2010045	Posting list intersection on multicore architectures In current commercial Web search engines, queries are processed in the conjunctive mode, which requires the search engine to compute the intersection of a number of posting lists to determine the documents matching all query terms. In practice, the intersection operation takes a significant fraction of the query processing time, for some queries dominating the total query latency. Hence, efficient posting list intersection is critical for achieving short query latencies. In this work, we focus on improving the performance of posting list intersection by leveraging the compute capabilities of recent multicore systems. To this end, we consider various coarse-grained and fine-grained parallelization models for list intersection. Specifically, we present an algorithm that partitions the work associated with a given query into a number of small and independent tasks that are subsequently processed in parallel. Through a detailed empirical analysis of these alternative models, we demonstrate that exploiting parallelism at the finest-level of granularity is critical to achieve the best performance on multicore systems. On an eight-core system, the fine-grained parallelization method is able to achieve more than five times reduction in average query processing time while still exploiting the parallelism for high query throughput.
2010046	Timestamp-based result cache invalidation for web search engines The result cache is a vital component for efficiency of large-scale web search engines, and maintaining the freshness of cached query results is the current research challenge. As a remedy to this problem, our work proposes a new mechanism to identify queries whose cached results are stale. The basic idea behind our mechanism is to maintain and compare generation time of query results with update times of posting lists and documents to decide on staleness of query results. The proposed technique is evaluated using a Wikipedia document collection with real update information and a real-life query log. We show that our technique has good prediction accuracy, relative to a baseline based on the time-to-live mechanism. Moreover, it is easy to implement and incurs less processing overhead on the system relative to a recently proposed, more sophisticated invalidation mechanism.
2010047	Energy-price-driven query processing in multi-center web search engines Concurrently processing thousands of web queries, each with a response time under a fraction of a second, necessitates maintaining and operating massive data centers. For large-scale web search engines, this translates into high energy consumption and a huge electric bill. This work takes the challenge to reduce the electric bill of commercial web search engines operating on data centers that are geographically far apart. Based on the observation that energy prices and query workloads show high spatio-temporal variation, we propose a technique that dynamically shifts the query workload of a search engine between its data centers to reduce the electric bill. Experiments on real-life query workloads obtained from a commercial search engine show that significant financial savings can be achieved by this technique.
2010048	Faster top-k document retrieval using block-max indexes Large search engines process thousands of queries per second over billions of documents, making query processing a major performance bottleneck. An important class of optimization techniques called early termination achieves faster query processing by avoiding the scoring of documents that are unlikely to be in the top results. We study new algorithms for early termination that outperform previous methods. In particular, we focus on safe techniques for disjunctive queries, which return the same result as an exhaustive evaluation over the disjunction of the query terms. The current state-of-the-art methods for this case, the WAND algorithm by Broder et al. [11] and the approach of Strohman and Croft [30], achieve great benefits but still leave a large performance gap between disjunctive and (even non-early terminated) conjunctive queries. We propose a new set of algorithms by introducing a simple augmented inverted index structure called a block-max index. Essentially, this is a structure that stores the maximum impact score for each block of a compressed inverted list in uncompressed form, thus enabling us to skip large parts of the lists. We show how to integrate this structure into the WAND approach, leading to considerable performance gains. We then describe extensions to a layered index organization, and to indexes with reassigned document IDs, that achieve additional gains that narrow the gap between disjunctive and conjunctive top-k query processing.
2010050	Utilizing marginal net utility for recommendation in e-commerce Traditional recommendation algorithms often select products with the highest predicted ratings to recommend. However, earlier research in economics and marketing indicates that a consumer usually makes purchase decision(s) based on the product's marginal net utility (i.e., the marginal utility minus the product price). Utility is defined as the satisfaction or pleasure user u gets when purchasing the corresponding product. A rational consumer chooses the product to purchase in order to maximize the total net utility. In contrast to the predicted rating, the marginal utility of a product depends on the user's purchase history and changes over time. According to the Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility, many products have the decreasing marginal utility with the increase of purchase count, such as cell phones, computers, and so on. Users are not likely to purchase the same or similar product again in a short time if they already purchased it before. On the other hand, some products, such as pet food, baby diapers, would be purchased again and again. To better match users' purchase decisions in the real world, this paper explores how to recommend products with the highest marginal net utility in e-commerce sites. Inspired by the Cobb-Douglas utility function in consumer behavior theory, we propose a novel utility-based recommendation framework. The framework can be utilized to revamp a family of existing recommendation algorithms. To demonstrate the idea, we use Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) as an example and revamp it with the framework. We evaluate the proposed algorithm on an e-commerce (shop.com) data set. The new algorithm significantly improves the base algorithm, largely due to its ability to recommend both products that are new to the user and products that the user is likely to re-purchase.
2010051	Recommending ephemeral items at web scale We describe an innovative and scalable recommendation system successfully deployed at eBay. To build recommenders for long-tail marketplaces requires projection of volatile items into a persistent space of latent products. We first present a generative clustering model for collections of unstructured, heterogeneous, and ephemeral item data, under the assumption that items are generated from latent products. An item is represented as a vector of independently and distinctly distributed variables, while a latent product is characterized as a vector of probability distributions, respectively. The probability distributions are chosen as natural stochastic models for different types of data. The learning objective is to maximize the total intra-cluster coherence measured by the sum of log likelihoods of items under such a generative process. In the space of latent products, robust recommendations can then be derived using naive Bayes for ranking, from historical transactional data. Item-based recommendations are achieved by inferring latent products from unseen items. In particular, we develop a probabilistic scoring function of recommended items, which takes into account item-product membership, product purchase probability, and the important auction-end-time factor. With the holistic probabilistic measure of a prospective item purchase, one can further maximize the expected revenue and the more subjective user satisfaction as well. We evaluated the latent product clustering and recommendation ranking models using real-world e-commerce data from eBay, in both forms of offline simulation and online A/B testing. In the recent production launch, our system yielded 3-5 folds improvement over the existing production system in click-through, purchase-through and gross merchandising value; thus now driving 100% related recommendation traffic with billions of items at eBay. We believe that this work provides a practical yet principled framework for recommendation in the domains with affluent user self-input data.
2010052	A unified framework for recommendations based on quaternary semantic analysis Social network systems such as FaceBook and YouTube have played a significant role in capturing both explicit and implicit user preferences for different items in the form of ratings and tags. This forms a quaternary relationship among users, items, tags and ratings. Existing systems have utilized only ternary relationships such as users-items-ratings, or users-items-tags to derive their recommendations. In this paper, we show that ternary relationships are insufficient to provide accurate recommendations. Instead, we model the quaternary relationship among users, items, tags and ratings as a 4-order tensor and cast the recommendation problem as a multi-way latent semantic analysis problem. A unified framework for user recommendation, item recommendation, tag recommendation and item rating prediction is proposed. The results of extensive experiments performed on a real world dataset demonstrate that our unified framework outperforms the state-of-the-art techniques in all the four recommendation tasks.
2010053	Associative tag recommendation exploiting multiple textual features This work addresses the task of recommending relevant tags to a target object by jointly exploiting three dimensions of the problem: (i) term co-occurrence with tags pre-assigned to the target object, (ii) terms extracted from multiple textual features, and (iii) several metrics of tag relevance. In particular, we propose several new heuristic methods, which extend state-of-the-art strategies by including new metrics that try to capture how accurately a candidate term describes the object's content. We also exploit two learning-to-rank (L2R) techniques, namely RankSVM and Genetic Programming, for the task of generating ranking functions that combine multiple metrics to accurately estimate the relevance of a tag to a given object. We evaluate all proposed methods in various scenarios for three popular Web 2.0 applications, namely, LastFM, YouTube and YahooVideo. We found that our new heuristics greatly outperform the methods on which they are based, producing gains in precision of up to 181%, as well as another state-of-the-art technique, with improvements in precision of up to 40% over the best baseline in any scenario. Further improvements can also be achieved with the new L2R strategies, which have the additional advantage of being quite flexible and extensible to exploit other aspects of the tag recommendation problem.
2010055	Evaluating diversified search results using per-intent graded relevance Search queries are often ambiguous and/or underspecified. To accomodate different user needs, search result diversification has received attention in the past few years. Accordingly, several new metrics for evaluating diversification have been proposed, but their properties are little understood. We compare the properties of existing metrics given the premises that (1) queries may have multiple intents; (2) the likelihood of each intent given a query is available; and (3) graded relevance assessments are available for each intent. We compare a wide range of traditional and diversified IR metrics after adding graded relevance assessments to the TREC 2009 Web track diversity task test collection which originally had binary relevance assessments. Our primary criterion is discriminative power, which represents the reliability of a metric in an experiment. Our results show that diversified IR experiments with a given number of topics can be as reliable as traditional IR experiments with the same number of topics, provided that the right metrics are used. Moreover, we compare the intuitiveness of diversified IR metrics by closely examining the actual ranked lists from TREC. We show that a family of metrics called D#-measures have several advantages over other metrics such as ?-nDCG and Intent-Aware metrics.
2010056	Evaluating multi-query sessions The standard system-based evaluation paradigm has focused on assessing the performance of retrieval systems in serving the best results for a single query. Real users, however, often begin an interaction with a search engine with a sufficiently under-specified query that they will need to reformulate before they find what they are looking for. In this work we consider the problem of evaluating retrieval systems over test collections of multi-query sessions. We propose two families of measures: a model-free family that makes no assumption about the user's behavior over a session, and a model-based family with a simple model of user interactions over the session. In both cases we generalize traditional evaluation metrics such as average precision to multi-query session evaluation. We demonstrate the behavior of the proposed metrics by using the new TREC 2010 Session track collection and simulations over the TREC-9 Query track collection.
2010057	Quantifying test collection quality based on the consistency of relevance judgements Relevance assessments are a key component for test collection-based evaluation of information retrieval systems. This paper reports on a feature of such collections that is used as a form of ground truth data to allow analysis of human assessment error. A wide range of test collections are retrospectively examined to determine how accurately assessors judge the relevance of documents. Our results demonstrate a high level of inconsistency across the collections studied. The level of irregularity is shown to vary across topics, with some showing a very high level of assessment error. We investigate possible influences on the error, and demonstrate that inconsistency in judging increases with time. While the level of detail in a topic specification does not appear to influence the errors that assessors make, judgements are significantly affected by the decisions made on previously seen similar documents. Assessors also display an assessment inertia. Alternate approaches to generating relevance judgements appear to reduce errors. A further investigation of the way that retrieval systems are ranked using sets of relevance judgements produced early and late in the judgement process reveals a consistent influence measured across the majority of examined test collections. We conclude that there is a clear value in examining, even inserting, ground truth data in test collections, and propose ways to help minimise the sources of inconsistency when creating future test collections.
2010058	Pseudo test collections for learning web search ranking functions Test collections are the primary drivers of progress in information retrieval. They provide yardsticks for assessing the effectiveness of ranking functions in an automatic, rapid, and repeatable fashion and serve as training data for learning to rank models. However, manual construction of test collections tends to be slow, labor-intensive, and expensive. This paper examines the feasibility of constructing web search test collections in a completely unsupervised manner given only a large web corpus as input. Within our proposed framework, anchor text extracted from the web graph is treated as a pseudo query log from which pseudo queries are sampled. For each pseudo query, a set of relevant and non-relevant documents are selected using a variety of web-specific features, including spam and aggregated anchor text weights. The automatically mined queries and judgments form a pseudo test collection that can be used for training ranking functions. Experiments carried out on TREC web track data show that learning to rank models trained using pseudo test collections outperform an unsupervised ranking function and are statistically indistinguishable from a model trained using manual judgments, demonstrating the usefulness of our approach in extracting reasonable quality training data "for free".
2010060	Parallel learning to rank for information retrieval Learning to rank represents a category of effective ranking methods for information retrieval. While the primary concern of existing research has been accuracy, learning efficiency is becoming an important issue due to the unprecedented availability of large-scale training data and the need for continuous update of ranking functions. In this paper, we investigate parallel learning to rank, targeting simultaneous improvement in accuracy and efficiency.
2010061	Learning features through feedback for blog distillation The paper is focused on blogosphere research based on the TREC blog distillation task, and aims to explore unbiased and significant features automatically and efficiently. Feedback from faceted feeds is introduced to harvest relevant features and information gain is used to select discriminative features. The evaluation result shows that the selected feedback features can greatly improve the performance and adapt well to the terabyte data.
2010062	Time-based relevance models This paper addresses blog feed retrieval where the goal is to retrieve the most relevant blog feeds for a given user query. Since the retrieval unit is a blog, as a collection of posts, performing relevance feedback techniques and selecting the most appropriate documents for query expansion becomes challenging. By assuming time as an effective parameter on the blog posts content, we propose a time-based query expansion method. In this method, we select terms for expansion using most relevant days for the query, as opposed to most relevant documents. This provide us with more trustable terms for expansion. Our preliminary experiments on Blog08 collection shows that this method can outperform state of the art relevance feedback methods in blog retrieval.
2010063	Improved query performance prediction using standard deviation Query performance prediction (QPP) is an important task in information retrieval (IR). In this paper, we (1) develop a new predictor based on the standard deviation of scores in a variable length ranked list, and (2) we show that this new predictor outperforms state-of-the-art approaches without the need for tuning.
2010064	Learning to rank using query-level regression In this paper, we use query-level regression as the loss function. The regression loss function has been used in pointwise methods, however pointwise methods ignore the query boundaries and treat the data equally across queries, and thus the effectiveness is limited. We show that regression is an effective loss function for learning to rank when used in query-level. We use neural network to model the ranking function and gradient descent for optimization and refer our method as ListReg. Experimental results show that ListReg significantly outperforms pointwise Regression and the state-of-the-art listwise method in most cases.
2010065	Diversifying product search results In recent years, online shopping is becoming more and more popular. Users type keyword queries on product search systems to find relevant products, accessories, and even related products. However, existing product search systems always return very similar products on the first several pages instead of taking diversity into consideration. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to address the diversity issue in the context of product search. We transform search result diversification into a combination of diversifying product categories and diversifying product attribute values within each category. The two sub-problems are optimization problems which can be reduced into well-known NP-hard problems respectively. We further leverage greedy-based approximation algorithms for efficient product search results re-ranking.
2010066	Ad hoc IR: not much room for improvement Ranking function performance reached a plateau in 1994. The reason for this is investigated. First the performance of BM25 is measured as the proportion of queries satisfied on the first page of 10 results -- it performs well. The performance is then compared to human performance. They perform comparably. The conclusion is there isn't much room for ranking function improvement.
2010067	Image annotation based on recommendation model In this paper, a novel approach based on recommendation model is proposed for automatic image annotation. For any to-be-annotated image, we first select some related images with tags from training dataset according to their visual similarity. And then we estimate the initial ratings for tags of the training images based on tag ranking method and construct a rating matrix. We also construct a trust matrix based on visual similarity with a k-NN strategy. Then a recommendation model is built on both matrices to rank candidate tags for the target image. The proposed approach is evaluated using two benchmark image datasets, and experimental results have indicated its effectiveness.
2010068	Utilizing minimal relevance feedback for ad hoc retrieval Using relevance feedback can significantly improve (ad hoc) retrieval effectiveness. Yet, if little feedback is available, effectively exploiting it is a challenge. To that end, we present a novel approach that utilizes document passages. Empirical evaluation demonstrates the merits of the approach.
2010069	Sense discrimination for physics retrieval Information Retrieval in technical domains like physics is characterised by long and precise queries, whose meaning is strongly influenced by term context and domain. We treat this as a disambiguation problem, and present initial findings of a retrieval model that posits a higher probability of relevance for documents matching disambiguated query terms. Preliminary evaluation on a real-life physics test collection shows promising performance improvement.
2010070	When documents are very long, BM25 fails! We reveal that the Okapi BM25 retrieval function tends to overly penalize very long documents. To address this problem, we present a simple yet effective extension of BM25, namely BM25L, which "shifts" the term frequency normalization formula to boost scores of very long documents. Our experiments show that BM25L, with the same computation cost, is more effective and robust than the standard BM25.
2010071	Location and timeliness of information sources during news events People nowadays can obtain information on current news events through media outlets, social media, and by actively seeking information using search engines. In this paper we investigate the temporal relationship between news coverage by media outlets, social media, and query logs and show that social media frequently precedes other information sources. Additionally, we demonstrate that there is strong negative correlation between the probability for reporting of an event and the distance of the information source from the event.
2010072	What deliberately degrading search quality tells us about discount functions Deliberate degradation of search results is a common tool in user experiments. We degrade high-quality search results by inserting non-relevant documents at different ranks. The effect of these manipulations, on a number of commonly-used metrics, is counter-intuitive: the discount functions implicit in P@k, MRR, NDCG, and others do not account for the true relationship between rank and value to the user. We propose an alternative, based on visibility data.
2010073	Collective topic modeling for heterogeneous networks In this paper, we propose a joint probabilistic topic model for simultaneously modeling the contents of multi-typed objects of a heterogeneous information network. The intuition behind our model is that different objects of the heterogeneous network share a common set of latent topics so as to adjust the multinomial distributions over topics for different objects collectively. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach for the tasks of topic modeling and object clustering.
2010074	Graph-cut based tag enrichment In this paper, a graph cut based tag enrichment approach is proposed. We build a graph for each image with its initial tags. The graph is with two terminals. Nodes of the graph are full connected with each other. Min-cut/max-flow algorithm is utilized to find the relevant tags for the image. Experiments on Flickr dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed graph-cut based tag enrichment approach.
2010075	Personalized social query expansion using social bookmarking systems We propose a new approach for social and personalized query expansion using social structures in the Web 2.0. While focusing on social tagging systems, the proposed approach considers (i) the semantic similarity between tags composing a query, (ii) a social proximity between the query and the user profile, and (iii) on the fly, a strategy for expanding user queries. The proposed approach has been evaluated using a large dataset crawled from del.icio.us.
2010076	What are the real differences of children's and adults' web search We present first results of a logfile analysis on web search engines for children. The aim of this research is to analyse fundamental facts about how children's web search behaviour differs from that of adults. We show differences to previous results, which are often based on small lab experiments. Our large-scale analysis suggests that children search queries are more information-oriented and shorter on average. Children indeed make a lot of spelling errors and often repeat searches and revisit web pages.
2010077	Cognitive coordinating behaviors in multitasking web search This paper investigates how users cognitively coordinate multitasking Web search across different information search problems. The analysis suggests that (1) multitasking is a prevalent Web search behavior including both sequential multitasking (31%) and parallel multitasking (69%); (2) multitasking is performed through a task switching process; and (3) such a process is supported and underpinned by cognitive coordination mechanisms and strategy coordination.
2010078	Optimizing multimodal reranking for web image search In this poster, we introduce a web image search reranking approach with exploring multiple modalities. Diff erent from the conventional methods that build graph with one feature set for reranking, our approach integrates multiple feature sets that describe visual content from different aspects. We simultaneously integrate the learning of relevance scores, the weighting of different feature sets, the distance metric and the scaling for each feature set into a unified scheme. Experimental results on a large data set that contains more than 1,100 queries and 1 million images demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.
2010079	Multi-layer graph-based semi-supervised learning for large-scale image datasets using mapreduce Semi-supervised learning is to exploit the vast amount of unlabeled data in the world. This paper proposes a scalable graph-based technique leveraging the distributed computing power of the MapReduce programming model. For a higher quality of learning, the paper also presents a multi-layer learning structure to unify both visual and textual information of image data during the learning process. Experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed methods.
2010080	Tackling class imbalance and data scarcity in literature-based gene function annotation In recent years, a number of machine learning approaches to literature-based gene function annotation have been proposed. However, due to issues such as lack of labeled data, class imbalance and computational cost, they have usually been unable to surpass simpler approaches based on string-matching. In this paper, we propose a principled machine learning approach based on kernel classifiers. We show that kernels can address the task's inherent data scarcity by embedding additional knowledge and we propose a simple yet effective solution to deal with class imbalance. From experiments on the TREC Genomics Track data, our approach achieves better F1-score than two state-of-the-art approaches based on string-matching and cross-species information.
2010081	Bootstrapping subjectivity detection We describe a method for automatically generating subjectivity clues for a specific topic and a set of (relevant) document, evaluating it on the task of classifying sentences w.r.t. subjectivity, with improvements over previous work.
2010082	The effects of choice in routing relevance judgments The emergence of human computation systems, including Mechanical Turk and games with a purpose, has made it feasible to distribute relevance judgment tasks to workers over the Web. Most human computation systems assign tasks to individuals randomly, and such assignments may match workers with tasks that they may be unqualified or unmotivated to perform. We compare two groups of workers, those given a choice of queries to judge versus those who are not, in terms of their self-rated competence and their actual performance. Results show that when given a choice of task, workers choose ones for which they have greater expertise, interests, confidence, and understanding.
2010083	Statistical feature extraction for cross-language web content quality assessment Web content quality assessment is a typical static ranking problem. Heuristic content and TFIDF features based statistical systems have proven effective for Web content quality assessment. But they are all language dependent features, which are not suitable for cross-language ranking. In this paper, we fuse a series of language-independent features including hostname features, domain registration features, two-layer hyperlink analysis features and third-party Web service features to assess the Web content quality. The experiments on ECML/PKDD 2010 Discovery Challenge cross-language datasets show that the assessment is effective.
2010084	Exploiting endorsement information and social influence for item recommendation Social networking services possess two features: (1) capturing the social relationships among people, represented by the social network, and (2) allowing users to express their preferences on different kinds of items (e.g. photo, celebrity, pages) through endorsing buttons, represented by a kind of endorsement bipartite graph. In this work, using such information, we propose a novel recommendation method, which leverages the viral marketing in the social network and the wisdom of crowds from endorsement network. Our recommendation consists of two parts. First, given some query terms describing user's preference, we find a set of targeted influencers who have the maximum activation probability on those nodes related to the query terms in the social network. Second, based on the derived targeted influencers as key experts, we recommend items via the endorsement network. We conduct the experiments on DBLP co-authorship social network with author-reference data as the endorsement network. The results show our method can achieve effective recommendations.
2010085	Modeling subset distributions for verbose queries Improving verbose (or long) queries poses a new challenge for search systems. Previous techniques mainly focused on two aspects, weighting the important words or phrases and selecting the best subset query. The former does not consider how words and phrases are used in actual subset queries, while the latter ignores alternative subset queries. Recently, a novel reformulation framework has been proposed to transform the original query as a distribution of reformulated queries, which overcomes the disadvantages of previous techniques. In this paper, we apply this framework to verbose queries, where a reformulated query is specified as a subset query. Experiments on TREC collections show that the query distribution based framework outperforms the state-of-the-art techniques.
2010086	Domain expert topic familiarity and search behavior Users of information retrieval systems employ a variety of strategies when searching for information. One factor that can directly influence how searchers go about their information finding task is the level of familiarity with a search topic. We investigate how the search behavior of domain experts changes based on their previous level of familiarity with a search topic, reporting on a user study of biomedical experts searching for a range of domain-specific material. The results of our study show that topic familiarity can influence the number of queries that are employed to complete a task, the types of queries that are entered, and the overall number of query terms. Our findings suggest that biomedical search systems should enable searching through a variety of querying modes, to support the different search strategies that users were found to employ depending on their familiarity with the information that they are searching for.
2010087	Sample selection for dictionary-based corpus compression Compression of large text corpora has the potential to drastically reduce both storage requirements and per-document access costs. Adaptive methods used for general-purpose compression are ineffective for this application, and historically the most successful methods have been based on word-based dictionaries, which allow use of global properties of the text. However, these are dependent on the text complying with assumptions about content and lead to dictionaries of unpredictable size. In recent work we have described an LZ-like approach in which sampled blocks of a corpus are used as a dictionary against which the complete corpus is compressed, giving compression twice as effective than that of zlib. Here we explore how pre-processing can be used to eliminate redundancy in our sampled dictionary. Our experiments show that dictionary size can be reduced by 50% or more (less than 0.1% of the collection size) with no significant effect on compression or access speed.
2010088	Evaluating medical information retrieval This paper presents a framework for evaluating information retrieval of medical records. We use the BLULab corpus, a large collection of real-world de-identified medical records. The collection has been hand coded by clinical terminologists using the ICD-9 medical classification system. The ICD codes are used to devise queries and relevance judgements for this collection. Results of initial test runs using a baseline IR system show that there is room for improvement in medical information retrieval. Queries and relevance judgements are made available at http://aehrc.com/med_eval
2010089	Region-based landmark discovery by crowdsourcing geo-referenced photos We propose a novel model for landmark discovery that locates region-based landmarks on map in contrast to the traditional point-based landmarks. The proposed method preserves more information and automatically identifies candidate regions on map by crowdsourcing geo-referenced photos. Gaussian kernel convolution is applied to remove noises and generate detected region. We adopt F1 measure to evaluate discovered landmarks and manually check the association between tags and regions. The experiment results show that more than 90% of attractions in the selected city can be correctly located by this method.
2010090	Towards effective short text deep classification Recently, more and more short texts (e.g., ads, tweets) appear on the Web. Classifying short texts into a large taxonomy like ODP or Wikipedia category system has become an important mining task to improve the performance of many applications such as contextual advertising and topic detection for micro-blogging. In this paper, we propose a novel multi-stage classification approach to solve the problem. First, explicit semantic analysis is used to add more features for both short texts and categories. Second, we leverage information retrieval technologies to fetch the most relevant categories for an input short text from thousands of candidates. Finally, a SVM classifier is applied on only a few selected categories to return the final answer. Our experimental results show that the proposed method achieved significant improvements on classification accuracy compared with several existing state of art approaches.
2010091	Temporal latent semantic analysis for collaboratively generated content: preliminary results Latent semantic analysis (LSA) has been intensively studied because of its wide application to Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing. Yet, traditional models such as LSA only examine one (current) version of the document. However, due to the recent proliferation of collaboratively generated content such as threads in online forums, Collaborative Question Answering archives, Wikipedia, and other versioned content, the document generation process is now directly observable. In this study, we explore how this additional temporal information about the document evolution could be used to enhance the identification of latent document topics. Specifically, we propose a novel hidden-topic modeling algorithm, temporal Latent Semantic Analysis (tLSA), which elegantly extends LSA to modeling document revision history using tensor decomposition. Our experiments show that tLSA outperforms LSA on word relatedness estimation using benchmark data, and explore applications of tLSA for other tasks.
2010092	Self-adjusting hybrid recommenders based on social network analysis Ensemble recommender systems successfully enhance recom-mendation accuracy by exploiting different sources of user prefe-rences, such as ratings and social contacts. In linear ensembles, the optimal weight of each recommender strategy is commonly tuned empirically, with limited guarantee that such weights are optimal afterwards. We propose a self-adjusting hybrid recommendation approach that alleviates the social cold start situation by weighting the recommender combination dynamically at recommendation time, based on social network analysis algorithms. We show empirical results where our approach outperforms the best static combination for different hybrid recommenders.
2010093	BlogCast effect on information diffusion in a blogosphere A blog service company provides a function named BlogCast that exposes quality posts on the blog main page to vitalize a blogosphere. This paper analyzes a new type of information diffusion via BlogCast. We show that there exists a strong halo effect in a blogosphere via thorough investigation on a huge volume of blog data.
2010094	Product comparison using comparative relations This paper proposes a novel Product Comparison approach. The comparative relations between products are first mined from both user reviews on multiple review websites and community-based question answering pairs containing product comparison information. A unified graph model is then developed to integrate the resultant comparative relations for product comparison. Experiments on popular electronic products show that the proposed approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.
2010095	Collaborative cyberporn filtering with collective intelligence This paper presents a user intent method to generate blacklists for collaborative cyberporn filtering. A novel porn detection framework that finds new pornographic web pages by mining user search behaviors is proposed. It employs users' clicks in search query logs to select the suspected web pages without extra human efforts to label data for training, and determines their categories with the help of URL host name and path information, but without web page content. We adopt an MSN porn data set to explore the effectiveness of our method. This user intent approach achieves high precision, while maintaining favorably low false positive rate. In addition, real-life filtering simulation reveals that our user intent method with its accumulative update strategy achieves 43.36% of blocking rate, while maintaining a steadily less than 7% of over-blocking rate.
2010096	Do IR models satisfy the TDC retrieval constraint An abstract is not available.
2010097	On diversifying and personalizing web search Diversification and personalization methods are common ap-proaches to deal with the one-size-fits-all paradigm of Web search engines. We performed a user study with 190 subjects where we analyzed the effects of diversification and personalization methods in a Web search engine. The obtained results suggest that our proposed combination of diversification and personalization factors may be a way to overcome the notion of intrusiveness in personalized approaches.
2010098	Semantic tag recommendation using concept model The common tags given by multiple users to a particular document are often semantically relevant to the document and each tag represents a specific topic. In this paper, we attempt to emulate human tagging behavior to recommend tags by considering the concepts contained in documents. Specifically, we represent each document using a few most relevant concepts contained in the document, where the concept space is derived from Wikipedia. Tags are then recommended based on the tag concept model derived from the annotated documents of each tag. Evaluated on a Delicious dataset of more than 53K documents, the proposed technique achieved comparable tag recommendation accuracy as the state-of-the-art, while yielding an order of magnitude speed-up.
2010099	Recommending interesting activity-related local entities When searching for entities with a strong local character (e.g., a museum), people may also be interested in discovering proximal activity-related entities (e.g., a café). Geographical proximity is a necessary, but not sufficient, qualifier for recommending other entities such that they are related in a useful manner (e.g., interest in a fish market does not imply interest in nearby bookshops, but interest in other produce stores is more likely). We describe and evaluate methods to identify such activity-related local entities.
2010100	Cross-corpus relevance projection An abstract is not available.
2010101	Location disambiguation for geo-tagged images In this poster, we address the problem of location disambiguation for geotagged Web photo resources. We propose an approach for analyzing and partitioning large geotagged photo collections using geographic and semantic information. By organizing the dataset in a structural scheme, we resolve the location ambiguity and clutter problem yield by massive volume of geotagged photos.
2010102	Towards an indexing method to speed-up music retrieval Computations in most music retrieval systems strongly depend on the size of data compared. We propose to enhance performances of a music retrieval system, namely a harmonic similarity evaluation method, by first indexing relevant parts of music pieces. The indexing algorithm represents each audio piece exclusively by its major repetition, using harmonic descriptions and string matching techniques. Evaluations are performed in the context of a state-of-the-art retrieval method, namely cover songs identification, and results highlight the success of our indexing system in keeping similar results while yielding a substantial gain in computation time.
2010103	An investigation of decompounding for cross-language patent search Decompounding has been found to improve information retrieval (IR) effectiveness in general domains for languages such as German or Dutch. We investigate if cross-language patent retrieval can profit from decompounding. This poses two challenges: i) There may be few resources such as parallel corpora available for training an machine translation system for a compounding language. ii) Patents have a specific writing style and vocabulary ("patentese"), which may affect the performance of decompounding and translation methods. Experiments on data from the CLEF-IP 2010 task show that decompounding patents for translation can overcome out-of-vocabulary problems (OOV) and that decompounding improves IR performance significantly for small training corpora.
2010104	Detecting seasonal queries by time-series analysis Seasonal events such as Halloween and Christmas repeat every year and initiate several temporal information needs. The impact of such events on users is often reflected in search logs in form of seasonal spikes in the frequency of related queries (e.g. "halloween costumes", "where is santa"). Many seasonal queries such as "sigir conference" mainly target fresh pages (e.g. sigir2011.org) that have less usage data such as clicks and anchor-text compared to older alternatives (e.g.sigir2009.org). Thus, it is important for search engines to correctly identify seasonal queries and make sure that their results are temporally reordered if necessary. In this poster, we focus on detecting seasonal queries using time-series analysis. We demonstrate that the seasonality of a query can be determined with high accuracy according to its historical frequency distribution.
2010105	Learning to rank under tight budget constraints This paper investigates the influence of pruning feature lists to keep a given budget for the evaluation of ranking methods. We learn from a given training set how important the individual prefixes are for the ranking quality. Based on there importance we choose the best prefixes to calculate the ranking while keeping the budget.
2010106	A novel hybrid index structure for efficient text retrieval Query processing with precomputed term pair lists can improve efficiency for some queries, but suffers from the quadratic number of index lists that need to be read. We present a novel hybrid index structure that aims at decreasing the number of index lists retrieved at query processing time, trading off a reduced number of index lists for an increased number of bytes to read. Our experiments demonstrate significant cold-cache performance gains of almost 25% on standard benchmark queries.
2010107	A weighted curve fitting method for result merging in federated search Result merging is an important step in federated search to merge the documents returned from multiple source-specific ranked lists for a user query. Previous result merging methods such as Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) and Sample- Agglomerate Fitting Estimate (SAFE) use regression methods to estimate global document scores from document ranks in individual ranked lists. SSL relies on overlapping documents that exist in both individual ranked lists and a centralized sample database. SAFE goes a step further by using both overlapping documents with accurate rank information and documents with estimated rank information for regression. However, existing methods do not distinguish the accurate rank information from the estimated information. Furthermore, all documents are assigned equal weights in regression while intuitively, documents in the top should carry higher weights. This paper proposes a weighted curve fitting method for result merging in federated search. The new method explicitly models the importance of information from overlapping documents over non-overlapping ones. It also weights documents at different positions differently. Empirically results on two datasets clearly demonstrate the advantage of the proposed algorithm.
2010108	Effect of different docid orderings on dynamic pruning retrieval strategies Document-at-a-time (DAAT) dynamic pruning strategies for information retrieval systems such as MaxScore and Wand can increase querying efficiency without decreasing effectiveness. Both work on posting lists sorted by ascending document identifier (docid). The order in which docids are assigned -- and hence the order of postings in the posting lists -- is known to have a noticeable impact on posting list compression. However, the resulting impact on dynamic pruning strategies is not well understood. In this poster, we examine the impact on the efficiency of these strategies across different docid orderings, by experimenting using the TREC ClueWeb09 corpus. We find that while the number of postings scored by dynamic pruning strategies do not markedly vary for different docid orderings, the ordering still has a marked impact on mean query response time. Moreover, when docids are assigned by lexicographical URL ordering, the benefit to response time for is more pronounced for Wand than for MaxScore.
2010109	Time-based query performance predictors Query performance prediction is aimed at predicting the retrieval effectiveness that a query will achieve with respect to a particular ranking model. In this paper, we study query performance prediction for a ranking model that explicitly incorporates the time dimension into ranking. Different time-based predictors are proposed as analogous to existing keyword-based predictors. In order to improve predicting performance, we combine different predictors using linear regression and neural networks. Extensive experiments are conducted using queries and relevance judgments obtained by crowdsourcing.
2010110	Search task difficulty: the expected vs. the reflected We report findings on how the user's perception of task difficulty changes before and after searching for information to solve tasks. We found that while in one type of task, the dependent task, this did not change, in another, the parallel task, it did. The findings have implications on designing systems that can provide assistance to users with their search and task solving strategies.
2010111	On the suitability of diversity metrics for learning-to-rank for diversity An optimally diverse ranking should achieve the maximum coverage of the aspects underlying an ambiguous or underspecified query, with minimum redundancy with respect to the covered aspects. Although evaluation metrics that reward coverage and penalise redundancy provide intuitive objective functions for learning a diverse ranking, it is unclear whether they are the most effective. In this paper, we contrast the suitability of relevance and diversity metrics as objective functions for learning a diverse ranking. Our results in the context of the diversity task of the TREC 2009 and 2010 Web tracks show that diversity metrics are not necessarily better suited for guiding a learning approach. Moreover, the suitability of these metrics is compromised as they try to penalise redundancy during the learning process.
2010112	How diverse are web search results? Search result diversification has recently gained attention as a means to tackle ambiguous queries. While query ambiguity is of particular concern for the short queries commonly observed in a Web search scenario, it is unclear how much diversity is actually promoted by Web search engines (WSEs). In this paper, we assess the diversification performance of two leading WSEs in the context of the diversity task of the TREC 2009 and 2010 Web tracks. Our results show that these WSEs perform effectively for queries with multiple interpretations, but not for those open to multiple aspects related to a single interpretation. Moreover, by deploying a state-of-the-art diversification approach based on query suggestions from these WSEs themselves, we show that their diversification performance can be further improved.
2010113	Analysis of an expert search query log Expert search has made rapid progress in modeling, algorithms and evaluations in the recent years. However, there is very few work on analyzing how users interact with expert search systems. In this paper, we conduct analysis of an expert search query log. The aim is to understand the special characteristics of expert search usage. To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the earliest work on expert search query log analysis. We find that expert search users generally issue shorter queries, more common queries, and use more advanced search features, with fewer queries in a session, than general Web search users do. This study explores a new research direction in expert search by analyzing and exploiting query logs.
2010114	A model for expert finding in social networks Expert finding is a task of finding knowledgeable people on a given topic. State-of-the-art expertise retrieval algorithms identify matching experts based on analysis of textual content of documents experts are associated with. While powerful, these models ignore social structure that might be available. In this paper, we develop a Bayesian hierarchical model for expert finding that accounts for both social relationships and content. The model assumes that social links are determined by expertise similarity between candidates. We demonstrate the improved retrieval performance of our model over the baseline on a realistic data set.
2010115	Transductive learning over automatically detected themes for multi-document summarization We propose a new method for query-biased multi-document summarization, based on sentence extraction. The summary of multiple documents is created in two steps. Sentences are first clustered; where each cluster corresponds to one of the main themes present in the collection. Inside each theme, sentences are then ranked using a transductive learning-to-rank algorithm based on RankNet, in order to better identify those which are relevant to the query. The final summary contains the top-ranked sentences of each theme. Our approach is validated on DUC 2006 and DUC 2007 datasets.
2010116	Rating-based collaborative filtering combined with additional regularization The collaborative filtering (CF) approach to recommender system has received much attention recently. However, previous work mainly focuses on improving the formula of rating prediction, e.g. by adding user and item biases, implicit feedback and time-aware factors, etc, to reach a better prediction by minimizing an objective function. However, little effort has been made on improving CF by incorporating additional regularization to the objective function. Regularization can further bound the searching range of predicted ratings. In this paper, we improve the conventional rating-based objective function by using ranking constraints as the supplementary regularization to restrict the searching of predicted ratings in smaller and more likely ranges, and develop a novel method, called RankSVD++, based on the SVD++ model. Experimental results show that RankSVD++ achieves better performance than existing main-streaming methods due to the addition of informative ranking-based regularization. The idea proposed here can also be easily incorporated to the other CF models.
2010117	Words-of-interest selection based on temporal motion coherence for video retrieval The "Bag of Visual Words" (BoW) framework has been widely used in query-by-example video retrieval to model the visual content by a set of quantized local feature descriptors. In this paper, we propose a novel technique to enhance BoW by the selection of Word-of-Interest (WoI) that utilizes the quantified temporal motion coherence of the visual words between the adjacent frames in the query example. Experiments carried out using TRECVID datasets show that our technique improves the retrieval performance of the classical BoW-based approach.
2010118	Aggregating multiple opinion evidence in proximity-based opinion retrieval Blog post opinion retrieval is the problem of ranking blog posts according to the likelihood that the post is relevant to the query and that the author was expressing an opinion about the topic (of the query). A recent study has proposed a method for finding the opinion density at query term positions in a document which uses the proximity of query term and opinion term as an indicator of their relatedness. The maximum opinion density between different query positions was used as an opinion score of the whole document. In this paper we investigate the effect of exploiting multiple opinion evidence of a document. We propose using the ordered weighted averaging (OWA) operator in order to combine the opinion score of different query positions for a final score of a document, in the proximity-based opinion retrieval system.
2010119	Enhancing mobile search using web search log data Mobile search is still in infancy compared with general purpose web search. With limited training data and weak relevance features, the ranking performance in mobile search is far from satisfactory. To address this problem, we propose to leverage the knowledge of Web search to enhance the ranking of mobile search. In this paper, we first develop an equivalent page conversion between web search and mobile search, then we design a few novel ranking features, generated from the click-through data in web search, for estimating the relevance of mobile search. Large scale evaluations demonstrate that the knowledge from web search is quite effective for boosting the relevance of ranking on mobile search.
2010120	Award prediction with temporal citation network analysis Each year many ACM SIG communities will recognize an outstanding researcher through an award in honor of his or her profound impact and numerous research contributions. This work is the first to investigate an automated mechanism to help in selecting future award winners. We approach the problem as a researchers' expertise ranking problem, and propose a temporal probabilistic ranking model which combines content with citation network analysis. Experimental results based on real-world citation data and historical awardees indicate that some kinds of SIG awards are well-modeled by this approach.
2010121	Rating prediction using feature words extracted from customer reviews We developed a simple method of improving the accuracy of rating prediction using feature words extracted from customer reviews. Many rating predictors work well for a small and dense dataset of customer reviews. However, a practical dataset tends to be large and sparse, because it often includes too many products for each customer to buy and evaluate. Data sparseness reduces prediction accuracy. To improve accuracy, we reduced the dimension of the feature vector using feature words extracted by analyzing the relationship between ratings and accompanying review comments instead of using ratings. We applied our method to the Pranking algorithm and evaluated it on a corpus of golf course reviews supplied by a Japanese e-commerce company. We found that by successfully reducing data sparseness, our method improves prediction accuracy as measured using RankLoss.
2010122	Ranking tags in resource collections We examine different tag ranking strategies for constructing tag clouds to represent collections of tagged objects. The proposed methods are based on random walk on graphs, diversification, and rank aggregation, and they are empirically evaluated on a data set of tagged images from Flickr.
2010123	Identifying similar people in professional social networks with discriminative probabilistic models Identifying similar professionals is an important task for many core services in professional social networks. Information about users can be obtained from heterogeneous information sources, and different sources provide different insights on user similarity. This paper proposes a discriminative probabilistic model that identifies latent content and graph classes for people with similar profile content and social graph similarity patterns, and learns a specialized similarity model for each latent class. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work on identifying similar professionals in professional social networks, and the first work that identifies latent classes to learn a separate similarity model for each latent class. Experiments on a real-world dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed discriminative learning model.
2010124	Intent-oriented diversity in recommender systems Diversity as a relevant dimension of retrieval quality is receiving increasing attention in the Information Retrieval and Recommender Systems (RS) fields. The problem has nonetheless been approached under different views and formulations in IR and RS respectively, giving rise to different models, methodologies, and metrics, with little convergence between both fields. In this poster we explore the adaptation of diversity metrics, techniques, and principles from ad-hoc IR to the recommendation task, by introducing the notion of user profile aspect as an analogue of query intent. As a particular approach, user aspects are automatically extracted from latent item features. Empirical results support the proposed approach and provide further insights.
2010125	Disambiguating biomedical acronyms using EMIM Expanding a query with acronyms or their corresponding 'long-forms' has not been shown to provide consistent improvements in the biomedical IR literature. The major open issue with expanding acronyms in a query is their inherent ambiguity, as an acronym can refer to multiple long-forms. At the same time, a long-form identified in a query can be expanded with its acronym(s); however, some of these may be also ambiguous and lead to poor retrieval performance. In this work, we propose the use of the EMIM (Expected Mutual Information Measure) between a long-form and its abbreviated acronym to measure ambiguity. We experiment with expanding both acronyms and long-forms identified in the queries from the adhoc task of the TREC 2004 Genomics track. Our preliminary analysis shows the potential of both acronym and long-form expansions for biomedical IR.
2010126	Best document selection based on approximate utility optimization This poster describes an alternative approach to handling the best document selection problem. Best document selection is a common problem with many real world applications, but is not a well studied problem by itself; a simple solution would be to treat it as a ranking problem and to use existing ranking algorithms to rank all documents. We could then select only the first element of the sorted list. However, because ranking models optimize for all ranks, the model may sacrifice accuracy of the top rank for the sake of overall accuracy. This is an unnecessary trade-off. We begin by first defining an appropriate objective function for the domain, then create a boosting algorithm that explicitly targets this function. Based on experiments on a benchmark retrieval data set and Digg.com news commenting data set, we find that even a simple algorithm built for this specific problem gives better results than baseline algorithms that were designed for the more complicated ranking tasks.
2010127	Forecasting counts of user visits for online display advertising with probabilistic latent class models Display advertising is a multi-billion dollar industry where advertisers promote their products to users by having publishers display their advertisements on popular Web pages. An important problem in online advertising is how to forecast the number of user visits for a Web page during a particular period of time. Prior research addressed the problem by using traditional time-series forecasting techniques on historical data of user visits; (e.g., via a single regression model built for forecasting based on historical data for all Web pages) and did not fully explore the fact that different types of Web pages have different patterns of user visits. In this paper we propose a probabilistic latent class model to automatically learn the underlying user visit patterns among multiple Web pages. Experiments carried out on real-world data demonstrate the advantage of using latent classes in forecasting online user visits.
2010128	Knowledge effects on document selection in search results pages Click through events in search results pages (SERPs) are not reliable implicit indicators of document relevance. A user's task and domain knowledge are key factors in recognition and link selection and the most useful SERP document links may be those that best match the user's domain knowledge. User study participants rated their knowledge of genomics MeSH terms before conducting 2004 TREC Genomics Track tasks. Each participant's document knowledge was represented by their knowledge of the indexing MeSH terms. Results show high, intermediate, and low domain knowledge groups had similar document selection SERP rank distributions. SERP link selection distribution varied when participant knowledge of the available documents was analyzed. High domain knowledge participants usually selected a document with the highest personal knowledge rating. Low domain knowledge participants were reasonably successful at selecting available documents of which they had the most knowledge, while intermediate knowledge participants often failed to do so. This evidence for knowledge effects on SERP link selection may contribute to understanding the potential for personalization of search results ranking based on user domain knowledge.
2010129	Learning to rank from a noisy crowd We study how to best use crowdsourced relevance judgments learning to rank [1, 7]. We integrate two lines of prior work: unreliable crowd-based binary annotation for binary classification [5, 3], and aggregating graded relevance judgments from reliable experts for ranking [7]. To model varying performance of the crowd, we simulate annotation noise with varying magnitude and distributional properties. Evaluation on three LETOR test collections reveals a striking trend contrary to prior studies: single labeling outperforms consensus methods in maximizing learner accuracy relative to annotator eýort. We also see surprising consistency of the learning curve across noise distributions, as well as greater challenge with the adversarial case for multi-class labeling.
2010130	How to count thumb-ups and thumb-downs?: an information retrieval approach to user-rating based ranking of items It is a common practice among Web 2.0 services to allow users to rate items on their sites. In this paper, we first point out the flaws of the popular methods for user-rating based ranking of items, and then argue that two well-known Information Retrieval (IR) techniques, namely the Probability Ranking Principle and Statistical Language Modelling, provide a simple but effective solution to this problem.
2010131	Predicting users' domain knowledge from search behaviors This study uses regression modeling to predict a user's domain knowledge level (DK) from implicit evidence provided by certain search behaviors. A user study (n=35) with recall-oriented search tasks in the genomic domain was conducted. A number of regression models of a person's DK, were generated using different behavior variable selection methods. The best model highlights three behavior variables as DK predictors: the number of documents saved, the average query length, and the average ranking position of documents opened. The model is validated using the split sampling method. Limitations and future research directions are discussed.
2010132	The interactive PRP for diversifying document rankings The assumptions underlying the Probability Ranking Principle (PRP) have led to a number of alternative approaches that cater or compensate for the PRP's limitations. In this poster we focus on the Interactive PRP (iPRP), which rejects the assumption of independence between documents made by the PRP. Although the theoretical framework of the iPRP is appealing, no instantiation has been proposed and investigated. In this poster, we propose a possible instantiation of the principle, performing the first empirical comparison of the iPRP against the PRP. For document diversification, our results show that the iPRP is significantly better than the PRP, and comparable to or better than other methods such as Modern Portfolio Theory.
2010133	Detecting success in mobile search from interaction Predicting searcher success and satisfaction is a key problem in Web search, which is essential for automatic evaluating and improving search engine performance. This problem has been studied actively in the desktop search setting, but not specifically for mobile search, despite many known differences between the two modalities. As mobile devices become increasingly popular for searching the Web, improving the searcher experience on such devices is becoming crucially important. In this paper, we explore the possibility of predicting searcher success and satisfaction in mobile search with a smart phone. Specifically, we investigate client-side interaction signals, including the number of browsed pages, and touch screen-specific actions such as zooming and sliding. Exploiting this information with machine learning techniques results in nearly 80% accuracy for predicting searcher success -- significantly outperforming the previous models.
2010134	Measuring assessor accuracy: a comparison of nist assessors and user study participants In many situations, humans judging document relevance are forced to trade-off accuracy for speed. The development of better interactive retrieval systems and relevance assessing platforms requires the measurement of assessor accuracy, but to date the subjective nature of relevance has prevented such measurement. To quantify assessor performance, we define relevance to be a group's majority opinion, and demonstrate the value of this approach by comparing the performance of NIST assessors to a group of assessors representative of participants in many information retrieval user studies. Using data collected as part of a user study with 48 participants, we found that NIST assessors discriminate between relevant and non-relevant documents better than the average participant in our study, but that NIST assessors' true positive rate is no better than that of the study participants. In addition, we found NIST assessors to be conservative in their judgment of relevance compared to the average participant.
2010135	A bipartite graph based social network splicing method for person name disambiguation The key issue of person name disambiguation is to discover different namesakes in massive web documents rather than simply cluster documents by using textual features. In this paper, we describe a novel person name disambiguation method based on social networks to effectively identify namesakes. The social network snippets in each document are extracted. Then, the namesakes are identified via splicing the social networks of each namesake by using the snippets as a bipartite graph. Experimental results show that our method achieves better result than the top performance of WePS-2 in identifying different namesakes.
2010136	Link formation analysis in microblogs Unlike a traditional social network service, a microblogging network like Twitter is a hybrid network, combining aspects of both social networks and information networks. Understanding the structure of such hybrid networks and to predict new links are important for many tasks such as friend recommendation, community detection, and network growth models. In this paper, by analyzing data collected over time, we find that 90% of new links are to people just two hops away and dynamics of friend acquisition are also related to users' account age. Finally, we compare two popular sampling methods which are widely used for network analysis and find that ForestFire does not preserve properties required for the link prediction task.
2010137	Evolution of web search results within years We provide a first large-scale analysis of the evolution of query results obtained from a real search engine at two distant points in time, namely, in 2007 and 2010, for a set of 630,000 real queries.
2010138	Decayed DivRank: capturing relevance, diversity and prestige in information networks Many network-based ranking approaches have been proposed to rank objects according to different criteria, including relevance, prestige and diversity. However, existing approaches either only aim at one or two of the criteria, or handle them with additional heuristics in multiple steps. Inspired by DivRank, we propose a unified ranking model, Decayed DivRank (DDRank), to meet the three criteria simultaneously. Empirical experiments on paper citation network show that DDRank can outperform existing algorithms in capturing relevance, diversity and prestige simultaneously in ranking.
2010139	Multi-objective optimization in learning to rank Supervised learning to rank algorithms typically optimize for high relevance and ignore other facets of search quality, such as freshness and diversity. Prior work on multi-objective ranking trained rankers focused on using hybrid labels that combine overall quality of documents, and implicitly incorporate multiple criteria into quantifying ranking risks. However, these hybrid scores are usually generated based on heuristics without considering potential correlations between individual facets (e.g., freshness versus relevance). In this poster, we empirically demonstrate that the correlation between objective facets in multi-criteria ranking optimization may significantly influence the effectiveness of trained rankers with respect to each objective.
2010140	A large-scale study of the effect of training set characteristics over learning-to-rank algorithms In this work we describe the results of a large-scale study on the effect of the distribution of labels across the different grades of relevance in the training set on the performance of trained ranking functions. In a controlled experiment we generate a large number of training datasets wih different label distributions and employ three learning to rank algo- rithms over these datasets. We investigate the effect of these distributions on the accuracy of obtained ranking functions to give an insight into the manner training sets should be constructed.
2010141	Exploring term temporality for pseudo-relevance feedback As digital collections expand, the importance of the temporal aspect of information has become increasingly apparent. The aim of this paper is to investigate the effect of using long-term temporal profiles of terms in information retrieval by enhancing the term selection process of pseudo-relevance feedback (PRF). For this purpose, two temporal PRF approaches were introduced considering only temporal aspect and temporal along with textual aspect. Experiments used the AP88-89 and WSJ87-92 test collections with TREC Ad-Hoc Topics 51-100. Term temporal profiles are extracted from the Google Books n-grams dataset. The results show that the long-term temporal aspects of terms are capable of enhancing retrieval effectiveness.
2010142	MSSF: a multi-document summarization framework based on submodularity Multi-document summarization aims to distill the most representative information from a set of documents to generate a summary. Given a set of documents as input, most of existing multi-document summarization approaches utilize different sentence selection techniques to extract a set of sentences from the document set as the summary. The submodularity hidden in textual-unit similarity motivates us to incorporate this property into our solution to multi-document summarization tasks. In this poster, we propose a new principled and versatile framework for different multi-document summarization tasks using the submodular function [8].
2010143	SEJoin: an optimized algorithm towards efficient approximate string searches We investigated the problem of finding from a collection of strings those similar to a given query string based on edit distance, for which the critical operation is merging inverted lists of grams generated from the collection of strings. We present an efficient algorithm to accelerate the merging operation.
2010144	Bag-of-visual-words vs global image descriptors on two-stage multimodal retrieval The Bag-Of-Visual-Words (BOVW) paradigm is fast becoming a popular image representation for Content-Based Image Retrieval (CBIR), mainly because of its better retrieval effectiveness over global feature representations on collections with images being near-duplicate to queries. In this experimental study we demonstrate that this advantage of BOVW is diminished when visual diversity is enhanced by using a secondary modality, such as text, to pre-filter images. The TOP-SURF descriptor is evaluated against Compact Composite Descriptors on a two-stage image retrieval setup, which first uses a text modality to rank the collection and then perform CBIR only on the top-K items.
2010145	Query term ranking based on search results overlap In this paper, we propose a method to rank and assign weights to query terms according to their impact on the topic of the query. We use Search Result Overlap Ratio (SROR) to quantify the overlap of the search results of the full query and a shorten query after removing one term. Intuitively, if the overlap is small, it indicates a big topic shift and the removed term should be discriminative and important. The SROR could be used for measuring query term importance with a search engine automatically. By this way, learning based models could be trained based on a large number of automatically labeled instances and make predictions for future queries efficiently.
2010146	Tossing coins to trim long queries Verbose web queries are often descriptive in nature where a term based search engine is unable to distinguish between the essential and noisy words, which can result in a drift from the user intent. We present a randomized query reduction technique that builds on an earlier learning to rank based approach. The proposed technique randomly picks only a small set of samples, instead of the exponentially many sub-queries, thus being fast enough to be useful for web search engines, while still covering wide sub-query space.
2010147	A comparison of time-aware ranking methods When searching a temporal document collection, e.g., news archives or blogs, the time dimension must be explicitly incorporated into a retrieval model in order to improve relevance ranking. Previous work has followed one of two main approaches: 1) a mixture model linearly combining textual similarity and temporal similarity, or 2) a probabilistic model generating a query from the textual and temporal part of a document independently. In this paper, we compare the effectiveness of different time-aware ranking methods by using a mixture model applied to all methods. Extensive evaluation is conducted using the New York Times Annotated Corpus, queries and relevance judgments obtained using the Amazon Mechanical Turk.
2010148	Learning for graphs with annotated edges Automatic classification with graphs containing annotated edges is an interesting problem and has many potential applications. We present a risk minimization formulation that exploits the annotated edges for classification tasks. One major advantage of our approach compared to other methods is that the weight of each edge in the graph structures in our model, including both positive and negative weights, can be learned automatically from training data based on edge features. The empirical results show that our approach can lead to significantly improved classification performance compared to several baseline approaches.
2010149	Formulating effective questions for community-based question answering Community-based Question Answering (CQA) services have become a major venue for people's information seeking on the Web. However, many studies on CQA have focused on the prediction of the best answers for a given question. This paper looks into the formulation of effective questions in the context of CQA. In particular, we looked at effect of contextual factors appended to a basic question on the performance of submitted answers. This study analysed a total of 930 answers returned in response to 266 questions that were formulated by 46 participants. The results show that adding a questionnaire's personal and social attribute to the question helped improve the perceptions of answers both in information seeking questions and opinion seeking questions.
2010151	ClusteringWiki: personalized and collaborative clustering of search results How to organize and present search results plays a critical role in the utility of search engines. Due to the unprecedented scale of the Web and diversity of search results, the common strategy of ranked lists has become increasingly inadequate, and clustering has been considered as a promising alternative. Clustering divides a long list of disparate search results into a few topic-coherent clusters, allowing the user to quickly locate relevant results by topic navigation. While many clustering algorithms have been proposed that innovate on the automatic clustering procedure, we introduce ClusteringWiki, the first prototype and framework for personalized clustering that allows direct user editing of clustering results. Through a Wiki interface, the user can edit and annotate the membership, structure and labels of clusters for a personalized presentation. In addition, the edits and annotations can be shared among users as a mass collaborative way of improving search result organization and search engine utility.
2010152	OrientSTS: spatio-temporal sequence searching in flickr Nowadays, due to the increasing user requirements of efficient and personalized services, a perfect travel plan is urgently needed. However, at present it is hard for people to make a personalized traveling plan. Most of them follow other people's general travel trajectory. So only after finishing their travel, do they know which scene is their favorite, which is not, and what is the perfect order of visits. In this research we propose a novel spatio-temporal sequence (STS) searching, which mainly includes two steps. Firstly, we propose a novel method to detect tourist features of every scene, and its difference in different seasons. Secondly, combined with personal profile and scene features, a set of interesting scenes will be chosen and each scene has a specific weight for each user. The goal of our research is to provide the traveler with the STS, which passes through as many chosen scenes as possible with the maximum weight and the minimum distance within his travel time. We propose a method based on topic model to detect scene features, and provide two approximate algorithms to mine STS: a local optimization algorithm and a global optimization algorithm. System evaluations have been conducted and the performance results show the efficiency.
2010153	A toolkit for knowledge base population The main goal of knowledge base population (KBP) is to distill entity information (e.g., facts of a person) from multiple unstructured and semi-structured data sources, and incorporate the information into a knowledge base (KB). In this work, we intend to release an open source KBP toolkit that is publicly available for research purposes.
2010154	iMecho: a context-aware desktop search system In this demo, we present iMecho, a context-aware desktop search system to help users get more relevant results. Different from other desktop search engines, iMecho ranks results not only by the content of the query, but also the context of the query. It employs an Hidden Markov Model (HMM)-based user model, which is learned from user's activity logs, to estimate the query context when he submits the query. The results from keyword search are re-ranked by their relevances to the context with acceptable overhead.
2010155	Visualizing and querying semantic social networks We demonstrate SSNetViz that is developed for integrating, visualizing and querying heterogeneous semantic social networks obtained from multiple information sources. A semantic social network refers to a social network graph with multi-typed nodes and links. We demonstrate various innovative features of SSNetViz with social networks from three information sources covering a similar set of entities and relationships in terrorism domain.
2010156	What-you-retrieve-is-what-you-see: a preliminary cyber-physical search engine The cyber-physical systems (CPS) are envisioned as a class of real-time systems integrating the computing, communication and storage facilities with monitoring and control of the physical world. One interesting CPS application in the mobile Internet is to provide Web search "on the spot" regarding the physical world that a user sees, or literally WYRIWYS (What-You-Retrieve-Is-What-You-See). The objective of our work is to develop server/browser software for supporting WYRIWYS search in our prototype cyber-physical search engine. A WYRIWYS search retrieves visible Web objects and ranks them by their cyber-physical relevances (term, visual, spatial, temporal etc.). This work is distinguished from previous LWS as it provides quality Web search geared with the physical world. Therefore it suggests a very promising solution to cyber-physical Web search.
2010157	QuickView: advanced search of tweets Tweets have become a comprehensive repository for real-time information. However, it is often hard for users to quickly get information they are interested in from tweets, owing to the sheer volume of tweets as well as their noisy and informal nature. We present QuickView, an NLP-based tweet search platform to tackle this issue. Specifically, it exploits a series of natural language processing technologies, such as tweet normalization, named entity recognition, semantic role labeling, sentiment analysis, tweet classification, to extract useful information, i.e., named entities, events, opinions, etc., from a large volume of tweets. Then, non-noisy tweets, together with the mined information, are indexed, on top of which two brand new scenarios are enabled, i.e., categorized browsing and advanced search, allowing users to effectively access either the tweets or fine-grained information they are interested in.
2010158	Personalized video: leanback online video consumption Current user interfaces for online video consumption are mostly browser based, lean forward, require constant interaction and provide a fragmented view of the total content available. For easier consumption, the user interface and interactions need to be redesigned for less interruptive and lean back experience. In this paper, we describe Personalized Video, an application that converts the online video experience into a personalized lean back experience. It has been implemented on the Windows platform and integrated with intuitive user interactions like gesture and face recognition. It also supports group personalization for concurrent users.
2010159	GreenMeter: a tool for assessing the quality and recommending tags for web 2.0 applications We present GreenMeter, a tool for assessing the quality and recommending tags for Web 2.0 content. Its goal is to improve tag quality and the effectiveness of various information services (e.g., search, content recommendation) that rely on tags as data sources. We demonstrate an implementation of GreenMeter for the popular Last.fm application.
2010160	JuSe: a picture dictionary query system for children As adults we take for granted our capacity to express our information needs verbally and textually. However, young children also have preferences and information needs, but are just learning to be able to express themselves effectively. Consequently they encounter many barriers when trying to spell, type, and communicate their needs to a 'faceless' search engine text box. Junior Search (JuSe) is an interface that enables preschoolers and young children to search and find consumable online content (such as games for kids, videos, etc.) through adaptable picture dictionaries. Inspired by educational children's toys, rather than search engines designed for adults, JuSe incorporates a learning element by combining audio-visual and textual cues to improve written word recognition and vocabulary skills. JuSe provides an interactive learning environment that allows parents to introduce new words and concepts into the child's lexicon, as well as controlling the content and search queries.
2010161	CrowdTracker: enabling community-based real-time web monitoring CrowdTracker is a community-based web monitoring system optimized for real-time web streams like Twitter, Facebook, and Google Buzz. In this demo summary, we provide an overview of the system and architecture, and outline the demonstration plan.
2010162	The Meta-Dex Suite: generating and analyzing indexes and meta-indexes Our Meta-dex software suite extracts content and index text from a corpus of PDF files, and generates a meta-index that references entries across an entire domain. We provide tools to analyze the individual and integrated indexes, and visualize entries and books within the meta-index. The suite is scalable to very large data sets.
2010163	Tulsa: web search for writing assistance An abstract is not available.
2010164	The TREC files: the (ground) truth is out there Traditional tools for information retrieval (IR) evaluation, such as TREC's trec_eval, have outdated command-line interfaces with many unused features, or 'switches', accumulated over the years. They are usually seen as cumbersome applications by new IR researchers, steepening the learning curve. We introduce a platform-independent application for IR evaluation with a graphical easy-to-use interface: the TREC_Files Evaluator. The application supports most of the standard measures used for evaluation in TREC, CLEF, and elsewhere, such as MAP, P10, P20, and bpref, as well as the Averaged Normalized Modified Retrieval Rank (ANMRR) proposed by MPEG for image retrieval evaluation. Additional features include a batch mode and statistical significance testing of the results against a pre-selected baseline.
2010165	A tool for comparative IR evaluation on component level An abstract is not available.
2010167	Machine learning for information retrieval In recent years, we have witnessed successful application of machine learning techniques to a wide range of information retrieval problems, including Web search engines, recommendation systems, online advertising, etc. It is thus critical for researchers in the information retrieval community to understand the core machine learning techniques. In order to accommodate audiences with different levels of understanding of machine learning, we divide this tutorial into two sessions: the first session will focus on basic machine learning concepts and tools; in the second session, we will introduce more advanced topics in machine learning, and will present recent developments in machine learning and its application to information retrieval. Each season is self-contained. Session 1: Core Learning Technologies for Information Retrieval. This session of the tutorial will cover the core machine learning methods, basic optimization techniques and key information retrieval applications. In particular, it includes: 1). Core concepts in machine learning, such as supervised learning/unsupervised learning, bias and variance trade off, and probabilistic models; 2). Useful concepts and algorithms in optimization including the first and second order gradient methods, and Expectation and Maximization; 3). The application of machine learning methods to key information retrieval problems including text classification, collaborative filtering, clustering and learning to rank; Session 2: Emerging Learning Technologies for Information Retrieval. This session will cover more advanced machine learning techniques that have started to be utilized in information retrieval applications. In particular, it will cover: 1). Advanced Optimization Techniques including stochastic optimization and smooth minimization; 2). Emerging Learning Techniques such as Multiple-Instance Learning, Active Learning and Semi-supervised Learning. The tutorial will benefit a large body of audience in the information retrieval community, ranging from students who are new to machine learning to the seasoned researchers who would like to understand the recent advance in machine learning for information retrieval research. This tutorial will also benefit the practitioners who apply learning techniques to real-world information retrieval systems.
2010168	Enhancing web search by mining search and browse logs Huge amounts of search log data have been accumulated in various search engines. Currently, a commercial search engine receives billions of queries and collects tera-bytes of log data on any single day. Other than search log data, browse logs can be collected by client-side browser plug-ins, which record the browse information if users' permissions are granted. Such massive amounts of search/browse log data, on the one hand, provide great opportunities to mine the wisdom of crowds and improve web search results. On the other hand, designing effective and efficient methods to clean, model, and process large scale log data also presents great challenges. In this tutorial, we will focus on mining search and browse log data for search engines. We will start with an introduction of search and browse log data and an overview of frequently-used data summarization in log mining. We will then elaborate how log mining applications enhance the five major components of a search engine, namely, query understanding, document understanding, query-document matching, user understanding, and monitoring and feedbacks. For each aspect, we will survey the major tasks, fundamental principles, and state-of-the-art methods. Finally, we will discuss the challenges and future trends of log data mining. The goal of this tutorial is to provide a systematic survey on large-scale search/browse log mining to the IR community. It may help IR researchers to get familiar with the core challenges and promising directions in log mining. At the same time, this tutorial may also serve the developers of web information retrieval systems as a comprehensive and in-depth reference to the advanced log mining techniques.
2010169	A new look at old tricks: the fertile roots of current research As we face an explosion of potential new applications for the fundamental concepts and technologies of information retrieval, ranging from ad ranking to social media, from collaborative recommending to question answering systems, many researchers are spending unnecessary time reinventing ideas and relationships that are buried in the prehistory of information retrieval (which, for many researchers, means anything published before they entered graduate school). A lot of the ideas that surface as "new" in today's super-heated research environment have very firm roots in earlier developments in fields as diverse as citation analysis and pattern recognition. The purpose of this tutorial is to survey those roots, and their relation to the contemporary fruits on the tree of information retrieval, and to separate, as much as is possible in an era of increasing secrecy about methods, the problems to be solved, the algorithms for solving them, and the heuristics that are the bread and butter of a working operation. Participants will become familiar with roots in Pattern Analysis, Statistics, Information Science and other sources of key ideas that reappear in the current development of Information Retrieval as it applies to Search Engines, Social Media, and Collaborative Systems. They will be able to separate problems from algorithms, and algorithms from heuristics, in the application of these ideas to their own research and/or development activities. Course materials will be made available on a Web site two weeks prior to the tutorial. They will include links to relevant software; links to publications that will be discussed; and mechanisms for chat among the tutorial participants, before, during and after the tutorial.
2010170	Crowdsourcing for information retrieval: principles, methods, and applications Crowdsourcing has emerged in recent years as a promising new avenue for leveraging today's digitally-connected, diverse, distributed workforce. Generally speaking, crowdsourcing describes outsourcing of tasks to a large group of people instead of assigning such tasks to an in-house employee or contractor. Crowdsourcing platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk and CrowdFlower have gained particular attention as active online market places for reaching and tapping into this still largely under-utilized workforce. Crowdsourcing also offers intriguing new opportunities for accomplishing different kinds of tasks or achieving broader participation than previously possible, as well as completing standard tasks more accurately in less time and at lower cost. Unlocking the potential of crowdsourcing in practice, however, requires a tri-partite understanding of principles, platforms, and best practices. We will introduce the opportunities and challenges of crowdsourcing while discussing the three issues above. This will provide a basic foundation to begin crowdsourcing in the context of one's own particular tasks
2010171	Practical online retrieval evaluation Online evaluation is amongst the few evaluation techniques available to the information retrieval community that is guaranteed to reflect how users actually respond to improvements developed by the community. Broadly speaking, online evaluation refers to any evaluation of retrieval quality conducted while observing user behavior in a natural context. However, it is rarely employed outside of large commercial search engines due primarily to a perception that it is impractical at small scales. The goal of this tutorial is to familiarize information retrieval researchers with state-of-the-art techniques in evaluating information retrieval systems based on natural user clicking behavior, as well as to show how such methods can be practically deployed. In particular, our focus will be on demonstrating how the Interleaving approach and other click based techniques contrast with traditional offline evaluation, and how these online methods can be effectively used in academic-scale research. In addition to lecture notes, we will also provide sample software and code walk-throughs to showcase the ease with which Interleaving and other click-based methods can be employed by students, academics and other researchers.
2010172	Web retrieval: the role of users Web retrieval methods have evolved through three major steps in the last decade or so. They started from standard document-centric IR in the early days of the Web, then made a major step forward by leveraging the structure of the Web, using link analysis techniques in both crawling and ranking challenges. A more recent, no less important but maybe more discrete step forward, has been to enter the user in this equation in two ways: (1) Implicitly, through the analysis of usage data captured by query logs, and session and click information in general; the goal here being to improve ranking as well as to measure user's happiness and engagement; (2) Explicitly, by offering novel interactive features; the goal here being to better answer users' needs. This half day tutorial covers the user-related challenges associated with the implicit and explicit role of users in Web retrieval. More specifically, we review and discuss challenges associated with: (1) Usage data analysis and metrics - It is critical to monitor how users take advantage and interact with Web retrieval systems, as this implicit relevant feedback aggregated at a large scale, can provide insights on users' underlying intent as well as approximate quite accurately the level of success of a given feature. Here we have to consider not only clicks statistics, the sequences of queries, the time spent in a page, the number of actions per session, etc. This is the focus of the first part of the tutorial. (2) User interaction - Given the intrinsic problems posed by the Web, the key challenge for the user is to conceive a good query to be submitted to the search system, one that leads to a manageable and relevant answer. The retrieval system must assist users during two key stages of interaction: efore the query is fully expressed and after the results are returned. After quite some stagnation on the front-end of Web retrieval, we have seen numerous novel interactive features appear in the last 3 to 4 years, as the leading commercial search engines seem to compete for users' attention. The second part of the tutorial will be dedicated to explicit user interaction. We will introduce novel material (as compared to previous versions of this tutorial that were given at SIGIR'2010, WSDM'2011 and ECIR'2011) in order to reflect recent Web search features such as Google Instant or Yahoo! Direct Search. The goal of this tutorial is to teach the key principles and technologies behind the activities and challenges briefly outlined above, bring new understanding and insights to the attendees, and hopefully foster future research. A previous version of this tutorial was offered at the ACM SIGIR'2010, WSDM'2011 and ECIR'2011.
2010173	Information organization and retrieval with collaboratively generated content Proliferation of ubiquitous access to the Internet enables millions of Web users to collaborate online on a variety of activities. Many of these activities result in the construction of large repositories of knowledge, either as their primary aim (e.g., Wikipedia) or as a by-product (e.g., Yahoo! Answers). In this tutorial, we will discuss organizing and exploiting Collaboratively Generated Content (CGC) for information organization and retrieval. Specifically, we intend to cover two complementary areas of the problem: (1) using such content as a powerful enabling resource for knowledge-enriched, intelligent representations and new information retrieval algorithms, and (2) development of supporting technologies for extracting, filtering, and organizing collaboratively created content. The unprecedented amounts of information in CGC enable new, knowledge-rich approaches to information access, which are significantly more powerful than the conventional word-based methods. Considerable progress has been made in this direction over the last few years. Examples include explicit manipulation of human-defined concepts and their use to augment the bag of words (cf. Explicit Semantic Analysis), using large-scale taxonomies of topics from Wikipedia or the Open Directory Project to construct additional class-based features, or using Wikipedia for better word sense disambiguation. However, the quality and comprehensiveness of collaboratively created content vary widely, and in order for this resource to be useful, a significant amount of preprocessing, filtering, and organization is necessary. Consequently, new methods for analyzing CGC and corresponding user interactions are required to effectively harness the resulting knowledge. Thus, not only the content repositories can be used to improve IR methods, but the reverse pollination is also possible, as better information extraction methods can be used for automatically collecting more knowledge, or verifying the contributed content. This natural connection between modeling the generation process of CGC and effectively using the accumulated knowledge suggests covering both areas together in a single tutorial. The intended audience of the tutorial includes IR researchers and graduate students, who would like to learn about the recent advances and research opportunities in working with collaboratively generated content. The emphasis of the tutorial is on comparing the existing approaches and presenting practical techniques that IR practitioners can use in their research. We also cover open research challenges, as well as survey available resources (software tools and data) for getting started in this research field.
2010175	Persistence in the ephemeral: utilizing repeat behaviors for multi-session personalized search As the abundance of information on the Internet grows, an increasing burden is placed on the user to specify his or her query precisely in order to avoid extraneous results that may be relevant, but not useful. At the same time, users have a tendency to repeat their search behaviors, seeking the same URL (re-finding) as well as issuing the same query (re-searching). These repeated actions reveal a form of user preference that the search engine can utilize to personalize the results. In our approach, we personalize search results related to ongoing tasks, allowing for a different degree of strength of interest, and diversity of interest per task. We focus on high valued queries; queries that are both related to past queries and will be related to future queries given the ongoing nature of the task.
2010176	Search engines that learn online The goal of my research is to develop self-learning search engines, that can learn online, i.e., directly from interactions with actual users. Such systems can continuously adapt to user preferences throughout their lifetime, leading to better search performance in settings where expensive manual tuning is infeasible. Challenges that are addressed in my work include the development of effective online learning to rank algorithms for IR, user aspects, and evaluation.
2010177	Query expansion based on a semantic graph model Query expansion is a classical topic in the field of information retrieval, which is proposed to bridge the gap between searchers' information intents and their queries. Previous researches usually expand queries based on document collections, or some external resources such as WordNet and Wikipedia [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However, it seems that independently using one of these resources has some defects, document collections lack semantic information of words, while WordNet and Wikipedia may not include domain-specific knowledge in certain document collection. Our work aims to combine these two kinds of resources to establish an expansion model which represents not only domain-specific information but also semantic information. In our preliminary experiments, we construct a two-layer word graph and use Random-Walk algorithm to calculate the weights of each term in pseudo-relevance feedback documents, then select the highest weighted term to expand original query. The first layer of the word graph contains terms in related documents, while the second layer contains semantic senses corresponding to these terms. These terms and semantic senses are treated as vertices of the graph and connected with each other by all possible relationships, such as mutual information and semantic similarities. We utilized mutual information, semantic similarity and uniform distribution as the weight of term-term relation, sense-sense relation and word-sense relation respectively. Though these experiments show that our expansion outperform original queries, we are troubled with some difficult problems. Given the framework of semantic graph model, we need more effort to find out an optimal graph to represent the relationships between terms and their semantic senses. We utilized a two-layer graph model in our preliminary research, where terms from different documents are treated equally. Maybe we can introduce the document as a third layer in future work, where we can differ the same terms in different documents according to document relevance and context. Then we need appropriately represent initial weights of this words, senses and relationships. Various measures for weights of terms and term relations have been proved effective in other information retrieval tasks, such as TFIDF, mutual information (MI), but there is little research on weights for semantic senses and their relations. For polysemous words, we add all of their semantic senses to the graph and assume that these senses are uniformly distributed. Actually, it is not precise for a word in a special document and query. As we know, a polysemous word may have only one or two senses in a document, and they are not uniformly distributed. Give a word, what we should do is to determine its word senses in a relevant document and estimate the distribution of these senses. Word sense disambiguation may help us in this problem. Then, there are many methods to compute word similarity according to WordNet, which we use to represent the weights of relationships between word senses. Varelas et al implemented some popular methods to compute semantic similarity by mapping terms to an ontology and examining their relationships in that ontology [4]. We also need to know which algorithm for semantic similarity is most suitable for our model. Additional, WordNet is suitable to calculate word similarity but not suitable to measure word relevance. The inner hyperlinks of Wikipedia could help us to calculate word relevance. We wish to find an effective way to combine the similarity measure from WordNet and relevance measure from Wikipedia, which may completely reflect word relationships.
2010178	Descriptive modelling of text classification and its integration with other IR tasks Nowadays, Information Retrieval (IR) systems have to deal with multiple sources of data available in different formats. Datasets can consist of complex and heterogeneous objects with relationships between them. In addition, information needs can vary wildly and they can include different tasks. As a result, the importance of flexibility in IR systems is rapidly growing. This fact is specially important in environments where the information required at different moments is very different and its utility may be contingent on timely implementation. In these cases, how quickly a new problem is solved is as important as how well you solve it. Current systems are usually developed for specific cases. It implies that too much engineering effort is needed to adapt them when new knowledge appears or there are changes in the requirements. Furthermore, heterogeneous and linked data present greater challenges, as well as the simultaneous application of different tasks. This research proposes the usage of descriptive approaches for three different purposes: the modelling of the specific task of Text Classification (TC), focusing on knowledge and complex data exploitation; the flexible application of models to different tasks; and the simultaneously application of different IR-tasks. This investigation will contribute to the long-term goal of achieving a descriptive and composable IR technology that provides a modular framework that knowledge engineers can compose into a task-specific solution. The ultimate goal is to develop a flexible framework that offers classifiers, retrieval models, information extractors, and other functions. In addition, those functional blocks could be customised to satisfy user needs. Descriptive approaches allow a high-level definition of algorithms which are, in some cases, as compact as mathematical formulations. One of the expected benefits is to make the implementation clearer and the knowledge transfer easier. They allow models from different tasks to be defined as modules that can be "concatenated", processing the information as a pipeline where some of the outputs of one module are the input of the following one. This combination involves minimum engineering effort due to the paradigm's "Plug & Play" capabilities offered by its functional syntax. This solution provides the flexibility needed to customise and quickly combine different IR-tasks and/or models. Classification is a desired candidate for being part of a flexible IR framework because it can be required in several situations for different purposes. In particular, descriptive approaches will improve its modelling with complex and heterogeneous objects. Furthermore, we aim to show how this approach allows to apply TC models for ad-hoc retrieval (and vice versa) and their simultaneous application for complex information needs. The main hypothesis of this research is that a seamless approach for modelling TC and its integration with other IR-tasks will provide a general framework for rapid prototyping and modelling of solutions for specific users. In addition, it will allow new complex models that take into account relationships and inference from large ontologies. The importance of flexibility for information systems and the exploitation of complex information and knowledge from heterogeneous sources are the main points for discussion. The main challenges are expressiveness and scalability. Abstraction improves flexibility and maintainability. However, it limits the modelling power. A balance between abstraction and expressiveness has to be reached. On the other hand, scalability has been traditionally a challenge for descriptive modelling. Our goal is to prove the feasibility of our approach for real-scale environments.
2010179	Efficient and effective solutions for search engines An abstract is not available.
2010180	Modeling document scores for distributed information retrieval Distributed Information Retrieval (DIR), also known as Federated Search, integrates multiple searchable collections and provides direct access to them through a unified interface [3]. This is done by a centralized broker , that receives user queries, forwards them to appropriate collections and returns merged results to users. In practice, most of federated resources do not cooperate with a broker and do not provide neither their content nor the statistics used for retrieval. This is known as uncooperative DIR. In this case a broker creates a resource representation by sending sample queries to a collection and analyzing retrieved documents. This process is called query-based sampling . The key issue here is the following: 1.1 How many documents have to be retrieved from a resource in order to obtain a representative sample? Although there have been a number of attempts to address this issue it is still not solved appropriately. For a given user query resources are ranked according to their similarity to the query or based on the number of relevant documents they contain. Since resource representations are usually incomplete, the similarity or the number of relevant documents cannot be calculated precisely. Resource selection algorithms proposed in the literature estimate these numbers based on incomplete samples. However these estimates are subjects to error. In practice, inaccurate estimates that have high error should be trusted less then the more accurate estimates with low error. Unfortunately none of the existing algorithms can make the calculation of the estimation errors possible. Therefore the following questions arise: 2.1 How to estimate resource scores so that the estimation errors can be calculated? 2.2 How to use these errors in order to improve the resource selection performance? Existing results merging algorithms estimate normalized document scores based on scores of documents that appear both in a sample and in a result list. The problem similar to the resource selection one arises. The normalized document scores are only the estimates and are subjects to error. Inaccurate estimates should be trusted less then the more accurate ones. Again none of the existing algorithms provide a way for calculating these errors. Thus the two question to be address on the results merging phase are similar to the resource selection ones: 3.1 How to estimate normalized document scores so that the estimation errors can be calculated? 3.2 How to use these errors in order to improve the results merging performance? In this work we address the above issues by applying score distribution models (SDM) to different phases of DIR [2]. In particular, we discuss the SDM-based resource selection technique that allows the calculation of resource score estimation errors and can be extended in order to calculate the number of documents to be sampled from each resource for a given query. We have performed initial experiments comparing the SDM-based resource selection technique to the state-of-the-art algorithms and we are currently experimenting with the SDM-based results merging method. We plan to apply the existing score normalization techniques from meta-search to the DIR results merging problem [1]. However, the SDM-based results merging approaches require the relevance scores to be returned together with retrieved documents. It is not yet clear how to relax this strong assumption that does not always hold in practice.
2010181	Improving query and result list adaptation in personalized multilingual information retrieval A general characteristic of Information Retrieval (IR) and Multilingual IR (MIR) [5] systems is that if the same query was submitted by different users, the system would yield the same results, regardless of the user. On the other hand, Adaptive Hypermedia (AH) systems operate in a personalized manner where the services are adapted to the user [1]. Personalized IR (PIR) is motivated by the success in both areas, IR and AH [4]. IR systems have the advantage of scalability and AH systems have the advantage of satisfying individual user needs. The majority of studies in PIR literature have focused on monolingual IR, and relatively little work has been done concerning multilingual IR. This PhD research study aims to improve personalization in MIR systems, by improving the relevance of multilingual search results with respect to the user and not just the query. The study investigates how to model different aspects of a multilingual search user. Information about users can be demographic information, such as language and country, or information about the user's search interests. This information can be gathered explicitly by asking the user to supply the required information or implicitly by inferring the information from the user's search history. The study will then investigate how to exploit the modeled user information to personalize the user's multilingual search by performing query and result list adaptation. The main research questions that are addressed in this study are: how to improve the relevance of search results with respect to individual users in PMIR and how to construct profiles that represent aspects and interests of a multilingual search user. So far, the work carried out for this study included: (1) a proposed framework for the delivery and evaluation of PMIR [3]; and (2) exploratory experiments with search history and collection (result) re-ranking on a dataset of multilingual search logs [2]. The next stage of experimentation will involve the investigation and development of algorithms for: (1) constructing multilingual user profiles; (2) pre-translation and post-translation query expansion based on terms from the user profile; and (3) result list re-ranking based on the user's interests, and preferred language. Two types of experiments will be conducted in an in-lab setting, with a group of users from different linguistic backgrounds. In the first set of experiments, users will be asked to use a baseline web search system for their daily search activities over a period of time. The baseline system will be wrapped around one of the major search engines. Interactions with the system will be logged, and part of this information will be used for training the system (constructing user profiles from text of queries and clicked documents); the other part (remaining queries) will be used for testing the effectiveness of the query adaptation and result list adaptation algorithms, where the users will be asked to provide some personal relevance judgements. In the second set of experiments, the users will be asked to use the PMIR system to fulfill a number of defined search tasks. Quantitative and qualitative techniques will be used to evaluate different aspects of the experiments, including: (1) retrieval effectiveness, which can be measured using standard IR metrics; (2) user's performance on search tasks, which can be measured in terms of time and number of actions needed to fulfill the tasks; (3) user profile accuracy, which can be assessed by questionnaires that indicate how well the user profile depicted the users' search interests; and (4) usability and user satisfaction, which can be assessed using standard system usability questionnaires.
2010182	Using k-Top retrieved web snippets to date temporalimplicit queries based on web content analysis The World Wide Web (WWW) is a huge information network from which retrieving and organizing quality relevant content remains an open question for mostly all ambiguous queries. As an example, many queries have temporal implicit intents associated with them but they are not inferred by search engines. Inferring the user intentions and the period he has in mind, may therefore play an extremely important role in the improvement of the results. Our work goes in this direction. We aim to introduce a temporal analysis framework for analyzing documents in a temporal dimension in order to identify and understand the temporal nature of any given query, namely implicit ones. Our analysis is not based on metadata, but on the exploitation of temporal information from the content itself, particularly within web snippets, which are interesting pieces of concentrated information, where time clues, especially years, often appear. Our intention is to develop a language-independent solution and to model the degree of relationship between the terms and dates identified. This is the core part of the framework and the basis for both temporal query understanding and search results exploration, such as temporal clustering. We believe that inferring this knowledge is a very important step in the process of adding a temporal dimension to IR systems, thus disambiguating a large class of queries for which search engines continue to fail.
2010183	Domain-specific information retrieval using rcommenders The continuing increase in the volume of information available in our daily lives is creating ever greater challenges for people to find personally useful information. One approach used to addressing this problem is Personalized Information Retrieval (PIR). PIR systems collect a user's personal information from both implicit and explicit sources to build a user profile with the objective of giving retrieval results which better meet their individual user information needs than a standard Information Retrieval (IR) system. However, in many situations there may be no opportunity to learn about the specific interests of a user and build a personal model when this user is querying on a new topic, e.g. when a user visits a museum or exhibition which is unrelated to their normal search interests. Under this condition, the experiences and behaviours of other previous users, who have made similar queries, could be used to build a model of user behavior in this domain. My PhD proposes to focus on the development of new and innovative methods of domain-specific IR. My work seeks to combine recommender algorithms trained using previous search behaviours from different searchers with a standard ranked IR method to form a domain-specific IR model to improve the search effectiveness for a user entering a query without personal prior search history on this topic. The challenges for my work are: how to provide users better results; how to train and evaluate the methods proposed in my work.
2010184	Understanding and using contextual information in recommender systems An abstract is not available.
2010185	Multidimensional search result diversification: diverse search results for diverse users Hundreds of millions of people today rely on Web based Search Engines to satisfy their information needs. In order to meet the expectations of this vast and diverse user population, the search engine should present a list of results such that the probability of satisfying the average user is maximized. This leads us to the problem of Search Result Diversification. Given a user submitted query, the search engine should include results that are relevant to the user query and at the same time, diverse enough to meet the expectations of diverse user populations. However, it is not clear in what respect the results should be diversified. Much of the current work in diversity focuses on ambiguous and underspecified queries and tries to include results corresponding to diverse interpretations of the ambiguous query. This is not always sufficient. My analysis of a commercial web search engine's logs reveals that even for well-specified informational queries, click entropy is very high indicating that different users prefer different types of documents. Very recently, a diversification algorithm fine-tuned for such informational queries has been proposed. Further, high click entropies were also observed for a large fraction of transactional queries. One major goal of my PhD thesis will then be to identify the various possible dimensions along which the search results can be diversified. Having such an information will enhance our understanding about the expectations of an average user from the search engine. By utilizing aggregate statistics about queries, users and their interaction with the search engine for different queries, more concrete evidences about diverse user preferences as well as relative importance of different diversity dimensions can be derived. Once we know different diversity dimensions, the next natural question is: given a query, how can we determine the diversification requirement best suited for the query? For some queries sub-topic coverage may be more important while for others diversification with respect to document source or stylistics might be important. This problem is related to the problem of selective diversification where the goal is to identify queries for which diversification techniques should be used. However, in addition, we are also interested in identifying different diversity classes a given query belongs to. Further, for some queries it may be required to diversify along multiple diversity dimensions. In such cases, it is also important to determine the relative importance of different diversity dimensions for the given query. By utilizing past user interaction data, query level features (like query clarity, entropy, lexical features etc.) and document level features (e.g. popularity, content quality, previous click history etc.), classifiers for diversification requirements can be developed. Given a user query, once we know the type of diversity requirements for the user, an appropriate diversification technique is required. I would like to study the problem of simultaneously diversifying search results along multiple dimensions, as discussed above. One possible way here could be to build upon the nugget based framework introduced by Clarke et al. where we represent each document as a set of nuggets, each nugget corresponding to a diversity dimension.
2010187	Sensor-aided mobile information management and retrieval The number of "smart" mobile devices such as wireless phones and tablet computers has been rapidly growing. These mobile devices are equipped with a variety of sensors such as camera, gyroscope, accelerometer, compass, NFC, WiFi, GPS, etc. These sensors can be used to capture images and voice, detect motion patterns, and predict locations, to name just a few. This keynote depicts techniques in configuration, calibration, computation, and fusion for improving sensor performance and conserving power consumption. We also present novel mobile information management and retrieval applications that can benefit a great deal from enhanced sensor technologies.
2010188	Predicting eBay listing conversion At eBay Market Place, listing conversion rate can be measured by number of items sold divided by number of items in a sample set. For a given item, conversion rate can also be treated as the probability of sale. By investigating eBay listings' transactional patterns, as well as item attributes and user click-through data, we developed conversion models that allow us to predict a live listing's probability of sale. In this paper, we discuss the design and implementation of such conversion models. These models are highly valuable in analysis of inventory quality and ranking. Our work reveals the uniqueness of sales-oriented search at eBay and its similarity to general web search problems.
2010189	A large scale machine learning system for recommending heterogeneous content in social networks The goal of the Facebook recommendation engine is to compare and rank heterogeneous types of content in order to find the most relevant recommendations based on user preference and page context. The challenges for such a recommendation engine include several aspects: 1) the online queries being processed are at very large scale; 2) with new content types and new user-generated content constantly added to the system, the candidate object set and underlying data distribution change rapidly; 3) different types of content usually have very distinct characteristics, which makes generic feature engineering difficult; and 4) unlike a search engine that can capture intention of users based on their search queries, our recommendation engine needs to focus more on users' profile and interests, past behaviors and current actions in order to infer their cognitive states. In this presentation, we would like to introduce an effective, scalable, online machine learning framework we developed in order to address the aforementioned challenges. We also want to discuss the insights, approaches and experiences we have accumulated during our research and development process.
2010190	Review of MSR-Bing web scale speller challenge In this paper, we provide an overview of the MSR-Bing Web Scale Speller Challenge of 2011. We describe the motivation and outline the algorithmic and engineering challenges posed by this activity. The design and the evaluation methods are also reviewed, and the online resources that will remain publicly available to the community are also described. The Challenge will culminate in a workshop after the time of the writing where the top prize winners will publish their approaches. The main findings and the lessons learned will be summarized and shared in the Industry Track presentation accompanying this paper.
2010191	Elsevier SIGIR 2011 application challenge abstract Elsevier SIGIR 2011 Application Challenge is an international competition that encourages software developers to create applications that run on Elsevier's SciVerse platform. The Challenge is open to all SIGIR 2011 Conference participants.
2348520	User-aware caching and prefetching query results in web search engines Query results caching is an efficient technique for Web search engines. In this paper we present User-Aware Cache, a novel approach tailored for query results caching, that is based on user characteristics. We then use a trace of around 30 million queries to evaluate User-Aware Cache, as well as traditional methods and theoretical upper bounds. Experimental results show that this approach can achieve hit ratios better than state-of-the-art methods.
2348521	Using eye-tracking with dynamic areas of interest for analyzing interactive information retrieval Based on a new framework for capturing dynamic areas of interest in eye-tracking, we model the user search process as a Markov-chain. The analysis indicates possible system improvements and yields parameter estimates for the Interactive Probability Ranking Principle (IPRP).
2348529	Methods for mining and summarizing text conversations More and more today, people are engaging in conversations via email, blogs, discussion forums, text messaging and other social media. A person may want to archive these conversations and later retrieve information about what was discussed, or analyze a conversation in real-time. What topics are covered in these conversations? What opinions are people expressing? Have any decisions been made? Have action items been assigned? This tutorial will present various natural language processing (NLP) techniques that can help answer these questions, thus creating numerous new and valuable applications that can support people in more effectively participating in these conversation. The tutorial is based on a book that we have recently published, Methods for Mining and Summarizing Text Conversations.
2348528	Beyond bag-of-words: machine learning for query-document matching in web search 
2348526	$100,000 prize jackpot. call now!: identifying the pertinent features of SMS spam Mobile SMS spam is on the rise and is a prevalent problem. While recent work has shown that simple machine learning techniques can distinguish between ham and spam with high accuracy, this paper explores the individual contributions of various textual features in the classification process. Our results reveal the surprising finding that simple is better: using the largest spam corpus of which we are aware, we find that using simple textual features is sufficient to provide accuracy that is nearly identical to that achieved by the best known techniques, while achieving a twofold speedup.
2348525	Will this #hashtag be popular tomorrow? Hashtags are widely used in Twitter to define a shared context for events or topics. In this paper, we aim to predict hashtag popularity in near future (i.e., next day). Given a hashtag that has the potential to be popular in the next day, we construct a hashtag profile using the tweets containing the hashtag, and extract both content and context features for hashtag popularity prediction. We model this prediction problem as a classification problem and evaluate the effectiveness of the extracted features and classification models.
2348524	Want a coffee?: predicting users' trails Twitter and Foursquare are two well-connected platforms for sharing information where growing numbers of users post location-related messages. In contrast to the longitude-latitude geotags commonly used online, e.g., on photos and tweets, new place-tags containing category information show more human-readable high-level information rather than a pair of coordinates. This grants an opportunity for better understanding users' physical locations which can be used as context to facilitate other applications, e.g., location context-aware advertisement. In this paper, we verify the assumption that users' current trails contain cues of their future routes. The results from the preliminary experiments show promising performance of a basic Markov Chain-based model.
2348523	Utilizing inter-document similarities in federated search We demonstrate the merits of using inter-document similarities for federated search. Specifically, we study a results merging method that utilizes information induced from clusters of similar documents created across the lists retrieved from the collections. The method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art results merging approaches.
2348522	Using PageRank to infer user preferences Recently, researchers have shown interest in the use of preference judgments for evaluation in IR literature. Although preference judgments have several advantages over absolute judgment, one of the major disadvantages is that the number of judgments needed increases polynomially as the number of documents in the pool increases. We propose a novel method using PageRank to minimize the number of judgments required to evaluate systems using preference judgments. We test the proposed hypotheses using the TREC 2004 to 2006 Terabyte dataset to show that it is possible to reduce the evaluation cost considerably. Further, we study the susceptibility of the methods due to assessor errors.
2348530	Crowdsourcing for search evaluation and social-algorithmic search The first computers were people. Today, Internet-based access to 24/7 online human crowds has led to a renaissance of research in human computation and the advent of crowdsourcing. These new opportunities have brought a disruptive shift to research and practice for how we build intelligent systems today. Not only can labeled data for training and evaluation be collected faster, cheaper, and easier than ever before, but we now see human computation being integrated into the systems themselves, operating in concert with automation. This tutorial introduces opportunities and challenges of human computation and crowdsourcing, particularly for search evaluation and developing hybrid search solutions that integrate human computation with traditional forms of automated search. We review methodology and findings of recent research and survey current generation crowdsourcing platforms now available, analyzing methods, potential, and limitations across platforms.
2348531	(Big) usage data in web search 
2348532	A new look at old tricks: the fertile roots of current research 
2348538	Visual information retrieval using Java and LIRE Visual information retrieval (VIR) is an active and vibrant research area, which attempts at providing means for organizing, indexing, annotating, and retrieving visual information (images and videos) form large, unstructured repositories. The goal of VIR is to retrieve the highest number of relevant matches to a given query (often expressed as an example image and/or a series of keywords). In its early years (1995-2000) the research efforts were dominated by content-based approaches contributed primarily by the image and video processing community. During the past decade, it was widely recognized that the challenges imposed by the semantic gap (the lack of coincidence between an image's visual contents and its semantic interpretation) required a clever use of textual metadata (in addition to information extracted from the image's pixel contents) to make image and video retrieval solutions efficient and effective. The need to bridge (or at least narrow) the semantic gap has been one of the driving forces behind current VIR research. Additionally, other related research problems and market opportunities have started to emerge, offering a broad range of exciting problems for computer scientists and engineers to work on. In this tutorial, we present an overview of visual information retrieval (VIR) concepts, techniques, algorithms, and applications. Several topics are supported by examples written in Java, using Lucene (an open-source Java-based indexing and search implementation) and LIRE (Lucene Image REtrieval), an open-source Java-based library for content-based image retrieval (CBIR) written by Mathias Lux. After motivating the topic, we briefly review the fundamentals of information retrieval, present the most relevant and effective visual descriptors currently used in VIR, the most common indexing approaches for visual descriptors, the most prominent machine learning techniques used in connection with contemporary VIR solutions, as well as the challenges associated with building real-world, large scale VIR solutions, including a brief overview of publicly available datasets used in worldwide challenges, contests, and benchmarks. Throughout the tutorial, we integrate examples using LIRE, whose main features and design principles are also discussed. Finally, we conclude the tutorial with suggestions for deepening the knowledge in the topic, including a brief discussion of the most relevant advances, open challenges, and promising opportunities in VIR and related areas. The tutorial is primarily targeted at experienced Information Retrieval researchers and practitioners interested in extending their knowledge of document-based IR to equivalent concepts, techniques, and challenges in VIR. The acquired knowledge should allow participants to derive insightful conclusions and promising avenues for further investigation.
2348537	Medical information retrieval: an instance of domain-specific search Due to an explosion in the amount of medical information available, search techniques are gaining importance in the medical domain. This tutorial discusses recent results on search in the medical domain, including the outcome of surveys on end user requirements, research relevant to the field, and current medical and health search applications available. Finally, the extent to which available techniques meet user requirements are discussed, and open challenges in the field are identified.
2348539	Large-scale graph mining and learning for information retrieval For many information retrieval applications, we need to deal with the ranking problem on very large scale graphs. However, it is non-trivial to perform efficient and effective ranking on them. On one aspect, we need to design scalable algorithms. On another aspect, we also need to develop powerful computational infrastructure to support these algorithms. This tutorial aims at giving a timely introduction to the promising advances in the aforementioned aspects in recent years, and providing the audiences with a comprehensive view on the related literature.
2348534	Experimental methods for information retrieval 
2348533	Aspect-based opinion mining from product reviews "What other people think" has always been an important piece of information for most of us during the decision-making process. Today people tend to make their opinions available to other people via the Internet. As a result, the Web has become an excellent source of consumer opinions. There are now numerous Web resources containing such opinions, e.g., product reviews forums, discussion groups, and blogs. But, it is really difficult for a customer to read all of the reviews and make an informed decision on whether to purchase the product. It is also difficult for the manufacturer of the product to keep track and manage customer opinions. Also, focusing on just user ratings (stars) is not a sufficient source of information for a user or the manufacturer to make decisions. Therefore, mining online reviews (opinion mining) has emerged as an interesting new research direction. Extracting aspects and the corresponding ratings is an important challenge in opinion mining. An aspect is an attribute or component of a product, e.g. 'zoom' for a digital camera. A rating is an intended interpretation of the user satisfaction in terms of numerical values. Reviewers usually express the rating of an aspect by a set of sentiments, e.g. 'great zoom'. In this tutorial we cover opinion mining in online product reviews with the focus on aspect-based opinion mining. This problem is a key task in the area of opinion mining and has attracted a lot of researchers in the information retrieval community recently. Several opinion related information retrieval tasks can benefit from the results of aspect-based opinion mining and therefore it is considered as a fundamental problem. This tutorial covers not only general opinion mining and retrieval tasks, but also state-of-the-art methods, challenges, applications, and also future research directions of aspect-based opinion mining.
2348536	Patent information retrieval: an instance of domain-specific search The tutorial aims to provide the IR researchers with an understanding of how the patent system works, the challenges that patent searchers face in using the existing tools and in adopting new methods developed in academia. At the same time, the tutorial will inform the IR researcher about the unique opportunities that the patent domain provides: a large amount of multi-lingual and multi-modal documents, the widest possible span of covered domains, a highly annotated corpus and, very importantly, relevance judgements created by experts in the fields and recorded electronically in the documents. The combination of these two objectives leads to the main purpose of the tutorial: to create awareness and to encourage more emphasis on the patent domain in the IR community. Table 1 provides details on how the tutorial covers the topics of the SIGIR conference.
2348535	IR models: foundations and relationships In IR research it is essential to know IR models. Research over the past years has consolidated the foundations of IR models. Moreover, relationships have been reported that help to use and position IR models. Knowing about the foundations and relationships of IR models can significantly improve building information management systems. The first part of this tutorial presents an in-depth consolidation of the foundations of the main IR models (TF-IDF, BM25, LM). Particular attention will be given to notation and probabilistic roots. The second part crystallises the relationships between models. Does LM embody IDF? How "heuristic" is TF-IDF? What are the probabilistic roots? How are LM and the probability of relevance related? What are the components shared by the main IR models? After the tutorial, attendees will be familiar with a consolidated view on IR models. The tutorial will be illustrative and interactive, providing opportunities to exchange controversial issues and research challenges.
2348542	Advances on the development of evaluation measures The goal of the tutorial is to provide attendees with a comprehensive overview of the latest advances in the development of information retrieval evaluation measures and discuss the current challenges in the area. A number of topics are covered, including background in traditional evaluation paradigm and traditional evaluation measures, evaluation measures based on user models, advanced models of user interaction with search engines, measures based on these models, measures for novelty and diversity, and session-based measures.
2348540	Query performance prediction for IR The goal of this tutorial is to expose participants to current research on query performance prediction. Participants will become familiar with state-of-the-art performance prediction methods, with common evaluation methodologies of prediction quality, and with potential applications that can utilize performance predictors. In addition, some open issues and challenges in the field will be discussed. This tutorial is an updated version of the SIGIR 2010 tutorial presented by David Carmel and Elad Yom-Tov on the same subject. This year we intend to expand on new results in the field, in particular focusing on recently developed frameworks that provide a unified model for performance prediction.
2348541	Collaborative information seeking: art and science of achieving 1+1&#62;2 in IR The assumption of information seekers being independent and IR problem being individual has been challenged often in the recent past, with an argument that the next big leap in search and retrieval will come through incorporating social and collaborative aspects of information seeking. This half-day tutorial will introduce the student to theories, methodologies, and tools that focus on information retrieval/seeking in collaboration. The student will have an opportunity to learn about the social aspect of IR with a focus on collaborative information seeking (CIS) situations, systems, and evaluation techniques. The course is intended for those interested in social and collaborative aspects of IR (from both academia and industry), and requires only a general understanding of IR systems and evaluation.
2348502	Parallelizing ListNet training using spark As ever-larger training sets for learning to rank are created, scalability of learning has become increasingly important to achieving continuing improvements in ranking accuracy. Exploiting independence of "summation form" computations, we show how each iteration in ListNet gradient descent can benefit from parallel execution. We seek to draw the attention of the IR community to use Spark, a newly introduced distributed cluster computing system, for reducing training time of iterative learning to rank algorithms. Unlike MapReduce, Spark is especially suited for iterative and interactive algorithms. Our results show near linear reduction in ListNet training time using Spark on Amazon EC2 clusters.
2348503	Predicting lifespans of popular tweets in microblog In microblog like Twitter, popular tweets are usually retweeted by many users. For different tweets, their lifespans (i.e., how long they will stay popular) vary. This paper presents a simple yet effective approach to predict the lifespans of popular tweets based on their static characteristics and dynamic retweeting patterns. For a potentially popular tweet, we generate a time series based on its first-hour retweeting information, and compare it with those of historic tweets of the same author and post time (at the granularity of hour). The top-k historic tweets are identified, whose mean lifespan is estimated as the lifespan of the new tweet. Our experiments on a three-month real data set from Tencent Microblog demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach.
2348500	Optimizing parameters of the expected reciprocal rank Most popular IR metrics are parameterized. Usually parameters of these metrics are chosen on the basis of general considerations and not adjusted by experiments with real users. Particularly, the parameters of the Expected Reciprocal Rank measure are the normalized parameters of the DCG metric, and the latter are chosen in an ad-hoc manner. We suggest an approach for adjusting parameters of the ERR metric that allows to reach maximum agreement with the real users behavior. More exactly, we optimized the parameters by maximizing Pearson weighted correlation between ERR and several online click metrics. For each click metric we managed to find the parameters of ERR that result into its higher correlation with the given online click metric.
2348501	Ousting ivory tower research: towards a web framework for providing experiments as a service With its close ties to the Web, the IR community is destined to leverage the dissemination and collaboration capabilities that the Web provides today. Especially with the advent of the software as a service principle, an IR community is conceivable that publishes experiments executable by anyone over the Web. A review of recent SIGIR papers shows that we are far away from this vision of collaboration. The benefits of publishing IR experiments as a service are striking for the community as a whole, and include potential to boost research profiles and reputation. However, the additional work must be kept to a minimum and sensitive data must be kept private for this paradigm to become an accepted practice. To foster experiments as a service in IR, we present a Web framework for experiments that addresses the outlined challenges and possesses a unique set of compelling features in comparison to existing solutions. We also describe how our reference implementation is already used officially as an evaluation platform for an established international plagiarism detection competition.
2348506	Retrieval evaluation on focused tasks Ranking of retrieval systems for focused tasks requires large number of relevance judgments. We propose an approach that minimizes the number of relevance judgments, where the performance measures are approximated using a Monte-Carlo sampling technique. Partial measures are taken using relevance judgments, whereas the remaining part of passages are annotated using a generated relevance probability distribution based on result rank. We define two conditions for stopping the assessment procedure when the ranking between systems is stable.
2348507	Rewarding term location information to enhance probabilistic information retrieval We investigate the effect of rewarding terms according to their locations in documents for probabilistic information retrieval. The intuition behind our approach is that a large amount of authors would summarize their ideas in some particular parts of documents. In this paper, we focus on the beginning part of documents. Several shape functions are defined to simulate the influence of term location information. We propose a Reward Term Retrieval model that combines the reward terms' information with BM25 to enhance probabilistic information retrieval performance.
2348504	Preliminary study of technical terminology for the retrieval of scientific book metadata records Books only represented by brief metadata (book records) are particularly hard to retrieve. One way of improving their retrieval is by extracting retrieval enhancing features from them. This work focusses on scientific (physics) book records. We ask if their technical terminology can be used as a retrieval enhancing feature. A study of 18,443 book records shows a strong correlation between their technical terminology and their likelihood of relevance. Using this finding for retrieval yields &#62;+5% precision and recall gains.
2348505	Queries without clicks: evaluating retrieval effectiveness based on user feedback Until recently, the lack of user activity on search results was perceived as a sign of user dissatisfaction from retrieval performance. However, recent studies have reported that some queries might not be followed by clicks to the content of the retrieved results, because the search task can be satisfied in the list of retrieved results the user views without the need to click through them. In this paper, we propose a method for evaluating user satisfaction from the results of searches that are not followed by clickthrough activity to the retrieved results. We found that there is a strong association between some implicit measures of user activity and user's explicit satisfaction judgments. Moreover, we developed a predictive model of user satisfaction based on implicit measures, achieving accuracy up to 86%.
2348508	Scheduling queries across replicas For increased efficiency, an information retrieval system can split its index into multiple shards, and then replicate these shards across many query servers. For each new query, an appropriate replica for each shard must be selected, such that the query is answered as quickly as possible. Typically, the replica with the lowest number of queued queries is selected. However, not every query takes the same time to execute, particularly if a dynamic pruning strategy is applied by each query server. Hence, the replica's queue length is an inaccurate indicator of the workload of a replica, and can result in inefficient usage of the replicas. In this work, we propose that improved replica selection can be obtained by using query efficiency prediction to measure the expected workload of a replica. Experiments are conducted using 2.2k queries, over various numbers of shards and replicas for the large GOV2 collection. Our results show that query waiting and completion times can be markedly reduced, showing that accurate response time predictions can improve scheduling accuracy and attesting the benefit of the proposed scheduling algorithm.
2348509	Re-examining search result snippet examination time for relevance estimation Previous studies of web search result examination have provided valuable insights in understanding and modelling searcher behavior. Yet, recent work (e.g., [3]) has been developed based on the assumption that the time a searcher spends examining a particular result abstract or snippet, correlates with result relevance. While this idea is intuitively attractive, to the best of our knowledge it has not been empirically tested. This poster investigates this hypothesis empirically, in a controlled setting, using eye tracking equipment to compare search result examination time with result relevance. Interestingly, while we replicate previous findings showing examination time to be indicative of whole-page relevance, we find that viewing time of individual results alone is a poor indicator of either absolute result relevance or even of pairwise preferences. Our results should not be taken as negating the usefulness of modeling searcher examination behavior, but rather to emphasize that snippet examination time is not in itself a good indicator of relevance.
2348510	Sentiment identification by incorporating syntax, semantics and context information This paper proposes a method based on conditional random fields to incorporate sentence structure (syntax and semantics) and context information to identify sentiments of sentences within a document. It also proposes and evaluates two different active learning strategies for labeling sentiment data. The experiments with the proposed approach demonstrate a 5-15% improvement in accuracy on Amazon customer reviews compared to existing supervised learning and rule-based methods.
2348511	Short text classification using very few words We propose a simple, scalable, and non-parametric approach for short text classification. Leveraging the well studied and scalable Information Retrieval (IR) framework, our approach mimics human labeling process for a piece of short text. It first selects the most representative and topical-indicative words from a given short text as query words, and then searches for a small set of labeled short texts best matching the query words. The predicted category label is the majority vote of the search results. Evaluated on a collection of more than 12K Web snippets, the proposed approach achieves comparable classification accuracy with the baseline Maximum Entropy classifier using as few as 3 query words and top-5 best matching search hits. Among the four query word selection schemes proposed and evaluated in our experiments, term frequency together with clarity gives the best classification accuracy.
2348512	Summarizing the differences from microblogs With the rapid growth of social media websites, microblogging has become a popular way to spread instant news and events. Due to the dynamic and social nature of microblogs, extracting useful information from microblogs is more challenging than from the traditional news articles. In this paper we study the problem of summarizing the differences from microblogs. Given a collection of microblogs discussing an event/topic, we propose to generate a short summary delivering the differences among these microblogs, such as the different points of view for a news topic and the changes and evolution of an ongoing event.
2348513	Survival analysis of click logs Click logs from search engines provide a rich opportunity to acquire implicit feedback from users. Patterns derived from the time between a posted query and a click provide information on the ranking quality, reflecting the perceived relevance of a retrieved URL. This paper applies the Kaplan-Meier estimator to study click patterns. The visualization of click curves demonstrates the interaction between the relevance and the rank position of URLs. The observed results demonstrate the potential of using click curves to predict the quality of the top-ranked results.
2348514	Text selections as implicit relevance feedback Users' search activity has been used as implicit feedback to model search interests and improve the performance of search systems. In search engines, this behavior usually takes the form of queries and result clicks. However, richer data on how people engage with search results can now be captured at scale, creating new opportu-nities to enhance search. In this poster we focus on one type of newly-observable behavior: text selection events on search-result captions. We show that we can use text selections as implicit feedback to significantly improve search result relevance.
2348515	Time to judge relevance as an indicator of assessor error When human assessors judge documents for their relevance to a search topic, it is possible for errors in judging to occur. As part of the analysis of the data collected from a 48 participant user study, we have discovered that when the participants made relevance judgments, the average participant spent more time to make errorful judgments than to make correct judgments. Thus, in relevance assessing scenarios similar to our user study, it may be possible to use the time taken to judge a document as an indicator of assessor error. Such an indicator could be used to identify documents that are candidates for adjudication or reassessment.
2348516	Towards alias detection without string similarity: an active learning based approach Entity aliases commonly exist and accurately detecting these aliases plays a vital role in various applications. In this paper, we use an active-learning-based method to detect aliases without string similarity. To minimize the cost on pairwise comparison, a subset-based method restricts the alias selection within a small-scale entity set. Within each generated entity set, an active learning based logistic regression classifier is employed to predict whether a candidate is the alias of a given entity. The experimental results on three datasets clearly demonstrate that our proposed approach can effectively detect this kind of entity aliases.
2348517	Towards zero-click mobile IR evaluation: knowing what and knowing when In this poster, we propose two evaluation tasks for mobile information access. The first task evaluates the system's ability to guess what the user's query should be given a context ("Knowing What"). The second task evaluates the system's ability to decide when to proactively deploy a given query ("Knowing When"). We conduct a preliminary manual analysis of a mobile query log to limit the space of possible queries so as to design feasible and practical evaluation tasks.
2348518	Twanchor text: a preliminary study of the value of tweets as anchor text It is well known that anchor text plays an important role in search, providing signals that are often not present in the source document itself. The paper reports results of a preliminary investigation on the value of tweets and tweet conversations as anchor text. We show that using tweets as anchors improves significantly over using HTML anchors, and significantly increases recall of news item retrieval.
2348519	Unsupervised linear score normalization revisited We give a fresh look into score normalization for merging result-lists, isolating the problem from other components. We focus on three of the simplest, practical, and widely-used linear methods which do not require any training data, i.e. MinMax, Sum, and Z-Score. We provide theoretical arguments on why and when the methods work, and evaluate them experimentally. We find that MinMax is the most robust under many circumstances, and that Sum is - in contrast to previous literature - the worst. Based on the insights gained, we propose another three simple methods which work as good or better than the baselines.
2348415	A knowledge-based approach for summarising opinions Automatic Document Summarisation plays a central role in the process of providing the user with a quick access to information. Applications range from the generation of news headlines, to the aggregation of opinions extracted from reviews. Traditional topic-based summarisation systems are not always able to capture the sentiments expressed in a review. Major efforts in sentiment analysis have been put in the tasks of mining and classifying reviews according to their polarity. In this research, we investigate the use of summarisation techniques applied to reviews, and we propose a knowledge-based approach to summarisation, in the context of sentiment analysis. The proposed research is focused on three different aspects. Firstly, we investigate the application of summarisation techniques to sentiment classification. Capturing the key passage of a review can be beneficial for both a sentiment classifier, and for a user who could potentially understand the polarity of a review without reading the full text. Secondly, we investigate how to combine knowledge extracted from the reviews or integrated from external sources, with the purpose of producing opinion-oriented summaries. Thirdly, we analyse the possibility of generating personalised (user-oriented or query-biased) opinion-based summaries.
2348412	Improving tweet stream classification by detecting changes in word probability We propose a classification model of tweet streams in Twitter, which are representative of document streams whose statistical properties will change over time. Our model solves several problems that hinder the classification of tweets; in particular, the problem that the probabilities of word occurrence change at different rates for different words. Our model switches between two probability estimates based on full and recent data for each word when detecting changes in word probability. This switching enables our model to achieve both accurate learning of stationary words and quick response to bursty words. We then explain how to implement our model by using a word suffix array, which is a full-text search index. Using the word suffix array allows our model to handle the temporal attributes of word n-grams effectively. Experiments on three tweet data sets demonstrate that our model offers statistically significant higher topic-classification accuracy than conventional temporally-aware classification models.
2348413	Predicting quality flaws in user-generated content: the case of wikipedia The detection and improvement of low-quality information is a key concern in Web applications that are based on user-generated content; a popular example is the online encyclopedia Wikipedia. Existing research on quality assessment of user-generated content deals with the classification as to whether the content is high-quality or low-quality. This paper goes one step further: it targets the prediction of quality flaws, this way providing specific indications in which respects low-quality content needs improvement. The prediction is based on user-defined cleanup tags, which are commonly used in many Web applications to tag content that has some shortcomings. We apply this approach to the English Wikipedia, which is the largest and most popular user-generated knowledge source on the Web. We present an automatic mining approach to identify the existing cleanup tags, which provides us with a training corpus of labeled Wikipedia articles. We argue that common binary or multiclass classification approaches are ineffective for the prediction of quality flaws and hence cast quality flaw prediction as a one-class classification problem. We develop a quality flaw model and employ a dedicated machine learning approach to predict Wikipedia's most important quality flaws. Since in the Wikipedia setting the acquisition of significant test data is intricate, we analyze the effects of a biased sample selection. In this regard we illustrate the classifier effectiveness as a function of the flaw distribution in order to cope with the unknown (real-world) flaw-specific class imbalances. The flaw prediction performance is evaluated with 10,000 Wikipedia articles that have been tagged with the ten most frequent quality flaws: provided test data with little noise, four flaws can be detected with a precision close to 1.
2348418	Building reputation and trust using federated search and opinion mining The term online reputation addresses trust relationships amongst agents in dynamic open systems. These can appear as ratings, recommendations, referrals and feedback. Several reputation models and rating aggregation algorithms have been proposed. However, finding a trusted entity on the web is still an issue as all reputation systems work individually. The aim of this project is to introduce a global reputation system for electronic product reviews that aggregates people's opinions from different resources (e.g. e-commerce websites, and review) with the help federated search techniques and generate a high quality and trusted result. The first step is to choose a range of product review collections from e-commerce review systems (e.g. Amazon), online review sites (e.g. Epinions), social networks (e.g. Facebook), question and answering sites (e.g. Yahoo! Answers), and blog (e.g. My Nokia Blog) resources. By using a federated search approach the query (product name) will be broadcasted to the selected resources and the result will be a list of reputation data with various formats including star rating, text reviews, voting, video, and so on. The focus of this work is on review text data and star ratings. A number of challenges including comparison issues (e.g. scale of star ratings: five-star vs. ten-star), hierarchical reviews (e.g. comments about reviews), choice of resources (e.g. choosing relevant sources deepens upon query), display issue (e.g. easy for the user), generalization issue (e.g. apply it on other domains), synchronization problem (e.g. generate up-to-date results), and high quality and trusted reviews will be addressed. A sentiment analysis approach is subsequently used to extract high quality opinions and inform how to increase trust in the search result. The extracted opinions will be used to generate facets for the global reputation system.
2348419	Enhancing knowledge base with knowledge transfer A Knowledge Base (KB) stores, organizes, and shares information pertinent to entities (i.e. KB nodes) such as people, organizations, and events. A large KB system, such as Wikipedia, relies on human curators to create and maintain the content in the systems. However, it has become challenging for human curators to sift through the rapidly growing amount of information and filter out the information irrelevant to a KB node. The area of Knowledge Base Enhancement (KBE) aims to explore and identify automatic methods to assist human curators to accelerate the process. KBE can be viewed as a special case of Information Filtering (IF). However, the lack of high-quality labelled data introduces a major challenge to train a satisfying model for the task. Transfer learning provides solutions to the problem and has explored applications in the area of text mining, whereas direct application to KBE or IF remains absent. Transfer learning is a research area in machine learning, emphasizing the reuse of previously acquired knowledge to another applicable task. The method is particularly useful in the situations where labeled instances are absent or difficult to obtain. To accelerate the growth of a KB, a transfer learning approach enables leveraging the heuristics and models learned from one KB node to another. For example, reusing the learned filtering models from Willie Nelson, a famous country singer, to Eddie Rabbitt, another country singer. Transfer learning requires three components: the target task (e.g. the problem to be solved), the source task(s) (e.g. auxiliary data, previously studied problem), and criteria to select appropriate source tasks. The objectives of my dissertation are twofold. First, it explores methods to identify informative source nodes from which to transfer. Second, it constructs a knowledge transfer network to represent the transfer learning relationship between KB nodes. This proposed research applies a transfer learning method -- Segmented Transfer (ST) -- and a knowledge representation -- Knowledge Transfer Network (KTN) -- to approach the area of KBE. The primary research questions include: What are the transferable objects in information filtering algorithms? What are the KB nodes of high transferability? What are the factors that determine the transfer learning relationship? Does it manifest on a knowledge transfer network representation? This interdisciplinary research crosses the study area of information filtering, machine learning, knowledge representation, and network analysis. This proposal motivates the problem of KBE, discusses the research methodology and proposed experiments, and reviews related works in information filtering and transfer learning. This line of research hopes to extend the application of transfer learning to KBE and to explore a new dimension of IF. The proposed ST and KTN intends to bring interdisciplinary approaches in the emerging field of KBE.
2348416	Adaptive IR for exploratory search support Most Information Retrieval (IR) software is designed to fit a general user where users are submitting queries and the retrieval system returns a ranked list of results. Regardless of the user, the query always returns the same list of results. Individual aspects like age, gender, profession or experience are often not taken into account, for example the difference in searching between children and adults. Although long challenged by works such as Bates' berrypicking model [1], common systems still assume that the user has a static information need which remains unchanged during the seeking process. Moreover many systems are strongly optimized for lookup searches, expecting that the user is only interested in facts and not in complex problem solving. But in many everyday situations people search for information to gain knowledge which allows them to fulfill a specific work task (e.g., [3]), like answering research questions, investigating for a publication or thesis, comparing different products or learning a language. Such complex tasks can be divided into sub-tasks and generally include multiple exploratory search sessions, in which the user strongly interacts with the system. This is a longitudinal process where the searcher necessarily gathers, collects, aggregates, interprets, processes, and evaluates information objects from one or more sources. In such complex search scenarios all three activities lookup, learn, and investigate are used in conjunction with one another to bridge the users knowledge gap [2]. In each step of this process, the user faces a new situation in which knowledge and information need changes. This inuences the relevance of information objects and may direct the user to different topics, domains, or also tasks. The goal of this research is to effectively assist at fulfilling complex (work) tasks consisting of multi-session exploratory search activities. To achieve this, information retrieval needs personalization and has to close the gaps between the different search sessions. This can be done by enabling the user to collect information objects into a personal reference library and visualizing past search activities in a kind of breadcrumb or time line. Thinking one step further, a personalized IR system (PIR) has to adapt to relevant factors and commit itself to the specific user and the personal search behavior. This means the system needs to guide the user through the searching process, suggesting useful search actions like effective search strategies or query formulations and has to recommend information objects relevant to the work task and the users current situation. Thereby the system has to be aware of the user and specific contextual circumstances. General information about the user like gender or age can be fetched explicitly, allowing to adapt in a more coarse grained way (i.e. decide the way of presenting results based on the user group). Moreover integrating used applications or providing other ways to let the user explicitly manage tasks will help to understand the goal of the users search activities and will provide much better ways of user assistance. To close the gap between user and system, both behavioral and contextual information are necessary. Information about the search behavior and indirectly the users knowledge and expertise can be conveyed by logging (e.g. query logs) and examining system interactions. The fetched data should be made transparent to the user, showing what kind of information has been gathered so far. The implicit information has to be refined with other contextual information collected implicitly from different interfaces or sensors (e.g. time, location) and explicitly by direct user input from e.g. relevance feedback interactions. This will allow a more fine grained way of system adaption and offers new options in assisting the user during the long-term search activities showing personalized search strategies and possible next steps appropriate to the information need and level of experience.
2348417	Adversarial content manipulation effects We address a question that has been somewhat overlooked throughout the transition from classical ad hoc retrieval to Web search: how is the performance of classical retrieval approaches affected by the presence of content manipulation? Our initial experiments have shown that the relative performance patterns of some classical retrieval strategies might change in the transition from non-manipulated to manipulated corpora. A natural future venue to explore is how to mix these strategies and make (some of) them more robust under presumed content manipulation conditions.
2348411	A utility-theoretic ranking method for semi-automated text classification In Semi-Automated Text Classification (SATC) an automatic classifier F labels a set of unlabelled documents D, following which a human annotator inspects (and corrects when appropriate) the labels attributed by F to a subset D' of D, with the aim of improving the overall quality of the labelling. An automated system can support this process by ranking the automatically labelled documents in a way that maximizes the expected increase in effectiveness that derives from inspecting D. An obvious strategy is to rank D so that the documents that F has classified with the lowest confidence are top-ranked. In this work we show that this strategy is suboptimal. We develop a new utility-theoretic ranking method based on the notion of inspection gain, defined as the improvement in classification effectiveness that would derive by inspecting and correcting a given automatically labelled document. We also propose a new effectiveness measure for SATC-oriented ranking methods, based on the expected reduction in classification error brought about by partially inspecting a list generated by a given ranking method. We report the results of experiments showing that, with respect to the baseline method above, and according to the proposed measure, our ranking method can achieve substantially higher expected reductions in classification error.
2348410	Confidence-aware graph regularization with heterogeneous pairwise features Conventional classification methods tend to focus on features of individual objects, while missing out on potentially valuable pairwise features that capture the relationships between objects. Although recent developments on graph regularization exploit this aspect, existing works generally assume only a single kind of pairwise feature, which is often insufficient. We observe that multiple, heterogeneous pairwise features can often complement each other and are generally more robust in modeling the relationships between objects. Furthermore, as some objects are easier to classify than others, objects with higher initial classification confidence should be weighed more towards classifying related but more ambiguous objects, an observation missing from previous graph regularization techniques. In this paper, we propose a Dirichlet-based regularization framework that supports the combination of heterogeneous pairwise features with confidence-aware prediction using limited labeled training data. Next, we showcase a few applications of our framework in information retrieval, focusing on the problem of query intent classification. Finally, we demonstrate through a series of experiments the advantages of our framework on a large-scale real-world dataset.
2348401	An IR-based evaluation framework for web search query segmentation This paper presents the first evaluation framework for Web search query segmentation based directly on IR performance. In the past, segmentation strategies were mainly validated against manual annotations. Our work shows that the goodness of a segmentation algorithm as judged through evaluation against a handful of human annotated segmentations hardly reflects its effectiveness in an IR-based setup. In fact, state-of the-art algorithms are shown to perform as good as, and sometimes even better than human annotations a fact masked by previous validations. The proposed framework also provides us an objective understanding of the gap between the present best and the best possible segmentation algorithm. We draw these conclusions based on an extensive evaluation of six segmentation strategies, including three most recent algorithms, vis-a-vis segmentations from three human annotators. The evaluation framework also gives insights about which segments should be necessarily detected by an algorithm for achieving the best retrieval results. The meticulously constructed dataset used in our experiments has been made public for use by the research community.
2348402	On per-topic variance in IR evaluation We explore the notion, put forward by Cormack &#38; Lynam and Robertson, that we should consider a document collection used for Cranfield-style experiments as a sample from some larger population of documents. In this view, any per-topic metric (such as average precision) should be regarded as an estimate of that metric's true value for that topic in the full population, and therefore as carrying its own per-topic variance or estimate precision or noise. As in the two mentioned papers, we explore this notion by simulating other samples from the same large population. We investigate different ways of performing this simulation. One use of this analysis is to refine the notion of statistical significance of a difference between two systems (in most such analyses, each per-topic measurement is treated as equally precise). We propose a mixed-effects model method to measure significance, and compare it experimentally with the traditional t-test.
2348403	An uncertainty-aware query selection model for evaluation of IR systems We propose a mathematical framework for query selection as a mechanism for reducing the cost of constructing information retrieval test collections. In particular, our mathematical formulation explicitly models the uncertainty in the retrieval effectiveness metrics that is introduced by the absence of relevance judgments. Since the optimization problem is computationally intractable, we devise an adaptive query selection algorithm, referred to as Adaptive, that provides an approximate solution. Adaptive selects queries iteratively and assumes that no relevance judgments are available for the query under consideration. Once a query is selected, the associated relevance assessments are acquired and then used to aid the selection of subsequent queries. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the algorithm on two TREC test collections as well as a test collection of an online search engine with 1000 queries. Our experimental results show that the queries chosen by Adaptive produce reliable performance ranking of systems. The ranking is better correlated with the actual systems ranking than the rankings produced by queries that were selected using the considered baseline methods.
2348405	Improving retrieval of short texts through document expansion Collections containing a large number of short documents are becoming increasingly common. As these collections grow in number and size, providing effective retrieval of brief texts presents a significant research problem. We propose a novel approach to improving information retrieval (IR) for short texts based on aggressive document expansion. Starting from the hypothesis that short documents tend to be about a single topic, we submit documents as pseudo-queries and analyze the results to learn about the documents themselves. Document expansion helps in this context because short documents yield little in the way of term frequency information. However, as we show, the proposed technique helps us model not only lexical properties, but also temporal properties of documents. We present experimental results using a corpus of microblog (Twitter) data and a corpus of metadata records from a federated digital library. With respect to established baselines, results of these experiments show that applying our proposed document expansion method yields significant improvements in effectiveness. Specifically, our method improves the lexical representation of documents and the ability to let time influence retrieval.
2348406	Extending BM25 with multiple query operators Traditional probabilistic relevance frameworks for informational retrieval refrain from taking positional information into account, due to the hurdles of developing a sound model while avoiding an explosion in the number of parameters. Nonetheless, the well-known BM25F extension of the successful Okapi ranking function can be seen as an embryonic attempt in that direction. In this paper, we proceed along the same line, defining the notion of virtual region: a virtual region is a part of the document that, like a BM25F-field, can provide a (larger or smaller, depending on a tunable weighting parameter) evidence of relevance of the document; differently from BM25F fields, though, virtual regions are generated implicitly by applying suitable (usually, but not necessarily, positional-aware) operators to the query. This technique fits nicely in the eliteness model behind BM25 and provides a principled explanation to BM25F; it specializes to BM25(F) for some trivial operators, but has a much more general appeal. Our experiments (both on standard collections, such as TREC, and on Web-like repertoires) show that the use of virtual regions is beneficial for retrieval effectiveness.
2348407	Rhetorical relations for information retrieval Typically, every part in most coherent text has some plausible reason for its presence, some function that it performs to the overall semantics of the text. Rhetorical relations, e.g. contrast, cause, explanation, describe how the parts of a text are linked to each other. Knowledge about this so-called discourse structure has been applied successfully to several natural language processing tasks. This work studies the use of rhetorical relations for Information Retrieval (IR): Is there a correlation between certain rhetorical relations and retrieval performance? Can knowledge about a document's rhetorical relations be useful to IR? We present a language model modification that considers rhetorical relations when estimating the relevance of a document to a query. Empirical evaluation of different versions of our model on TREC settings shows that certain rhetorical relations can benefit retrieval effectiveness notably (&gt;10% in mean average precision over a state-of-the-art baseline).
2348408	Modeling higher-order term dependencies in information retrieval using query hypergraphs Many of the recent, and more effective, retrieval models have incorporated dependencies between the terms in the query. In this paper, we advance this query representation one step further, and propose a retrieval framework that models higher-order term dependencies, i.e., dependencies between arbitrary query concepts rather than just query terms. In order to model higher-order term dependencies, we represent a query using a hypergraph structure -- a generalization of a graph, where a (hyper)edge connects an arbitrary subset of vertices. A vertex in a query hypergraph corresponds to an individual query concept, and a dependency between a subset of these vertices is modeled through a hyperedge. An extensive empirical evaluation using both newswire and web corpora demonstrates that query representation using hypergraphs is highly beneficial for verbose natural language queries. For these queries, query hypergraphs significantly improve the retrieval effectiveness of several state-of-the-art models that do not employ higher-order term dependencies.
2348400	Quality through flow and immersion: gamifying crowdsourced relevance assessments Crowdsourcing is a market of steadily-growing importance upon which both academia and industry increasingly rely. However, this market appears to be inherently infested with a significant share of malicious workers who try to maximise their profits through cheating or sloppiness. This serves to undermine the very merits crowdsourcing has come to represent. Based on previous experience as well as psychological insights, we propose the use of a game in order to attract and retain a larger share of reliable workers to frequently-requested crowdsourcing tasks such as relevance assessments and clustering. In a large-scale comparative study conducted using recent TREC data, we investigate the performance of traditional HIT designs and a game-based alternative that is able to achieve high quality at significantly lower pay rates, facing fewer malicious submissions.
2348438	RDF Xpress: a flexible expressive RDF search engine We demonstrate RDF Xpress, a search engine that enables users to effectively retrieve information from large RDF knowledge bases or Linked Data Sources. RDF Xpress provides a search interface where users can combine triple patterns with keywords to form queries. Moreover, RDF Xpress supports automatic query relaxation and returns a ranked list of diverse query results.
2348439	Sketch-based image similarity search with a pen and paper interface We present a novel and innovative user interface for query-by-sketching based image retrieval that exploits emergent interactive paper and digital pen technology. Users can draw sketches with a digital pen on interactive paper in a user-friendly way. The pen is able to capture the stroke vectors and to interactively stream them to the underlying content-based image retrieval (CBIR) system via the pen's Bluetooth interface. We present the integration of interactive paper/digital pen technology with QbS, our CBIR system tailored to Query-by-Sketching, and we demonstrate the use of the paper and pen interface together with QbS for three different collections: MIRFLICKR-25K, a cartoon collection, and a collection of medieval paper watermarks.
2348436	Pictune: situational music recommendation from geotagged pictures 
2348437	Political search trends We present Political Search Trends, a browser based web search analysis tool that (i) assigns a political leaning to web search queries, (ii) detects trending political queries in a given week, and (iii) links search queries to fact-checked statements. In terms of methodology, it showcases the power of analyzing queries leading to clicks on selected, annotated web sites of interest.
2348434	myDJ: recommending karaoke songs from one's own voice In this demo, we present myDJ, a karaoke recommendation system which recommends the songs people are capable to sing. Different from the existing song recommendation systems which recommend songs people like to listen, myDJ can recommend proper songs according to a subject's physical phonation area. It consists of a singer profiler to analyze the subject's phonation characters. In addition, the song profile for each song in database is extracted. To learn a ranking function, the learning to rank algorithm Listnet is applied under a list of predefined features extracted from each singer-song profile pair. In the results, proper songs which are suitable but challenging for the subject are recommended.
2348435	PageFetch: a retrieval game for children (and adults) Children often struggle with information retrieval tasks as searching for information often requires a developed vocabulary and strong categorisation skills; neither of which are particularly developed in children under the age of 12. In a study conducted by Druin et al, it was found that in an experimental setting many children are often uninterested in searching for information online or are only interested in searching for information that is relevant to their personal interests. Consequently, children who were unmotivated were the least successful in completing information retrieval tasks in their study. It was suggested that a more effective means of engaging child participants in search studies must be developed in order to gain further insights into the searching behaviours of children. To this end we have developed a game called PageFetch which aims to engage children (aged 8 to 80) in completing search tasks through a fun and interactive search-like interface.
2348433	MaSe: create your own mash-up search interface MaSe provides a sandbox environment for high school students to create their own personalised search interface. It has been designed with two major goals in mind: (1) as a hands-on tutorial for school children, to excite them about programming and computing science through the development of a practical application, and (2) to enable children to design and create their own search interface without extensive programming knowledge or prior experience. Consequently, MaSe provides a way to ascertain what children would like from a search engine interface in an exploratory and creative way as they can create a working prototype. This approach contrasts with previous work on exploring children's requirements of IR systems which attempts to directly elicit user needs through more traditional methods (i.e. surveys, interviews, focus groups, etc). However, we have attempted to incorporate the design guidelines for children as identified by Large (2006) into MaSe, where: we make use of bright colours, large text fonts, spell checking and the use of icons to represent search services, as well as including a thematic experience as suggested by Large (2006), with the use of a puppy avatar and puppy dog footprints.
2348432	Integrative online research-data management In support of our research projects in information retrieval, we have developed an integrated multi-process software system that shepherds research data from induction through aggregation, analysis, and presentation. We combine public-domain code libraries with our own software to provide a flexible, easily- configured modular system that exposes data online for easier collaboration. The goal is to create a single online infrastructure that allows colleagues to submit, process, analyze and visualize data, and discuss and prioritize issues through a single integrated interface. We demonstrate our system within the context of the large data set provided by the Indexer's Legacy project [1].
2348431	Distilling and exploring nuggets from a corpus This paper describes a live and scalable system that automatically extracts information nuggets for entities/topics from a continuously updated corpus for effective exploration and analysis. A nugget is a piece of semantic information that (1) must be mapped semantically to the transitive closure of a pre-defined ontology, (2) is explicitly supported by text, and (3) has a natural language description that completely conveys its semantic to a user. Fig. 1 shows a type of nugget "involvement in events" for a person entity (Leon Panetta): each nugget has a short description ("meeting", "news conference") with a list of supporting passages. Our key contributions are (1) We extract nuggets and remove redundancy to produce a summary of salient information with supporting clusters of passages. (2) We present an entity/topic centric exploration interface that also allows users to navigate to other entities involved in a nugget. (3) We use the statistical NLP technologies developed over the years in the ACE ,GALE and TAC-KBP programs, including parsing, mention detection, within and cross document coreference resolution, relation detection and slot filler extraction. (4) Our system is flexible and easily adaptable across domains as demonstrated on two corpora: generic news and scientific papers. Search engines such as Google News and Scholar do not retrieve nuggets, and only remove redundancy at document level. News aggregation applications such as Evri categorize news articles based on the entities of topics but do not extract nuggets. Other systems extract richer information, but not all of it has clear semantics; e.g., Silobreaker presents results as "the relationship between X and Y in the context of [keyphrase]", leaving users with the task of interpreting the semantics as it is not tied to a clear ontology. In contrast we remove redundancy, summarize results and present nuggets that have clear semantics.
2348430	CrowdTerrier: automatic crowdsourced relevance assessments with terrier In this demo, we present CrowdTerrier, an infrastructure extension to the open source Terrier IR platform that enables the semi-automatic generation of relevance assessments for a variety of document ranking tasks using crowdsourcing. The aim of CrowdTerrier is to reduce the time and expertise required to effectively Crowdsource relevance assessments by abstracting away from the complexities of the crowdsourcing process. It achieves this by automating the assessment process as much as possible, via a close integration of the IR system that ranks the documents (Terrier) and the crowdsourcing marketplace that is used to assess those documents (Amazon's Mechanical Turk).
2348427	A visual tool for bayesian data analysis: the impact of smoothing on naive bayes text classifiers Naive-Bayes (NB) classifiers are simple probabilistic classifiers still widely used in supervised learning due to their tradeoff between efficient model training and good empirical results. One of the drawbacks of these classifiers is that in situations of data sparsity (i.e. when the size of training set is small) the maximum likelihood estimation of the probability of unseen features in these situations is equal to zero causing arithmetic anomalies. To prevent this undesirable behavior, a number of smoothing techniques have been proposed. Among these, the Bayesian approach incorporates smoothing in terms of prior knowledge about the parameters of the model usually called hyper-parameters. Our research question is: can a visualization tool help researchers to quickly assess the goodness of the performance of NB classifiers by setting optimal smoothing parameters?
2348428	ALF: a client side logger and server for capturing user interactions in web applications This demonstration paper introduces ALF which provides a light-weight client side logging application and a server for collecting user interaction data. ALF has been designed as a loosely coupled independent service that runs in parallel with the IR web application that requires logging
2348429	ChatNoir: a search engine for the ClueWeb09 corpus We present the ChatNoir search engine which indexes the entire English part of the ClueWeb09 corpus. Besides Carnegie Mellon's Indri system, ChatNoir is the second publicly available search engine for this corpus. It implements the classic BM25F information retrieval model including PageRank and spam likelihood. The search engine is scalable and returns the first results within three seconds, which is significantly faster than Indri. A convenient API allows for implementing reproducible experiments based on retrieving documents from the ClueWeb09 corpus. The search engine has successfully accomplished a load test involving 100,000 queries.
2348423	Exploiting temporal topic models in social media retrieval Many of user generated contents in the Web 2.0 center around real-world incidents such as Japanese tsunami, or general concerns such as recent economic downturn. Such type of information is always of interest to users. For instance, when a user reads a news article about a tsunami in Japan, she wants to see related Flickr photos or more tweets about it. Conventional keyword-based search is inappropriate, since it is not always trivial to formulate ad-hoc interests about the event and material. In some cases, the user might want to explore emerging topics that dominate different sources. Present systems fail to connect topically documents across media, and the user has to examine individual sources to infer the topics herself. In this work, we address a special type of user information need, temporal topic, which refers to any abstract matter active within some points or periods of time. A temporal topic can be a real-world event, e.g. the Arab Spring revolution, but can also be a less conceivable subject, e.g. the study of vacuum tube computers in 1950s. Topics can also be recurrent such as the US presidency campaigns. There are extensive studies on how to detect topics from a collection of documents, but little uses temporal topics as part of user interest to retrieve documents. We believe that temporal topic-based retrieval is a one solution to improve user experience of present IR systems, as well as to benefit other applications (e.g. topic-sensitive online advertisement). Our research goal can be defined in three research questions. The first question involves finding latent temporal topics in a social media stream, where documents are well equipped with meta-data (timestamps, geo-spatial data, etc.). Following mixture models such as LDA, we treat each document as a mix of different temporal topic models, each model is incorporated with time. A temporal topic consists of at least two types of attributes - time and representing words, as similar to [4]. The dynamics of temporal topics can be characterized in a timeline fashion [4], or using hierarchical structures [1]. The challenge lies in devising a model flexible enough to diverse and rapidly changing data without many parameter assumptions. For this, we see Bayesian nonpara-metrics [3] as one promising solution, and will extend it to temporal dimension. The second research question is how to retrieve and rank documents from different social media sites, based on their relevance to one or several given temporal topics. We identify some following challenges. The first one is representing temporal topics as queries: although there have been attempts using keywords and time window separately [2], we aim to unify time and (topical) words in a single query model. The second challenge is integrating temporal topic models into ranking models. Inspired by our previous work [4], we will use language models to capture the relevance scores between documents and topics, and investigate advanced methods to index the scores effectively. Our last question involves connecting a given document to documents in other sources (data streams or corpora) that shared one of its latent temporal topics. This task does not only provide unified insight into different social media sites, but also help improve the quality of models by data in diverse sources. However, formalizing the semantics of "similarity" for documents in different settings based on temporal topcis is tricky. One baseline method is to apply Kullback-Leibler divergence on comparable features (TF-IDF, n-grams, photo tags, timestamps,..). We can also use language models [5] to construct a language model for each candidate document, then estimate how likely it generates the document of interest within a given temporal topic.
2348424	The essence of time: considering temporal relevance as an intent-aware ranking problem Real-time news and social media quickly reflect large-scale phenomena and events. As users become exposed to this information, time plays a central role in prompting both information authorship and seeking activities. The objective of this research is to develop a retrieval system which can anticipate a user's likely temporal intent(s), considering recent or ongoing real-world events. Such a system should not only provide recent news when relevant, but also higher rank non-timestamped or even older documents which are temporally pertinent as they cover aspects related to recent event topics. Key challenges to be addressed in this work include: a suitable source and method for event detection and tracking, an intent-aware ranking approach and an evaluation methodology.
2348426	A framework for manipulating and searching multiple retrieval types Conventional retrieval systems view documents as a unit and look at different retrieval types within a document. We introduce Proteus, a frame-work for seamlessly navigating books as dynamic collections which are defined on the fly. Proteus allows us to search various retrieval types. Navigable types include pages, books, named persons, locations, and pictures in a collection of books taken from the Internet Archive. The demonstration shows the value of multi-type browsing in dynamic collections to peruse new data.
2348420	Improving e-discovery using information retrieval E-discovery is the requirement that the documents and information in electronic form stored in corporate systems be produced as evidence in litigation. It has posed great challenges for legal experts. Legal searchers have always looked to find "any and all" evidence for a given case. Thus, a legal search system would essentially be a recall-oriented system. It has been a common practice among expert searchers to formulate Boolean queries to represent their information need. We want to work on three basic problems: Boolean query formulation - Our primary goal is to study Boolean query formulation in the light of the E-discovery task. This will include automatic Boolean query generation, expansion and learning the effect of proximity operators in Boolean searches. Data fusion - We would also like to explore the effectiveness of data fusion techniques in improving recall. Error modeling - Finally, we will work on error modeling methods for noisy legal documents.
2348422	Relevance as a subjective and situational multidimensional concept Relevance is the central concept of information retrieval. Although its important role is unanimously accepted among researchers, numerous different definitions of the term have emerged over the years. Considerable effort has been put into creating consistent and universally applicable descriptions of relevance in the form of relevance frameworks. Across these various formal systems of relevance, a wide range of relevance criteria has been identified. The probably most frequently used single criterion, that in some applications even becomes a synonym for relevance, is topicality. It expresses a document's topical overlap with the user's information need. For textual resources, it is often estimated based on term co-occurrences between query and document. There is, however, a significant number of further noteworthy relevance criteria. Prominent specimen are: (Currency) determines how recent and up to date the document is. Outdated information may have become invalid over time. (Availability) expresses how easy it is to obtain the document. Users might not want to invest more than a threshold amount of resources (e.g., disk space, downloading time or money) to get the document. (Readability) describes the document's readability and understandability. A document with a high topical relevance towards a given information need can become irrelevant if the user is not able to extract the desired information from it. (Credibility) contains criteria such as the document author's expertise, the publication's reputation and the document's general trustworthiness. (Novelty) describes the document's contribution to satisfying an information need with respect to the user's context. E.g., previous search results or general knowledge about the domain. It is evident that these criteria can have very different scopes. Some of them are static characteristics of the document or the author, others depend on the concrete information need at hand or even the user's search context. Currently, state-of-the-art retrieval models often treat relevance (regardless which interpretation of the term was chosen) as an atomic concept that can be expressed through topical overlap between document and query or a plain linear combination of multiple scores. Considering the broad audiences a web search engine has to serve, such a method does not seem optimal as the concrete composition of relevance will vary from person to person depending on social and educational context. Furthermore, each individual can be expected to have situational preference for certain combinations of relevance facets depending on the information need at hand. We investigate combination schemes which respect the dimension-specific relevance distributions. In particular, we developed a risk-aware method of combining relevance criteria inspired by the economic Portfolio theory. As a first stage, we applied this method for result set diversification across dimensions.
2348421	Opinion influence and diffusion in social network Nowadays, more and more people tend to make decisions based on the opinion information from the Internet, in addition to recommendations from offline friends or parents. For example, we may browse the resumes and comments on election candidates to determine if one candidate is qualified, or consult the consumer reports or reviews on special e-commercial websites to decide which brand of computer is suitable for one's needs. Though opinion information is rich on the Internet, [2] points out that 58% of American Internet users deem that online information is irretrievable, confusing, or conflicting with each other. Early works on opinion mining help to classify opinion polarity, to extract specific opinions and to summarize opinion texts. However, all these works are usually based on plain texts (reviews, comments or news articles). With the explosion of Web 2.0 applications, especially social network applications like blogs, discussion forums, micro-blogs, the massive individual users go to the major media websites, which leads to much more opinion materials posted on the Internet by user-shared experiences or views [3]. These opinion-rich and social network-based applications bring new perspectives for opinion mining as well. First, in addition to plain texts (reviews, newswire) in traditional opinion mining, we see new types of cyber-based text, like personal diary blogs, cyber-SMS tweets. Second, if we regard the opinions in plain text as static, the dynamic change of opinions in the social network is a new promising area, and catch increasing attention of worldwide researchers. In the social network, the opinion held by one individual is not static, but changes, which can be influenced by others. A serial of changes among different users forms the opinion propagation or diffusion in the network. This paper and my doctoral work focus on the opinion influence and diffusion in the social network, which explore the detailed process of one-to-one influence and the opinion diffusion process in the social network. The significance of this work is it can benefit many other related researches, like information maximum, viral marketing. Now some pioneering works have been conducted to investigate the role of social networks in information diffusion and influencers in the social network. These works are usually based on information diffusion models, like the cascade model (CM) or epidemic model (EM). However, we argue that it is not enough to simply apply these models to opinion influence and diffusion. 1) For both CM and EM, status shift is along specific directions, from inactive to active (CM) or from susceptible to infectious, and then, to recovered (EM). But opinion influence is more complex.
2348491	Looking inside the box: context-sensitive translation for cross-language information retrieval Cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) today is dominated by techniques that use token-to-token mappings from bilingual dictionaries. Yet, state-of-the-art statistical translation models (e.g., using Synchronous Context-Free Grammars) are far richer, capturing multi-term phrases, term dependencies, and contextual constraints on translation choice. We present a novel CLIR framework that is able to reach inside the translation "black box" and exploit these sources of evidence. Experiments on the TREC-5/6 English-Chinese test collection show this approach to be promising.
2348490	Lightweight contrastive summarization for news comment mining We develop and discuss a news comment miner that presents distinct viewpoints on a given theme or event. Given a query, the system uses metasearch techniques to find relevant news articles. Relevant articles are then scraped for both article content and comments. Snippets from the comments are sampled and presented to the user, based on theme popularity and contrastiveness to previously selected snippets. The system design focuses on being quicker and more lightweight than recent topic modelling approaches, while still focusing on selecting orthogonal snippets.
2348493	New assessment criteria for query suggestion Query suggestion is a useful tool to help users express their information needs by supplying alternative queries. When evaluating the effectiveness of query suggestion algorithms, many previous studies focus on measuring whether a suggestion query is relevant or not to the input query. This assessment criterion is too simple to describe users' requirements. In this paper, we introduce two scenarios of query suggestion. The first scenario represents cases where the search result of the input query is unsatisfactory. The second scenario represents cases where the search result is satisfactory but the user may be looking for alternative solutions. Based on the two scenarios, we propose two assessment criteria. Our labeling results indicate that the new assessment criteria provide finer distinctions among query suggestions than the traditional relevance-based criterion.
2348492	Making results fit into 40 characters: a study in document rewriting With the increasing popularity of mobile and hand-held devices, automatic approaches for adapting results to the limited screen size of mobile devices are becoming more important. Traditional approaches for reducing the length of textual results include summarization and snippet extraction. In this study, we investigate document rewriting techniques which retain the meaning and readability of the original text. Evaluations on different document sets show that i) rewriting documents considerably reduces document length and thus, scrolling effort on devices with limited screen size, and ii) the rewritten documents have a higher readability.
2348495	On building a reusable Twitter corpus The Twitter real-time information network is the subject of research for information retrieval tasks such as real-time search. However, so far, reproducible experimentation on Twitter data has been impeded by restrictions imposed by the Twitter terms of service. In this paper, we detail a new methodology for legally building and distributing Twitter corpora, developed through collaboration between the Text REtrieval Conference (TREC) and Twitter. In particular, we detail how the first publicly available Twitter corpus - referred to as Tweets2011 - was distributed via lists of tweet identifiers and specialist tweet crawling software. Furthermore, we analyse whether this distribution approach remains robust over time, as tweets in the corpus are removed either by users or Twitter itself. Tweets2011 was successfully used by 58 participating groups for the TREC 2011 Microblog track, while our results attest to the robustness of the crawling methodology over time.
2348494	On automatically tagging web documents from examples An emerging need in information retrieval is to identify a set of documents conforming to an abstract description. This task presents two major challenges to existing methods of document retrieval and classification. First, similarity based on overall content is less effective because there may be great variance in both content and subject of documents produced for similar functions, e.g. a presidential speech or a government ministry white paper. Second, the function of the document can be defined based on user interests or the specific data set through a set of existing examples, which cannot be described with standard categories. Additionally, the increasing volume and complexity of document collections demands new scalable computational solutions. We conducted a case study using web-archived data from the Latin American Government Documents Archive (LAGDA) to illustrate these problems and challenges. We propose a new hybrid approach based on Na&#239;ve Bayes inference that uses mixed n-gram models obtained from a training set to classify documents in the corpus. The approach has been developed to exploit parallel processing for large scale data set. The preliminary work shows promising results with improved accuracy for this type of retrieval problem.
2348497	On the mathematical relationship between expected n-call@k and the relevance vs. diversity trade-off It has been previously noted that optimization of the n-call@k relevance objective (i.e., a set-based objective that is 1 if at least n documents in a set of k are relevant, otherwise 0) encourages more result set diversification for smaller n, but this statement has never been formally quantified. In this work, we explicitly derive the mathematical relationship between expected n-call@k and the relevance vs. diversity trade-off --- through fortuitous cancellations in the resulting combinatorial optimization, we show the trade-off is a simple and intuitive function of n (notably independent of the result set size k e n), where diversification increases as n approaches 1.
2348496	On judgments obtained from a commercial search engine In information retrieval, relevance judgments play an important role as they are required both for evaluating the quality of retrieval systems and for training learning to rank algorithms. In recent years, numerous papers have been published using judgments obtained from a commercial search engine by researchers in industry. As typically no information is provided about the quality of these judgments, their reliability for evaluating/training retrieval systems remains questionable. In this paper, we analyze the reliability of such judgments for evaluating the quality of retrieval systems by comparing them to judgments by NIST judges at TREC.
2348499	Opinion summarisation through sentence extraction: an investigation with movie reviews In on-line reviews, authors often use a short passage to describe the overall feeling about a product or a service. A review as a whole can mention many details not in line with the overall feeling, so capturing this key passage is important to understand the overall sentiment of the review. This paper investigates the use of extractive summarisation in the context of sentiment classification. The aim is to find the summary sentence, or the short passage, which gives the overall sentiment of the review, filtering out potential noisy information. Experiments on a movie review data-set show that subjectivity detection plays a central role in building summaries for sentiment classification. Subjective extracts carry the same polarity of the full text reviews, while statistical and positional approaches are not able to capture this aspect.
2348498	On real-time ad-hoc retrieval evaluation Lab-based evaluations typically assess the quality of a retrieval system with respect to its ability to retrieve documents that are relevant to the information need of an end user. In a real-time search task however users not only wish to retrieve the most relevant items but the most recent as well. The current evaluation framework is not adequate to assess the ability of a system to retrieve both recent and relevant items, and the one proposed in the recent TREC Microblog Track has certain flaws that quickly became apparent to the organizers. In this poster, we redefine the experiment for a real-time ad-hoc search task, by setting new submission requirements for the submitted systems/runs, proposing metrics to be used in evaluating the submissions, and suggesting a pooling strategy to be used to gather relevance judgments towards the computation of the described metrics. The proposed task can indeed assess the quality of a retrieval system with regard to retrieving both relevant and timely information.
2348480	Genre classification for million song dataset using confidence-based classifiers combination We proposed a method to classify songs in the Million Song Dataset according to song genre. Since songs have several data types, we trained sub-classifiers by different types of data. These sub-classifiers are combined using both classifier authority and classification confidence for a particular instance. In the experiments, the combined classifier surpasses all of these sub-classifiers and the SVM classifier using concatenated vectors from all data types. Finally, the genre labels for the Million Song Dataset are provided.
2348484	Impact of assessor disagreement on ranking performance We consider the impact of inter-assessor disagreement on the maximum performance that a ranker can hope to achieve. We demonstrate that even if a ranker were to achieve perfect performance with respect to a given assessor, when evaluated with respect to a different assessor, the measured performance of the ranker decreases significantly. This decrease in performance may largely account for observed limits on the performance of learning-to-rank algorithms.
2348483	Identifying entity aspects in microblog posts Online reputation management is about monitoring and handling the public image of entities (such as companies) on the Web. An important task in this area is identifying "aspects" of the entity of interest (such as products, services, competitors, key people, etc.) given a stream of microblog posts referring to the entity. In this paper we compare different IR techniques and opinion target identification methods for automatically identifying aspects and find that (i) simple statistical methods such as TF.IDF are a strong baseline for the task, significantly outperforming opinion-oriented methods, and (ii) only considering terms tagged as nouns improves the results for all the methods analyzed.
2348482	How query extensions reflect search result abandonments It is often considered that high abandonment rate corresponds to poor IR system performance. However several studies suggested that there are so called good abandonments, i.e. situations when search engine result page contains enough details to satisfy the user information need without necessity to click on search results. In this work we propose to look at query extensions. We see that an extension by itself might motivate abandonment type (good or bad) for the underlying query to some degree. We also propose a way to find potentially good abandonment extensions in an automated manner.
2348481	GLASE 0.1: eyes tell more than mice This paper proposes a prototype system called Gaze-Learning-Access-and-Search-Engine 0.1 (GLASE), which can perform image relevance ranking based on gaze data and within-session learning. We developed a search user interface that uses an eye-tracker as an input device and employed a relevance re-ranking algorithm based on the gaze length. The preliminary experimental results showed that using our gaze-driven system reduced the task completion time an average of 13.7% in a search session.
2348488	Learning to select a time-aware retrieval model Time-aware retrieval models exploit one of two time dimensions, namely, (a) publication time or (b) content time (temporal expressions mentioned in documents). We show that the effectiveness for a temporal query (e.g., illinois earthquake 1968) depends significantly on which time dimension is factored into ranking results. Motivated by this, we propose a machine learning approach to select the most suitable time-aware retrieval model for a given temporal query. Our method uses three classes of features obtained from analyzing distributions over two time dimensions, a distribution over terms, and retrieval scores within top-k result documents. Experiments on real-world data with crowdsourced relevance assessments show the potential of our approach.
2348487	Investigating performance predictors using monte carlo simulation and score distribution models The standard deviation of scores in the top k documents of a ranked list has been shown to be significantly correlated with average precision and has been the basis of a number of query performance predictors. In this paper, we outline two hypotheses that aid in understanding this correlation. Using score distribution (SD) models with known parameters, we create a large number of document rankings using Monte Carlo simulation to test the validity of these hypotheses.
2348486	Inferring missing relevance judgments from crowd workers via probabilistic matrix factorization In crowdsourced relevance judging, each crowd worker typically judges only a small number of examples, yielding a sparse and imbalanced set of judgments in which relatively few workers influence output consensus labels, particularly with simple consensus methods like majority voting. We show how probabilistic matrix factorization, a standard approach in collaborative filtering, can be used to infer missing worker judgments such that all workers influence output labels. Given complete worker judgments inferred by PMF, we evaluate impact in unsupervised and supervised scenarios. In the supervised case, we consider both weighted voting and worker selection strategies based on worker accuracy. Experiments on crowd judgments from the 2010 TREC Relevance Feedback Track show promise of the PMF approach merits further investigation and analysis.
2348485	Incorporating statistical topic information in relevance feedback Most of the relevance feedback algorithms only use document terms as feedback (local features) in order to update the query and re-rank the documents to show to the user. This approach is limited by the terms of those documents without any global context. We propose to use statistical topic modeling techniques in relevance feedback to incorporate a better estimate of context by including global information about the document. This is particularly helpful for difficult queries where learning the context from the interactions with the user is crucial. We propose to use the topic mixture information obtained to characterize the documents and learn their topics. Then, we rank documents incorporating positive and negative feedback by fitting a latent distribution for each class of documents online and combining all the features using Bayesian Logistic Regression. We show results using the OHSUMED dataset for 3 different variants and obtain higher performance, up to 12.5% in Mean Average Precision (MAP).
2348489	Learning-based time-sensitive re-ranking for web search To model time-dependent user intent for Web search, this paper proposes a novel method using machine learning techniques to exploit temporal features for effective time-sensitive search result re-ranking. We propose models to incorporate users' click through information for queries that are seen in the training data, and then further extend the model to deal with unseen queries considering the relationship between queries. Experiment shows significant improvement on search result ranking over original search outputs.
2348451	A hybrid model for ad-hoc information retrieval Many information retrieval (IR) techniques have been proposed to improve the performance, and some combinations of these techniques has been demonstrated to be effective. However, how to effectively combine them is largely unexplored. It is possible that a method reduces the positive influence of the other one even if both of them are effective separately. In this paper, we propose a new hybrid model which can simply and flexibly combine components of three different IR techniques under a uniform framework. Extensive experiments on the TREC standard collections indicate that our proposed model can outperform the best TREC systems consistently in the ad-hoc retrieval. It shows that the combination strategy in our proposed model is very effective. Meanwhile, this method is also re-useable for other researchers to test whether their new methods are additive to the current technologies.
2348452	Exploiting paths for entity search in RDF graphs The field of entity search using Semantic Web (RDF) data has gained more interest recently. In this paper, we propose a probabilistic entity retrieval model for RDF graphs using paths in the graph. Unlike previous work which assumes that all descriptions of an entity are directly linked to the entity node, we assume that an entity can be described with any node that can be reached from the entity node by following paths in the RDF graph. Our retrieval model simulates the generation process of query terms from an entity node by traversing the graph. We evaluate our approach using a standard evaluation framework for entity search.
2348453	A study of term weighting schemes using class information for text classification 
2348454	A topic model of clinical reports Clinical narrative in the medical record provides perhaps the most detailed account of a patient's history. However, this information is documented in free-text, which makes it challenging to analyze. Efforts to index unstructured clinical narrative often focus on identifying predefined concepts from clinical terminologies. Less studied is the problem of analyzing the text as a whole to create temporal indices that capture relationships between learned clinical events. Topic models provide a method for analyzing large corpora of text to discover semantically related clusters of words. This work presents a topic model tailored to the clinical reporting environment that allows for individual patient timelines. Results show the model is able to identify patterns of clinical events in a cohort of brain cancer patients.
2348455	Active query selection for learning rankers Methods that reduce the amount of labeled data needed for training have focused more on selecting which documents to label than on which queries should be labeled. One exception to this (Long et al. 2010) uses expected loss optimization (ELO) to estimate which queries should be selected but is limited to rankers that predict absolute graded relevance. In this work, we demonstrate how to easily adapt ELO to work with any ranker and show that estimating expected loss in DCG is more robust than NDCG even when the final performance measure is NDCG.
2348457	BReK12: a book recommender for K-12 users Ideally, students in K-12 grade levels can turn to book recommenders to locate books that match their interests. Existing book recommenders, however, fail to take into account the readability levels of their users, and hence their recommendations may be unsuitable for the users. To address this issue, we introduce BReK12, a recommender that targets K-12 users and prioritizes the reading level of its users in suggesting books of interest. Empirical studies conducted using the Bookcrossing dataset show that BReK12 outperforms a number of existing recommenders (developed for general users) in identifying books appealing to K-12 users.
2348456	Anticipatory search: using context to initiate search Identifying content for which a user may search has a variety of applications, including ranking and recommendation. In this poster, we examine how pre-search context can be used to predict content that the user will seek before they have even specified a search query. We call this anticipatory search. Using a log-based approach, we compare different methods for predicting the content to be searched using different attributes of the pre-query context and behavioral signals from previous visitors to the most recent browse URL. Each method covers different cases and shows promise for query-free anticipatory search on the Web.
2348459	Cluster-based one-class ensemble for classification problems in information retrieval A number of relevant information retrieval classification problems are one-class classification problems at heart. I.e., labeled data is only available for one class, the so-called target class, and common discrimination-based classification approaches, be them binary or multiclass, are not applicable. Achieving a high effectiveness when solving one-class problems is difficult anyway and it becomes even more challenging when the target class data is multimodal, which is often the case. To address these concerns we propose a cluster-based one-class ensemble that consists of four steps: (1) applying a clustering algorithm to the target class data, (2) training an individual one-class classifier for each of the identified clusters, (3) aggregating the decisions of the individual classifiers, and (4) selecting the best fitting clustering model. We evaluate our approach with four datasets: an artificially generated dataset, a dataset compiled from a known multiclass text corpus, and two datasets related to one-class problems that received much attention recently, namely authorship verification and quality flaw prediction. Our approach outperforms a one-class SVM on all four datasets.
2348458	Clarity re-visited We present a novel interpretation of Clarity [5], a widely used query performance predictor. While Clarity is commonly described as a measure of the "distance" between the language model of the top-retrieved documents and that of the collection, we show that it actually quantifies an additional property of the result list, namely, its diversity. This analysis, along with empirical evaluation, helps to explain the low prediction quality of Clarity for large-scale Web collections.
2348440	Task-aware search assistant 
2348443	Multi-platform image search using tag enrichment The number of images available online is growing steadily and current web search engines have indexed more than 10 billion images. Approaches to image retrieval are still often text-based and operate on image annotations and captions. Image annotations (i.e. image tags) are typically short, user-generated, and of varying quality, which increases the mismatch problem between query terms and image tags. For example, a user might enter the query "wedding dress" while all images are annotated with "bridal gown" or "wedding gown". This demonstration presents an image search system using reduction and expansion of image annotations to overcome vocabulary mismatch problems by enriching the sparse set of image tags. Our image search application accepts a written query as input and produces a ranked list of result images and annotations (i.e. image tags) as output. The system integrates methods to reduce and expand the image tag set, thus decreasing the effect of sparse image tags. It builds on different image collections such as the Wikipedia image collection (http://www.imageclef.org/wikidata) and the Microsoft Office.com ClipArt collection (http://office.microsoft.com/), but can be applied to social collections such as Flickr as well. Our demonstration system runs on PCs, tablets, and smartphones, making use of advanced user interface capabilities on mobile devices.
2348441	TweetSpector: entity-based retrieval of tweets TweetSpector is a tool for demonstrating entity-based of retrieval of tweets. The various features of this tool include: entity profile creation, real-time tweet classification, active improvement of the created profiles through user feedback, and the dashboard displaying different metrics.
2348442	YooSee: a video browsing application for young children Nowadays children as young as two years old can easily interact with mobile touch screen devices and personal computers to watch online videos through services such as YouTube. However, such services present a number of challenges for young children (e.g. fine grain gestures/interactions and good typing/literacy skills). In addition, when children use such services there is a risk that they may stumble upon content that is inappropriate. YooSee is a web-based application developed using the PuppyIR framework and designed for children aged between two and six years old. YooSee enables children to: (1) search and browse through video content using an engaging, novel interaction paradigm, and (2) be able to safely enjoy moderated video content.
2348448	CloudSearch and the democratization of information retrieval Amazon CloudSearch is a new hosted search service, built on top of many cloud-based AWS services, and based on the same technology that powers search on Amazon's retail sites. Because of its ease of configuration and scalability, CloudSearch represents the next step in the democratization of information retrieval. This democratization process, increasing access to search for both end users and potential search providers, has continued over several decades, through technologies like early online metered search services, enterprise search software, web search, and open source search tools. CloudSearch further reduces barriers to entry, allowing a person or organization to basically say "make my content searchable" and have it happen automatically. CloudSearch may also offer an opportunity to overcome the stagnation that has occurred in search user experiences over the past 15 years. When you no longer need to be a search expert to make your content available, you're not stuck with ten blue links. Instead, you can focus on providing the kind of interaction that makes sense for your application and your users. CloudSearch enables a flowering of search applications that need not be tied to the web, and an opportunity to explore new ways of interacting with information retrieval technology.
2348447	Putting context into search and search into context It is very challenging task to understand a short query, especially if that query is considered in isolation. Luckily, queries do magically appear in a search box -- rather, they are issued by real people, trying to accomplish a task, at a given point in time and space, and this "context" can be used to aid query understanding. Traditionally search engines have returned the same results to everyone who asks the same question. However, using a single ranking for everyone, in every context limits how well a search engine can do. In this talk I outline a framework to quantify the "potential for personalization", that can be used to characterize the extent to which different people have the same (or different) intents for a query. I then describe several examples of how we represent and use different kinds of context to improve search quality. Finally I conclude by highlighting some important challenges in developing such systems at Web scale including system optimization, evaluation, transparency and serendipity.
2348446	Watson: the Jeopardy! challenge and beyond Watson, named after IBM founder Thomas J. Watson, was built by a team of IBM researchers who set out to accomplish a grand challenge-build a computing system that rivals a human's ability to answer questions posed in natural language with speed, accuracy and confidence. The quiz show Jeopardy! provided the ultimate test of this technology because the game's clues involve analyzing subtle meaning, irony, riddles and other complexities of natural language in which humans excel and computers traditionally fail. Watson passed its first test on Jeopardy!, beating the show's two greatest champions in a televised exhibition match, but the real test will be in applying the underlying natural language processing and analytics technology in business and across industries. In this talk I will introduce the Jeopardy! grand challenge, present an overview of Watson and the DeepQA technology upon which Watson is built, and explore future applications of this technology.
2348445	IR paradigms in computational advertising The central problem in the emerging discipline of computational advertising is to find the "best match" between a given user in a given context and a suitable advertisement. The context could be a user entering a query in a search engine ("sponsored search"), a user reading a web page ("content match" and "display ads"), a user streaming a movie, and so on. In some situations, it is desirable to solve the "dual" optimization problem: rather then find the best ad given a user in a context, the goal is to identify the "best audience", i.e. the most receptive set of users and/or the most suitable contexts for a given advertising campaign. The information about the user can vary from scarily detailed to practically nil. The number of potential advertisements might be in the billions. Thus, depending on the definition of "best match" and "best audience" these problems lead to a variety of massive optimization problems, with complicated constraints, and challenging data representation and access issues. In general, the direct problem is solved in two stages: first a rough filtering is used to identify a relatively small set of ads to be considered as potential matches, followed by a more sophisticated secondary ranking where economics considerations take center stage. Historically, the filtering has been conceived as a database selection problem, and was done using simple Boolean formulae, for instance, in sponsored search the filter could be "all ads that provide a specific bid for the present query string or a subset of it". Similarly for the dual problem (audience definition) for, say, a sports car ad, the filter could be "all males in California, aged 40 or less". This "database approach" for the direct problem has been recently supplanted by an "IR approach" based on a similarity search between a carefully constructed query that captures the advertising opportunity and an annotated document corpus that represents the potential ads. Similarly, in the dual problem, the newer approach is to devise an efficient and effective representation of the users, then form a query that represents a prototypical ideal user, and finally find the users most similar to the prototype. The aim of this talk is to discuss the penetration of the IR paradigms in computational advertising and present some research challenges and opportunities in this area of enormous economic importance.
2348449	Entity sentiment extraction using text ranking Entity extraction and sentiment classification are among the most common types of information derived from documents, but the problem of directly associating entities and sentiment has received less attention. We use TextRank on a graph linking entities and sentiment-laden words and phrases. We extract from the resulting eigenvector the final sentiment weights of the entities. We then explore the algorithm's performance and accuracy, compared to a baseline.
2348474	Fast on-line learning for multilingual categorization Multiview learning has been shown to be a natural and efficient framework for supervised or semi-supervised learning of multilingual document categorizers. The state-of-the-art co-regularization approach relies on alternate minimizations of a combination of language-specific categorization errors and a disagreement between the outputs of the monolingual text categorizers. This is typically solved by repeatedly training categorizers on each language with the appropriate regularizer. We extend and improve this approach by introducing an on-line learning scheme, where language-specific updates are interleaved in order to iteratively optimize the global cost in one pass. Our experimental results show that this produces similar performance as the batch approach, at a fraction of the computational cost.
2348475	Finding interesting posts in Twitter based on retweet graph analysis Millions of posts are being generated in real-time by users in social networking services, such as Twitter. However, a considerable number of those posts are mundane posts that are of interest to the authors and possibly their friends only. This paper investigates the problem of automatically discovering valuable posts that may be of potential interest to a wider audience. Specifically, we model the structure of Twitter as a graph consisting of users and posts as nodes and retweet relations between the nodes as edges. We propose a variant of the HITS algorithm for producing a static ranking of posts. Experimental results on real world data demonstrate that our method can achieve better performance than several baseline methods.
2348476	Finding readings for scientists from social websites Current search systems are designed to find relevant articles, especially topically relevant ones, but the notion of relevance largely depends on search tasks. We study the specific task that scientists are searching for worth-reading articles beneficial for their research. Our study finds: users' perception of relevance and preference of reading are only moderately correlated; current systems can effectively find readings that are highly relevant to the topic, but 36% of the worth-reading articles are only marginally relevant or even non-relevant. Our system can effectively find those worth-reading but marginally relevant or non-relevant articles by taking advantages of scientists' recommendations in social websites.
2348477	Finding web appearances of social network users via latent factor model With the rapid growing of Web 2.0, people spend more time on social networks such as Facebook and Twitter. In order to know the people they are interacting with, finding the web appearances of them will help the social network users to a great extent. We propose a novel and effective latent factor model to find web appearances of target social network users. Our method solves the name ambiguity problem by simultaneously exploring the link structure of social networks and the web. Experiments on real-world data show the superiority of our method over several baselines.
2348470	Explaining neighborhood-based recommendations Recommender Systems (RS) attempt to discover users' preferences, and to learn about them in order to anticipate their needs. The main task normally associated with a RS is to offer suggestions for items. However, for most users, RSs are black boxes, computerized oracles that give advice, but cannot be questioned. In order to improve the quality of predictions and the satisfaction of the users, explanations facilities are needed. We present a novel methodology to explain recommendations: showing predictions over a set of observed items. Our proposal has been validated by means of user studies and lab experiments using MovieLens dataset.
2348471	Exploiting term dependence while handling negation in medical search In medical records, negative qualifiers, e.g. no or without, are commonly used by health practitioners to identify the absence of a medical condition. Without considering whether the term occurs in a negative or positive context, the sole presence of a query term in a medical record is insufficient to imply that the record is relevant to the query. In this paper, we show how to effectively handle such negation within a medical records information retrieval system. In particular, we propose a term representation that tackles negated language in medical records, which is further extended by considering the dependence of negated query terms. We evaluate our negation handling technique within the search task provided by the TREC Medical Records 2011 track. Our results, which show a significant improvement upon a system that does not consider negated context within records, attest the importance of handling negation.
2348472	Exploring example-based person search in email This paper describes an entity ranking model for example-based person search in email. Evaluation by comparison to manually resolved named references in Enron email yield results that correspond to typically placing the correct entity in the first or second rank.
2348473	Exploring tag relevance for image tag re-ranking In this paper, we propose to explore the relevance between tags for image tag re-ranking. The key component is to define a global tag-tag similarity matrix, which is achieved by analysis in both semantic and visual aspects. The text semantic relevance is explored by the Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) model [1].For the visual information, the tag-relevance can be propagated by reconstructing exemplar images with visually and semantically consistent images. Based on our tag relevance matrix, a random-walk approach is leveraged to discover the significance of each tag. Finally, all tags in an image are re-ranked by their significance values. Extensive experiments show its effectiveness on an image dataset with a large tags vocabulary.
2348479	Gender-aware re-ranking In this paper we study usefulness of users' gender information for improving ranking of ambiguous queries in personalized and non-contextual settings. This study is performed as a sequence of offline re-ranking experiments and it demonstrates that the proposed gender-aware ranking features provide improvements in ranking quality. It is also shown that the proposed personalized features exhibit performance superior to non-contextual ones.
2348478	Fixed versus dynamic co-occurrence windows in TextRank term weights for information retrieval TextRank is a variant of PageRank typically used in graphs that represent documents, and where vertices denote terms and edges denote relations between terms. Quite often the relation between terms is simple term co-occurrence within a fixed window of k terms. The output of TextRank when applied iteratively is a score for each vertex, i.e. a term weight, that can be used for information retrieval (IR) just like conventional term frequency based term weights. So far, when computing TextRank term weights over co-occurrence graphs, the window of term co-occurrence is always fixed. This work departs from this, and considers dynamically adjusted windows of term co-occurrence that follow the document structure on a sentence- and paragraph-level. The resulting TextRank term weights are used in a ranking function that re-ranks 1000 initially returned search results in order to improve the precision of the ranking. Experiments with two IR collections show that adjusting the vicinity of term co-occurrence when computing TextRank term weights can lead to gains in early precision.
2348465	Effect of written instructions on assessor agreement Assessors frequently disagree on the topical relevance of documents. How much of this disagreement is due to ambiguity in assessment instructions? We have two assessors assess TREC Legal Track documents for relevance, some to a general topic description, others to detailed assessment guidelines. We find that detailed guidelines lead to no significant increase in agreement amongst assessors or between assessors and the official qrels.
2348466	Effects of expertise differences in synchronous social Q&#38;A Synchronous social question-and-answer (Q&#38;A) systems match askers to answerers and support real-time dialog between them to resolve questions. These systems typically find answerers based on the degree of expertise match with the asker's initial question. However, since synchronous social Q&#38;A involves a dialog between asker and answerer, differences in expertise may also matter (e.g., extreme novices and experts may have difficulty establishing common ground). In this poster we use data from a live social Q&#38;A system to explore the impact of expertise differences on answer quality and aspects of the dialog itself. The findings of our study suggest that synchronous social Q&#38;A systems should consider the relative expertise of candidate answerers with respect to the asker, and offer interactive dialog support to help establish common ground between askers and answerers.
2348463	Detecting candidate named entities in search queries The information extraction task of Named Entities Recognition (NER) has been recently applied to search engine queries, in order to better understand their semantics. Here we concentrate on the task prior to the classification of the named entities (NEs) into a set of categories, which is the problem of detecting candidate NEs via the subtask of query segmentation.We present a novel method for detecting candidate NEs using grammar annotation and query segmentation with the aid of top-n snippets from search engine results and a web n-gram model, to accurately identify NE boundaries. The proposed method addresses the problem of accurately setting boundaries of NEs and the detection of multiple NEs in queries.
2348464	Effect of dynamic pruning safety on learning to rank effectiveness A dynamic pruning strategy, such as WAND, enhances retrieval efficiency without degrading effectiveness to a given rank K, known as safe-to-rank-K. However, it is also possible for WAND to obtain more efficient but unsafe retrieval without actually significantly degrading effectiveness. On the other hand, in a modern search engine setting, dynamic pruning strategies can be used to efficiently obtain the set of documents to be re-ranked by the application of a learned model in a learning to rank setting. No work has examined the impact of safeness on the effectiveness of the learned model. In this work, we investigate the impact of WAND safeness through experiments using 150 TREC Web track topics. We find that unsafe WAND is biased towards documents with lower docids, thereby impacting effectiveness.
2348461	Creating temporally dynamic web search snippets Content on the Internet is always changing. We explore the value of biasing search result snippets towards new webpage content. We present results from a user study comparing traditional query-focused snippets with snippets that emphasize new page content for two query types: general and trending. Our results indicate that searchers prefer the inclusion of temporal information for trending queries but not for general queries, and that this is particularly valuable for pages that have not been recently crawled.
2348462	Dependency trigram model for social relation extraction from news articles We propose a kernel-based model to automatically extract social relations such as economic relations and political relations between two people from news articles. To determine whether two people are structurally associated with each other, the proposed model uses an SVM (support vector machine) tree kernel based on trigrams of head-dependent relations between them. In the experiments with the automatic content extraction (ACE) corpus and a Korean news corpus, the proposed model outperformed the previous systems based on SVM tree kernels even though it used more shallow linguistic knowledge.
2348460	Collaborative filtering with short term preferences mining Recently, recommender systems have fascinated researchers and benefited a variety of people's online activities, enabling users to survive the explosive web information. Traditional collaborative filtering techniques handle the general recommendation well. However, most such approaches usually focus on long term preferences. To discover more short term factors influencing people's decisions, we propose a short term preferences model, implemented with implicit user feedback. We conduct experiments comparing the performances of different short term models, which show that our model outperforms significantly compared to those long term models.
2348469	Estimating the magic barrier of recommender systems: a user study Recommender systems are commonly evaluated by trying to predict known, withheld, ratings for a set of users. Measures such as the Root-Mean-Square Error are used to estimate the quality of the recommender algorithms. This process does however not acknowledge the inherent rating inconsistencies of users. In this paper we present the first results from a noise measurement user study for estimating the magic barrier of recommender systems conducted on a commercial movie recommendation community. The magic barrier is the expected squared error of the optimal recommendation algorithm, or, the lowest error we can expect from any recommendation algorithm. Our results show that the barrier can be estimated by collecting the opinions of users on already rated items.
2348468	Emotion tagging for comments of online news by meta classification with heterogeneous information sources With the rapid growth of online news services, users can actively respond to online news by making comments. Users often express subjective emotions in comments such as sadness, surprise and anger. Such emotions can help understand the preferences and perspectives of individual users, and therefore may facilitate online publishers to provide users with more relevant services. This paper tackles the task of predicting emotions for the comments of online news. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first research work for addressing the task. In particular, this paper proposes a novel Meta classification approach that exploits heterogeneous information sources such as the content of the comments and the emotion tags of news articles generated by users. The experiments on two datasets from online news services demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
2348467	Efficient estimation of aspect weights Many websites encourage people to submit reviews of various products and services. We present and evaluate a novel approach to efficiently model and analyze the text within user reviews to estimate how much reviewers care about different aspects of a product (i.e., amenities, food, location, room, etc. of a hotel). Our approach performs statistically quite similar to the best existing method. However, our method for computing aspect weights is a linear time method while the current state of the art solution requires cubic time at best.
2348319	Optimizing positional index structures for versioned document collections Versioned document collections are collections that contain multiple versions of each document. Important examples are Web archives, Wikipedia and other wikis, or source code and documents maintained in revision control systems. Versioned document collections can become very large, due to the need to retain past versions, but there is also a lot of redundancy between versions that can be exploited. Thus, versioned document collections are usually stored using special differential (delta) compression techniques, and a number of researchers have recently studied how to exploit this redundancy to obtain more succinct full-text index structures. In this paper, we study index organization and compression techniques for such versioned full-text index structures. In particular, we focus on the case of positional index structures, while most previous work has focused on the non-positional case. Building on earlier work in [zs:redun], we propose a framework for indexing and querying in versioned document collections that integrates non-positional and positional indexes to enable fast top-k query processing. Within this framework, we define and study the problem of minimizing positional index size through optimal substring partitioning. Experiments on Wikipedia and web archive data show that our techniques achieve significant reductions in index size over previous work while supporting very fast query processing.
2348317	Efficient in-memory top-k document retrieval For over forty years the dominant data structure for ranked document retrieval has been the inverted index. Inverted indexes are effective for a variety of document retrieval tasks, and particularly efficient for large data collection scenarios that require disk access and storage. However, many efficiency-bound search tasks can now easily be supported entirely in memory as a result of recent hardware advances. In this paper we present a hybrid algorithmic framework for in-memory bag of-words ranked document retrieval using a self-index derived from the FM-Index, wavelet tree, and the compressed suffix tree data structures, and evaluate the various algorithmic trade-offs for performing efficient queries entirely in-memory. We compare our approach with two classic approaches to bag-of-words queries using inverted indexes, term-at-a-time (TAAT) and document-at-a-time (DAAT) query processing. We show that our framework is competitive with state-of-the-art indexing structures, and describe new capabilities provided by our algorithms that can be leveraged by future systems to improve effectiveness and efficiency for a variety of fundamental search operations.
2348318	Index maintenance for time-travel text search Time-travel text search enriches standard text search by temporal predicates, so that users of web archives can easily retrieve document versions that are considered relevant to a given keyword query and existed during a given time interval. Different index structures have been proposed to efficiently support time-travel text search. None of them, however, can easily be updated as the Web evolves and new document versions are added to the web archive. In this work, we describe a novel index structure that efficiently supports time-travel text search and can be maintained incrementally as new document versions are added to the web archive. Our solution uses a sharded index organization, bounds the number of spuriously read index entries per shard, and can be maintained using small in-memory buffers and append-only operations. We present experiments on two large-scale real-world datasets demonstrating that maintaining our novel index structure is an order of magnitude more efficient than periodically rebuilding one of the existing index structures, while query-processing performance is not adversely affected.
2348315	User evaluation of query quality Although a great deal of research has been conducted about automatic techniques for determining query quality, there have been relatively few studies about how people judge query quality. This study investigated this topic through a laboratory experiment with 40 subjects. Subjects were shown eight information problems (five fact-finding and three exploratory) and asked to evaluate queries for these problems according to several quality attributes. Subjects then evaluated search engine results pages (SERPs) for each query, which were manipulated to exhibit different levels of performance. Following this, subjects reevaluated the queries, were interviewed about their evaluation approaches and repeated the rating procedure for two information problems. Results showed that for fact-finding information problems, longer queries received higher ratings (both initial and post-SERP), and that post-SERP query ratings were more affected by the proportion of relevant documents viewed to all documents viewed rather than the ranks of the relevant documents. For exploratory information problems, subjects' ratings were highly correlated with the number of relevant documents in the SERP as well as the proportion of relevant documents viewed. Subjects adopted several approaches when evaluating query quality, which led to different quality ratings. Finally, during the reliability check subjects' initial evaluations were fairly stable, but their post-SERP evaluations significantly increased.
2348313	Improving searcher models using mouse cursor activity Web search components such as ranking and query suggestions analyze the user data provided in query and click logs. While this data is easy to collect and provides information about user behavior, it omits user interactions with the search engine that do not hit the server; these logs omit search data such as users' cursor movements. Just as clicks provide signals for relevance in search results, cursor hovering and scrolling can be additional implicit signals. In this work, we demonstrate a technique to extend models of the user's search result examination state to infer document relevance. We start by exploring recorded user interactions with the search results, both qualitatively and quantitatively. We find that cursor hovering and scrolling are signals telling us which search results were examined, and we use these interactions to reveal latent variables in searcher models to more accurately compute document attractiveness and satisfaction. Accuracy is evaluated by computing how well our model using these parameters can predict future clicks for a particular query. We are able to improve the click predictions compared to a basic searcher model for higher ranked search results using the additional log data.
2348314	Personalization of search results using interaction behaviors in search sessions Personalization of search results offers the potential for significant improvement in information retrieval performance. User interactions with the system and documents during information-seeking sessions provide a wealth of information about user preferences and their task goals. In this paper, we propose methods for analyzing and modeling user search behavior in search sessions to predict document usefulness and then using information to personalize search results. We generate prediction models of document usefulness from behavior data collected in a controlled lab experiment with 32 participants, each completing uncontrolled searching for 4 tasks in the Web. The generated models are then tested with another data set of user search sessions in radically different search tasks and constrains. The documents predicted useful and not useful by the models are used to modify the queries in each search session using a standard relevance feedback technique. The results show that application of the models led to consistently improved performance over a baseline that did not take account of user interaction information. These findings have implications for designing systems for personalized search and improving user search experience.
2348312	Modeling the impact of short- and long-term behavior on search personalization User behavior provides many cues to improve the relevance of search results through personalization. One aspect of user behavior that provides especially strong signals for delivering better relevance is an individual's history of queries and clicked documents. Previous studies have explored how short-term behavior or long-term behavior can be predictive of relevance. Ours is the first study to assess how short-term (session) behavior and long-term (historic) behavior interact, and how each may be used in isolation or in combination to optimally contribute to gains in relevance through search personalization. Our key findings include: historic behavior provides substantial benefits at the start of a search session; short-term session behavior contributes the majority of gains in an extended search session; and the combination of session and historic behavior out-performs using either alone. We also characterize how the relative contribution of each model changes throughout the duration of a session. Our findings have implications for the design of search systems that leverage user behavior to personalize the search experience.
2348310	Adaptive diversification of recommendation results via latent factor portfolio This paper studies result diversification in collaborative filtering. We argue that the diversification level in a recommendation list should be adapted to the target users' individual situations and needs. Different users may have different ranges of interests -- the preference of a highly focused user might include only few topics, whereas that of the user with broad interests may encompass a wide range of topics. Thus, the recommended items should be diversified according to the interest range of the target user. Such an adaptation is also required due to the fact that the uncertainty of the estimated user preference model may vary significantly between users. To reduce the risk of the recommendation, we should take the difference of the uncertainty into account as well. In this paper, we study the adaptive diversification problem theoretically. We start with commonly used latent factor models and reformulate them using the mean-variance analysis from the portfolio theory in text retrieval. The resulting Latent Factor Portfolio (LFP) model captures the user's interest range and the uncertainty of the user preference by employing the variance of the learned user latent factors. It is shown that the correlations between items (and thus the item diversity) can be obtained by using the correlations between latent factors (topical diversity), which in return significantly reduce the computation load. Our mathematical derivation also reveals that diversification is necessary, not only for risk-averse system behavior (non-adpative), but also for the target users' individual situations (adaptive), which are represented by the distribution and the variance of the latent user factors. Our experiments confirm the theoretical insights and show that LFP succeeds in improving latent factor models by adaptively introducing recommendation diversity to fit the individual user's needs.
2348306	Summarizing highly structured documents for effective search interaction As highly structured documents with rich metadata (such as products, movies, etc.) become increasingly prevalent, searching those documents has become an important IR problem. Unfortunately existing work on document summarization, especially in the context of search, has been mainly focused on unstructured documents, and little attention has been paid to highly structured documents. Due to the different characteristics of structured and unstructured documents, the ideal approaches for document summarization might be different. In this paper, we study the problem of summarizing highly structured documents in a search context. We propose a new summarization approach based on query-specific facet selection. Our approach aims to discover the important facets hidden behind a query using a machine learning approach, and summarizes retrieved documents based on those important facets. In addition, we propose to evaluate summarization approaches based on a utility function that measures how well the summaries assist users in interacting with the search results. Furthermore, we develop a game on Mechanical Turk to evaluate different summarization approaches. The experimental results show that the new summarization approach significantly outperforms two existing ones.
2348308	TFMAP: optimizing MAP for top-n context-aware recommendation In this paper, we tackle the problem of top-N context-aware recommendation for implicit feedback scenarios. We frame this challenge as a ranking problem in collaborative filtering (CF). Much of the past work on CF has not focused on evaluation metrics that lead to good top-N recommendation lists in designing recommendation models. In addition, previous work on context-aware recommendation has mainly focused on explicit feedback data, i.e., ratings. We propose TFMAP, a model that directly maximizes Mean Average Precision with the aim of creating an optimally ranked list of items for individual users under a given context. TFMAP uses tensor factorization to model implicit feedback data (e.g., purchases, clicks) with contextual information. The optimization of MAP in a large data collection is computationally too complex to be tractable in practice. To address this computational bottleneck, we present a fast learning algorithm that exploits several intrinsic properties of average precision to improve the learning efficiency of TFMAP, and to ensure its scalability. We experimentally verify the effectiveness of the proposed fast learning algorithm, and demonstrate that TFMAP significantly outperforms state-of-the-art recommendation approaches.
2348309	Increasing temporal diversity with purchase intervals The development of Web 2.0 technology has led to huge economic benefits and challenges for both e-commerce websites and online shoppers. One core technology to increase sales and consumers' satisfaction is the use of recommender systems. Existing product recommender systems consider the order of items purchased by users to obtain a list of recommended items. However, they do not consider the time interval between the products purchased. For example, there is often an interval of 2-3 months between the purchase of printer ink cartridges or refills. Thus, recommending appropriate ink cartridges one week before the user needs to replace the depleted ink cartridges would increase the likelihood of a purchase decision. In this paper, we propose to utilize the purchase interval information to improve the performance of the recommender systems for e-commerce. We design an efficient algorithm to compute the purchase intervals between product pairs from users' purchase history and integrate this information into the marginal utility model. We evaluate our approach on a real world ecommerce dataset. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach significantly improves the conversion rate and temporal diversity compared to state-of-the-art algorithms.
2348302	Evaluating aggregated search pages Aggregating search results from a variety of heterogeneous sources or verticals such as news, image and video into a single interface is a popular paradigm in web search. Although various approaches exist for selecting relevant verticals or optimising the aggregated search result page, evaluating the quality of an aggregated page is an open question. This paper proposes a general framework for evaluating the quality of aggregated search pages. We evaluate our approach by collecting annotated user preferences over a set of aggregated search pages for 56 topics and 12 verticals. We empirically demonstrate the fidelity of metrics instantiated from our proposed framework by showing that they strongly agree with the annotated user preferences of pairs of simulated aggregated pages. Furthermore, we show that our metrics agree with the majority preference more often than current diversity-based information retrieval metrics. Finally, we demonstrate the flexibility of our framework by showing that personalised historical preference data can be used to improve the performance of our proposed metrics.
2348304	Combining inverted indices and structured search for ad-hoc object retrieval Retrieving semi-structured entities to answer keyword queries is an increasingly important feature of many modern Web applications. The fast-growing Linked Open Data (LOD) movement makes it possible to crawl and index very large amounts of structured data describing hundreds of millions of entities. However, entity retrieval approaches have yet to find efficient and effective ways of ranking and navigating through those large data sets. In this paper, we address the problem of Ad-hoc Object Retrieval over large-scale LOD data by proposing a hybrid approach that combines IR and structured search techniques. Specifically, we propose an architecture that exploits an inverted index to answer keyword queries as well as a semi-structured database to improve the search effectiveness by automatically generating queries over the LOD graph. Experimental results show that our ranking algorithms exploiting both IR and graph indices outperform state-of-the-art entity retrieval techniques by up to 25% over the BM25 baseline.
2348305	Retrieving similar discussion forum threads: a structure based approach Online forums are becoming a popular way of finding useful information on the web. Search over forums for existing discussion threads so far is limited to keyword-based search due to the minimal effort required on part of the users. However, it is often not possible to capture all the relevant context in a complex query using a small number of keywords. Example-based search that retrieves similar discussion threads given one exemplary thread is an alternate approach that can help the user provide richer context and vastly improve forum search results. In this paper, we address the problem of finding similar threads to a given thread. Towards this, we propose a novel methodology to estimate similarity between discussion threads. Our method exploits the thread structure to decompose threads in to set of weighted overlapping components. It then estimates pairwise thread similarities by quantifying how well the information in the threads are mutually contained within each other using lexical similarities between their underlying components. We compare our proposed methods on real datasets against state-of-the-art thread retrieval mechanisms wherein we illustrate that our techniques outperform others by large margins on popular retrieval evaluation measures such as NDCG, MAP, Precision@k and MRR. In particular, consistent improvements of up to 10% are observed on all evaluation measures.
2348301	Time drives interaction: simulating sessions in diverse searching environments Real life information retrieval takes place in sessions, where users search by iterating between various cognitive, perceptual and motor subtasks through an interactive interface. The sessions may follow diverse strategies, which, together with the interface characteristics, affect user effort (cost), experience and session effectiveness. In this paper we propose a pragmatic evaluation approach based on scenarios with explicit subtask costs. We study the limits of effectiveness of diverse interactive searching strategies in two searching environments (the scenarios) under overall cost constraints. This is based on a comprehensive simulation of 20 million sessions in each scenario. We analyze the effectiveness of the session strategies over time, and the properties of the most and the least effective sessions in each case. Furthermore, we will also contrast the proposed evaluation approach with the traditional one, rank based evaluation, and show how the latter may hide essential factors that affect users' performance and satisfaction - and gives even counter-intuitive results.
2348300	Time-based calibration of effectiveness measures Many current effectiveness measures incorporate simplifying assumptions about user behavior. These assumptions prevent the measures from reflecting aspects of the search process that directly impact the quality of retrieval results as experienced by the user. In particular, these measures implicitly model users as working down a list of retrieval results, spending equal time assessing each document. In reality, even a careful user, intending to identify as much relevant material as possible, must spend longer on some documents than on others. Aspects such as document length, duplicates and summaries all influence the time required. In this paper, we introduce a time-biased gain measure, which explicitly accommodates such aspects of the search process. By conducting an appropriate user study, we calibrate and validate the measure against the TREC 2005 Robust Track test collection. We examine properties of the measure, contrasting it to traditional effectiveness measures, and exploring its extension to other aspects and environments. As its primary benefit, the measure allows us to evaluate system performance in human terms, while maintaining the simplicity and repeatability of system-oriented tests. Overall, we aim to achieve a clearer connection between user-oriented studies and system-oriented tests, allowing us to better transfer insights and outcomes from one to the other.
2348398	Using preference judgments for novel document retrieval There has been considerable interest in incorporating diversity in search results to account for redundancy and the space of possible user needs. Most work on this problem is based on subtopics: diversity rankers score documents against a set of hypothesized subtopics, and diversity rankings are evaluated by assigning a value to each ranked document based on the number of novel (and redundant) subtopics it is relevant to. This can be seen as modeling a user who is always interested in seeing more novel subtopics, with progressively decreasing interest in seeing the same subtopic multiple times. We put this model to test: if it is correct, then users, when given a choice, should prefer to see a document that has more value to the evaluation. We formulate some specific hypotheses from this model and test them with actual users in a novel preference-based design in which users express a preference for document A or document B given document C. We argue that while the user study shows the subtopic model is good, there are many other factors apart from novelty and redundancy that may be influencing user preferences. From this, we introduce a new framework to construct an ideal diversity ranking using only preference judgments, with no explicit subtopic judgments whatsoever.
2348397	Combining implicit and explicit topic representations for result diversification Result diversification deals with ambiguous or multi-faceted queries by providing documents that cover as many subtopics of a query as possible. Various approaches to subtopic modeling have been proposed. Subtopics have been extracted internally, e.g., from retrieved documents, and externally, e.g., from Web resources such as query logs. Internally modeled subtopics are often implicitly represented, e.g., as latent topics, while externally modeled subtopics are often explicitly represented, e.g., as reformulated queries. We propose a framework that: i)combines both implicitly and explicitly represented subtopics; and ii)allows flexible combination of multiple external resources in a transparent and unified manner. Specifically, we use a random walk based approach to estimate the similarities of the explicit subtopics mined from a number of heterogeneous resources: click logs, anchor text, and web n-grams. We then use these similarities to regularize the latent topics extracted from the top-ranked documents, i.e., the internal (implicit) subtopics. Empirical results show that regularization with explicit subtopics extracted from the right resource leads to improved diversification results, indicating that the proposed regularization with (explicit) external resources forms better (implicit) topic models. Click logs and anchor text are shown to be more effective resources than web n-grams under current experimental settings. Combining resources does not always lead to better results, but achieves a robust performance. This robustness is important for two reasons: it cannot be predicted which resources will be most effective for a given query, and it is not yet known how to reliably determine the optimal model parameters for building implicit topic models.
2348394	Reactive index replication for distributed search engines Distributed search engines comprise multiple sites deployed across geographically distant regions, each site being specialized to serve the queries of local users. When a search site cannot accurately compute the results of a query, it must forward the query to other sites. This paper considers the problem of selecting the documents indexed by each site focusing on replication to increase the fraction of queries processed locally. We propose RIP, an algorithm for replicating documents and posting lists that is practical and has two important features. RIP evaluates user interests in an online fashion and uses only local data of a site. Being an online approach simplifies the operational complexity, while locality enables higher performance when processing queries and documents. The decision procedure, on top of being online and local, incorporates document popularity and user queries, which is critical when assuming a replication budget for each site. Having a replication budget reflects the hardware constraints of any given site. We evaluate RIP against the approach of replicating popular documents statically, and show that we achieve significant gains, while having the additional benefit of supporting incremental indexes.
2348393	Mixture model with multiple centralized retrieval algorithms for result merging in federated search Result merging is an important research problem in federated search for merging documents retrieved from multiple ranked lists of selected information sources into a single list. The state-of-the-art result merging algorithms such as Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) and Sample-Agglomerate Fitting Estimate (SAFE) try to map document scores retrieved from different sources to comparable scores according to a single centralized retrieval algorithm for ranking those documents. Both SSL and SAFE arbitrarily select a single centralized retrieval algorithm for generating comparable document scores, which is problematic in a heterogeneous federated search environment, since a single centralized algorithm is often suboptimal for different information sources. Based on this observation, this paper proposes a novel approach for result merging by utilizing multiple centralized retrieval algorithms. One simple approach is to learn a set of combination weights for multiple centralized retrieval algorithms (e.g., logistic regression) to compute comparable document scores. The paper shows that this simple approach generates suboptimal results as it is not flexible enough to deal with heterogeneous information sources. A mixture probabilistic model is thus proposed to learn more appropriate combination weights with respect to different types of information sources with some training data. An extensive set of experiments on three datasets have proven the effectiveness of the proposed new approach.
2348396	Personalized diversification of search results Search personalization and diversification are often seen as opposing alternatives to cope with query uncertainty, where, given an ambiguous query, it is either preferable to adapt the search result to a specific aspect that may interest the user (personalization) or to regard multiple aspects in order to maximize the probability that some query aspect is relevant to the user (diversification). In this work, we question this antagonistic view, and hypothesize that these two directions may in fact be effectively combined and enhance each other. We research the introduction of the user as an explicit random variable in state of the art diversification methods, thus developing a generalized framework for personalized diversification. In order to evaluate our hypothesis, we conduct an evaluation with real users using crowdsourcing services. The obtained results suggest that the combination of personalization and diversification achieves competitive performance, improving the base-line, plain personalization, and plain diversification approaches in terms of both diversity and accuracy measures.
2348390	When web search fails, searchers become askers: understanding the transition While Web search has become increasingly effective over the last decade, for many users' needs the required answers may be spread across many documents, or may not exist on the Web at all. Yet, many of these needs could be addressed by asking people via popular Community Question Answering (CQA) services, such as Baidu Knows, Quora, or Yahoo! Answers. In this paper, we perform the first large-scale analysis of how searchers become askers. For this, we study the logs of a major web search engine to trace the transformation of a large number of failed searches into questions posted on a popular CQA site. Specifically, we analyze the characteristics of the queries, and of the patterns of search behavior that precede posting a question; the relationship between the content of the attempted queries and of the posted questions; and the subsequent actions the user performs on the CQA site. Our work develops novel insights into searcher intent and behavior that lead to asking questions to the community, providing a foundation for more effective integration of automated web search and social information seeking.
2348392	Content-based retrieval for heterogeneous domains: domain adaptation by relative aggregation points We introduce the problem of domain adaptation for content-based retrieval and propose a domain adaptation method based on relative aggregation points (RAPs). Content-based retrieval including image retrieval and spoken document retrieval enables a user to input examples as a query, and retrieves relevant data based on the similarity to the examples. However, input examples and relevant data can be dissimilar, especially when domains from which the user selects examples and from which the system retrieves data are different. In content-based geographic object retrieval, for example, suppose that a user who lives in Beijing visits Kyoto, Japan, and wants to search for relatively inexpensive restaurants serving popular local dishes by means of a content-based retrieval system. Since such restaurants in Beijing and Kyoto are dissimilar due to the difference in the average cost and areas' popular dishes, it is difficult to find relevant restaurants in Kyoto based on examples selected in Beijing. We propose a solution for this problem by assuming that RAPs in different domains correspond, which may be dissimilar but play the same role. A RAP is defined as the expectation of instances in a domain that are classified into a certain class, e.g. the most expensive restaurant, average restaurant, and restaurant serving the most popular dishes. Our proposed method constructs a new feature space based on RAPs estimated in each domain and bridges the domain difference for improving content-based retrieval in heterogeneous domains. To verify the effectiveness of our proposed method, we evaluated various methods with a test collection developed for content-based geographic object retrieval. Experimental results show that our proposed method achieved significant improvements over baseline methods. Moreover, we observed that the search performance of content-based retrieval in heterogeneous domains was significantly lower than that in homogeneous domains. This finding suggests that relevant data for the same search intent depend on the search context, that is, the location where the user searches and the domain from which the system retrieves data.
2348389	Category hierarchy maintenance: a data-driven approach Category hierarchies often evolve at a much slower pace than the documents reside in. With newly available documents kept adding into a hierarchy, new topics emerge and documents within the same category become less topically cohesive. In this paper, we propose a novel automatic approach to modifying a given category hierarchy by redistributing its documents into more topically cohesive categories. The modification is achieved with three operations (namely, sprout, merge, and assign) with reference to an auxiliary hierarchy for additional semantic information; the auxiliary hierarchy covers a similar set of topics as the hierarchy to be modified. Our user study shows that the modified category hierarchy is semantically meaningful. As an extrinsic evaluation, we conduct experiments on document classification using real data from Yahoo! Answers and AnswerBag hierarchies, and compare the classification accuracies obtained on the original and the modified hierarchies. Our experiments show that the proposed method achieves much larger classification accuracy improvement compared with several baseline methods for hierarchy modification.
2348388	Vote calibration in community question-answering systems User votes are important signals in community question-answering (CQA) systems. Many features of typical CQA systems, e.g. the best answer to a question, status of a user, are dependent on ratings or votes cast by the community. In a popular CQA site, Yahoo! Answers, users vote for the best answers to their questions and can also thumb up or down each individual answer. Prior work has shown that these votes provide useful predictors for content quality and user expertise, where each vote is usually assumed to carry the same weight as others. In this paper, we analyze a set of possible factors that indicate bias in user voting behavior -- these factors encompass different gaming behavior, as well as other eccentricities, e.g., votes to show appreciation of answerers. These observations suggest that votes need to be calibrated before being used to identify good answers or experts. To address this problem, we propose a general machine learning framework to calibrate such votes. Through extensive experiments based on an editorially judged CQA dataset, we show that our supervised learning method of content-agnostic vote calibration can significantly improve the performance of answer ranking and expert ranking.
2348387	Dual role model for question recommendation in community question answering Question recommendation that automatically recommends a new question to suitable users to answer is an appealing and challenging problem in the research area of Community Question Answering (CQA). Unlike in general recommender systems where a user has only a single role, each user in CQA can play two different roles (dual roles) simultaneously: as an asker and as an answerer. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to systematically investigate the distinctions between the two roles and their different influences on the performance of question recommendation in CQA. Moreover, we propose a Dual Role Model (DRM) to model the dual roles of users effectively. With different indepen-dence assumptions, two variants of DRM are achieved. Finally, we present the DRM based approach to question recommendation which provides a mechanism for naturally integrating the user relation between the answerer and the asker with the content re-levance between the answerer and the question into a uni-fied probabilistic framework. Experiments using a real-world data crawled from Yahoo! Answers show that: (1) there are evident distinctions between the two roles of users in CQA. Additionally, the answerer role is more effective than the asker role for modeling candidate users in question recommendation; (2) compared with baselines utilizing a single role or blended roles based methods, our DRM based approach consistently and significantly improves the performance of question recommendation, demonstrating that our approach can model the user in CQA more reasonably and precisely.
2348385	Robust ranking models via risk-sensitive optimization Many techniques for improving search result quality have been proposed. Typically, these techniques increase average effectiveness by devising advanced ranking features and/or by developing sophisticated learning to rank algorithms. However, while these approaches typically improve average performance of search results relative to simple baselines, they often ignore the important issue of robustness. That is, although achieving an average gain overall, the new models often hurt performance on many queries. This limits their application in real-world retrieval scenarios. Given that robustness is an important measure that can negatively impact user satisfaction, we present a unified framework for jointly optimizing effectiveness and robustness. We propose an objective that captures the tradeoff between these two competing measures and demonstrate how we can jointly optimize for these two measures in a principled learning framework. Experiments indicate that ranking models learned this way significantly decreased the worst ranking failures while maintaining strong average effectiveness on par with current state-of-the-art models.
2348384	Top-k learning to rank: labeling, ranking and evaluation In this paper, we propose a novel top-k learning to rank framework, which involves labeling strategy, ranking model and evaluation measure. The motivation comes from the difficulty in obtaining reliable relevance judgments from human assessors when applying learning to rank in real search systems. The traditional absolute relevance judgment method is difficult in both gradation specification and human assessing, resulting in high level of disagreement on judgments. While the pairwise preference judgment, as a good alternative, is often criticized for increasing the complexity of judgment from O(n) to (n log n). Considering the fact that users mainly care about top ranked search results, we propose a novel top-k labeling strategy which adopts the pairwise preference judgment to generate the top k ordering items from n documents (i.e. top-k ground-truth) in a manner similar to that of HeapSort. As a result, the complexity of judgment is reduced to O(n log k). With the top-k ground-truth, traditional ranking models (e.g. pairwise or listwise models) and evaluation measures (e.g. NDCG) no longer fit the data set. Therefore, we introduce a new ranking model, namely FocusedRank, which fully captures the characteristics of the top-k ground-truth. We also extend the widely used evaluation measures NDCG and ERR to be applicable to the top-k ground-truth, referred as &#954;-NDCG and &#954;-ERR, respectively. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on benchmark data collections to demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of our top-k labeling strategy and ranking models.
2348383	Structural relationships for large-scale learning of answer re-ranking Supervised learning applied to answer re-ranking can highly improve on the overall accuracy of question answering (QA) systems. The key aspect is that the relationships and properties of the question/answer pair composed of a question and the supporting passage of an answer candidate, can be efficiently compared with those captured by the learnt model. In this paper, we define novel supervised approaches that exploit structural relationships between a question and their candidate answer passages to learn a re-ranking model. We model structural representations of both questions and answers and their mutual relationships by just using an off-the-shelf shallow syntactic parser. We encode structures in Support Vector Machines (SVMs) by means of sequence and tree kernels, which can implicitly represent question and answer pairs in huge feature spaces. Such models together with the latest approach to fast kernel-based learning enabled the training of our rerankers on hundreds of thousands of instances, which previously rendered intractable for kernelized SVMs. The results on two different QA datasets, e.g., Answerbag and Jeopardy! data, show that our models deliver large improvement on passage re-ranking tasks, reducing the error in Recall of BM25 baseline by about 18%. One of the key findings of this work is that, despite its simplicity, shallow syntactic trees allow for learning complex relational structures, which exhibits a steep learning curve with the increase in the training size.
2348381	Adaptive context features for toponym resolution in streaming news News sources around the world generate constant streams of information, but effective streaming news retrieval requires an intimate understanding of the geographic content of news. This process of understanding, known as geotagging, consists of first finding words in article text that correspond to location names (toponyms), and second, assigning each toponym its correct lat/long values. The latter step, called toponym resolution, can also be considered a classification problem, where each of the possible interpretations for each toponym is classified as correct or incorrect. Hence, techniques from supervised machine learning can be applied to improve accuracy. New classification features to improve toponym resolution, termed adaptive context features, are introduced that consider a window of context around each toponym, and use geographic attributes of toponyms in the window to aid in their correct resolution. Adaptive parameters controlling the window's breadth and depth afford flexibility in managing a tradeoff between feature computation speed and resolution accuracy, allowing the features to potentially apply to a variety of textual domains. Extensive experiments with three large datasets of streaming news demonstrate the new features' effectiveness over two widely-used competing methods.
2348380	TwiNER: named entity recognition in targeted twitter stream Many private and/or public organizations have been reported to create and monitor targeted Twitter streams to collect and understand users' opinions about the organizations. Targeted Twitter stream is usually constructed by filtering tweets with user-defined selection criteria e.g. tweets published by users from a selected region, or tweets that match one or more predefined keywords. Targeted Twitter stream is then monitored to collect and understand users' opinions about the organizations. There is an emerging need for early crisis detection and response with such target stream. Such applications require a good named entity recognition (NER) system for Twitter, which is able to automatically discover emerging named entities that is potentially linked to the crisis. In this paper, we present a novel 2-step unsupervised NER system for targeted Twitter stream, called TwiNER. In the first step, it leverages on the global context obtained from Wikipedia and Web N-Gram corpus to partition tweets into valid segments (phrases) using a dynamic programming algorithm. Each such tweet segment is a candidate named entity. It is observed that the named entities in the targeted stream usually exhibit a gregarious property, due to the way the targeted stream is constructed. In the second step, TwiNER constructs a random walk model to exploit the gregarious property in the local context derived from the Twitter stream. The highly-ranked segments have a higher chance of being true named entities. We evaluated TwiNER on two sets of real-life tweets simulating two targeted streams. Evaluated using labeled ground truth, TwiNER achieves comparable performance as with conventional approaches in both streams. Various settings of TwiNER have also been examined to verify our global context + local context combo idea.
2348372	Collaborative personalized tweet recommendation Twitter has rapidly grown to a popular social network in recent years and provides a large number of real-time messages for users. Tweets are presented in chronological order and users scan the followees' timelines to find what they are interested in. However, an information overload problem has troubled many users, especially those with many followees and thousands of tweets arriving every day. In this paper, we focus on recommending useful tweets that users are really interested in personally to reduce the users' effort to find useful information. Many kinds of information on Twitter are available for helping recommendation, including the user's own tweet history, retweet history and social relations between users. We propose a method of making tweet recommendations based on collaborative ranking to capture personal interests. It can also conveniently integrate the other useful contextual information. Our final method considers three major elements on Twitter: tweet topic level factors, user social relation factors and explicit features such as authority of the publisher and quality of the tweet. The experiments show that all the proposed elements are important and our method greatly outperforms several baseline methods.
2348371	Learning to rank social update streams As online social media further integrates deeper into our lives, we spend more time consuming social update streams that come from our online connections. Although social update streams provide a tremendous opportunity for us to access information on-the-fly, we often complain about its relevance. Some of us are flooded with a steady stream of information and simply cannot process it in full. Ranking the incoming content becomes the only solution for the overwhelmed users. For some others, in contrast, the incoming information stream is pretty weak, and they have to actively search for relevant information which is quite tedious. For these users, augmenting their incoming content flow with relevant information from outside their first-degree network would be a viable solution. In that case, the problem of relevance becomes even more prominent. In this paper, we start an open discussion on how to build effective systems for ranking social updates from a unique perspective of LinkedIn -- the largest professional network in the world. More specifically, we address this problem as an intersection of learning to rank, collaborative filtering, and clickthrough modeling, while leveraging ideas from information retrieval and recommender systems. We propose a novel probabilistic latent factor model with regressions on explicit features and compare it with a number of non-trivial baselines. In addition to demonstrating superior performance of our model, we shed some light on the nature of social updates on LinkedIn and how users interact with them, which might be applicable to social update streams in general.
2348373	Exploring social influence for recommendation: a generative model approach Social friendship has been shown beneficial for item recommendation for years. However, existing approaches mostly incorporate social friendship into recommender systems by heuristics. In this paper, we argue that social influence between friends can be captured quantitatively and propose a probabilistic generative model, called social influenced selection(SIS), to model the decision making of item selection (e.g., what book to buy or where to dine). Based on SIS, we mine the social influence between linked friends and the personal preferences of users through statistical inference. To address the challenges arising from multiple layers of hidden factors in SIS, we develop a new parameter learning algorithm based on expectation maximization (EM). Moreover, we show that the mined social influence and user preferences are valuable for group recommendation and viral marketing. Finally, we conduct a comprehensive performance evaluation using real datasets crawled from last.fm and whrrl.com to validate our proposal. Experimental results show that social influence captured based on our SIS model is effective for enhancing both item recommendation and group recommendation, essential for viral marketing, and useful for various user analysis.
2348376	Placing images on the world map: a microblog-based enrichment approach Estimating the geographic location of images is a task which has received increasing attention recently. Large numbers of images uploaded to platforms such as Flickr do not contain GPS-based latitude/longitude coordinates. Obtaining such geographic information is beneficial for a variety of applications including travelogues, visual place descriptions and personalized travel recommendations. While most works in this area only exploit an image's textual meta-data (tags, title, etc.) to estimate at what geographic location the image was taken, we consider an additional textual dimension: the image owner's traces on the social Web. Specifically, we hypothesize that information extracted from a person's microblog stream(s) can be utilized to improve the accuracy with which the geographic location of the images is estimated. In this paper, we investigate this hypothesis on the example of Twitter streams and find it to be confirmed. The median error distance in kilometres decreases by up to 67% in comparison to existing state-of-the-art. The best results are achieved when tweets that were posted up to two days before and after an image was taken are considered. Moreover, we also find another type of additional information useful: population density data.
2348375	See-to-retrieve: efficient processing of spatio-visual keyword queries The wide proliferation of powerful smart phones equipped with multiple sensors, 3D graphical engine, and 3G connection has nurtured the creation of a new spectrum of visual mobile applications. These applications require novel data retrieval techniques which we call What-You-Retrieve-Is-What-You-See (WYRIWYS). However, state-of-the-art spatial retrieval methods are mostly distance-based and thus inapplicable for supporting WYRIWYS. Motivated by this problem, we propose a novel query called spatio-visual keyword (SVK) query, to support retrieving spatial Web objects that are both visually conspicuous and semantically relevant to the user. To capture the visual features of spatial Web objects with extents, we introduce a novel visibility metric which computes object visibility in a cumulative manner. We propose an incremental method called Complete Occlusion-map based Retrieval (COR) to answer SVK queries. This method exploits effective heuristics to prune the search space and construct a data structure called Occlusion-Map. Then the method adopts the best-first strategy to return relevant objects incrementally. Extensive experiments on real and synthetic data sets suggest that our method is effective and efficient when processing SVK queries.
2348377	Where is who: large-scale photo retrieval by facial attributes and canvas layout The ubiquitous availability of digital cameras has made it easier than ever to capture moments of life, especially the ones accompanied with friends and family. It is generally believed that most family photos are with faces that are sparsely tagged. Therefore, a better solution to manage and search in the tremendously growing personal or group photos is highly anticipated. In this paper, we propose a novel way to search for face photos by simultaneously considering attributes (e.g., gender, age, and race), positions, and sizes of the target faces. To better match the content and layout of the multiple faces in mind, our system allows the user to graphically specify the face positions and sizes on a query "canvas," where each attribute combination is defined as an icon for easier representation. As a secondary feature, the user can even place specific faces from the previous search results for appearance-based retrieval. The scenario has been realized on a tablet device with an intuitive touch interface. Experimenting with a large-scale Flickr dataset of more than 200k faces, the proposed formulation and joint ranking have made us achieve a hit rate of 0.420 at rank 100, significantly improving from 0.036 of the prior search scheme using attributes alone. We have also achieved an average running time of 0.0558 second by the proposed block-based indexing approach.
2348379	Mining the web for points of interest A point of interest (POI) is a focused geographic entity such as a landmark, a school, an historical building, or a business. Points of interest are the basis for most of the data supporting location-based applications. In this paper we propose to curate POIs from online sources by bootstrapping training data from Web snippets, seeded by POIs gathered from social media. This large corpus is used to train a sequential tagger to recognize mentions of POIs in text. Using Wikipedia data as the training data, we can identify POIs in free text with an accuracy that is 116% better than the state of the art POI identifier in terms of precision, and 50% better in terms of recall. We show that using Foursquare and Gowalla checkins as seeds to bootstrap training data from Web snippets, we can improve precision between 16% and 52%, and recall between 48% and 187% over the state-of-the-art. The name of a POI is not sufficient, as the POI must also be associated with a set of geographic coordinates. Our method increases the number of POIs that can be localized nearly three-fold, from 134 to 395 in a sample of 400, with a median localization accuracy of less than one kilometer.
2348363	Automatic suggestion of query-rewrite rules for enterprise search Enterprise search is challenging for several reasons, notably the dynamic terminology and jargon that are specific to the enterprise domain. This challenge is partly addressed by having domain experts maintaining the enterprise search engine and adapting it to the domain specifics. Those administrators commonly address user complaints about relevant documents missing from the top matches. For that, it has been proposed to allow administrators to influence search results by crafting query-rewrite rules, each specifying how queries of a certain pattern should be modified or augmented with additional queries. Upon a complaint, the administrator seeks a semantically coherent rule that is capable of pushing the desired documents up to the top matches. However, the creation and maintenance of rewrite rules is highly tedious and time consuming. Our goal in this work is to ease the burden on search administrators by automatically suggesting rewrite rules. This automation entails several challenges. One major challenge is to select, among many options, rules that are ``natural'' from a semantic perspective (e.g., corresponding to closely related and syntactically complete concepts). Towards that, we study a machine-learning classification approach. The second challenge is to accommodate the cross-query effect of rules---a rule introduced in the context of one query can eliminate the desired results for other queries and the desired effects of other rules. We present a formalization of this challenge as a generic computational problem. As we show that this problem is highly intractable in terms of complexity theory, we present heuristic approaches and optimization thereof. In an experimental study within IBM intranet search, those heuristics achieve near-optimal quality and well scale to large data sets.
2348361	Cognos: crowdsourcing search for topic experts in microblogs Finding topic experts on microblogging sites with millions of users, such as Twitter, is a hard and challenging problem. In this paper, we propose and investigate a new methodology for discovering topic experts in the popular Twitter social network. Our methodology relies on the wisdom of the Twitter crowds -- it leverages Twitter Lists, which are often carefully curated by individual users to include experts on topics that interest them and whose meta-data (List names and descriptions) provides valuable semantic cues to the experts' domain of expertise. We mined List information to build Cognos, a system for finding topic experts in Twitter. Detailed experimental evaluation based on a real-world deployment shows that: (a) Cognos infers a user's expertise more accurately and comprehensively than state-of-the-art systems that rely on the user's bio or tweet content, (b) Cognos scales well due to built-in mechanisms to efficiently update its experts' database with new users, and (c) Despite relying only on a single feature, namely crowdsourced Lists, Cognos yields results comparable to, if not better than, those given by the official Twitter experts search engine for a wide range of queries in user tests. Our study highlights Lists as a potentially valuable source of information for future content or expert search systems in Twitter.
2348360	Social-network analysis using topic models In this paper, we discuss how we can extend probabilistic topic models to analyze the relationship graph of popular social-network data, so that we can group or label the edges and nodes in the graph based on their topic similarity. In particular, we first apply the well-known Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model and its existing variants to the graph-labeling task and argue that the existing models do not handle popular nodes (nodes with many incoming edges) in the graph very well. We then propose possible extensions to this model to deal with popular nodes. Our experiments show that the proposed extensions are very effective in labeling popular nodes, showing significant improvements over the existing methods. Our proposed methods can be used for providing, for instance, more relevant friend recommendations within a social network.
2348367	Learning to predict response times for online query scheduling Dynamic pruning strategies permit efficient retrieval by not fully scoring all postings of the documents matching a query -- without degrading the retrieval effectiveness of the top-ranked results. However, the amount of pruning achievable for a query can vary, resulting in queries taking different amounts of time to execute. Knowing in advance the execution time of queries would permit the exploitation of online algorithms to schedule queries across replicated servers in order to minimise the average query waiting and completion times. In this work, we investigate the impact of dynamic pruning strategies on query response times, and propose a framework for predicting the efficiency of a query. Within this framework, we analyse the accuracy of several query efficiency predictors across 10,000 queries submitted to in-memory inverted indices of a 50-million-document Web crawl. Our results show that combining multiple efficiency predictors with regression can accurately predict the response time of a query before it is executed. Moreover, using the efficiency predictors to facilitate online scheduling algorithms can result in a 22% reduction in the mean waiting time experienced by queries before execution, and a 7% reduction in the mean completion time experienced by users.
2348365	A generalized hidden Markov model with discriminative training for query spelling correction Query spelling correction is a crucial component of modern search engines. Existing methods in the literature for search query spelling correction have two major drawbacks. First, they are unable to handle certain important types of spelling errors, such as concatenation and splitting. Second, they cannot efficiently evaluate all the candidate corrections due to the complex form of their scoring functions, and a heuristic filtering step must be applied to select a working set of top-K most promising candidates for final scoring, leading to non-optimal predictions. In this paper we address both limitations and propose a novel generalized Hidden Markov Model with discriminative training that can not only handle all the major types of spelling errors, including splitting and concatenation errors, in a single unified framework, but also efficiently evaluate all the candidate corrections to ensure the finding of a globally optimal correction. Experiments on two query spelling correction datasets demonstrate that the proposed generalized HMM is effective for correcting multiple types of spelling errors. The results also show that it significantly outperforms the current approach for generating top-K candidate corrections, making it a better first-stage filter to enable any other complex spelling correction algorithm to have access to a better working set of candidate corrections as well as to cover splitting and concatenation errors, which no existing method in academic literature can correct.
2348364	Time-sensitive query auto-completion Query auto-completion (QAC) is a common feature in modern search engines. High quality QAC candidates enhance search experience by saving users time that otherwise would be spent on typing each character or word sequentially. Current QAC methods rank suggestions according to their past popularity. However, query popularity changes over time, and the ranking of candidates must be adjusted accordingly. For instance, while halloween might be the right suggestion after typing ha in October, harry potter might be better any other time. Surprisingly, despite the importance of QAC as a key feature in most online search engines, its temporal dynamics have been under-studied. In this paper, we propose a time-sensitive approach for query auto-completion. Instead of ranking candidates according to their past popularity, we apply time-series and rank candidates according their forecasted frequencies. Our experiments on 846K queries and their daily frequencies sampled over a period of 4.5 years show that predicting the popularity of queries solely based on their past frequency can be misleading, and the forecasts obtained by time-series modeling are substantially more reliable. Our results also suggest that modeling the temporal trends of queries can significantly improve the ranking of QAC candidates.
2348368	Prefetching query results and its impact on search engines We investigate the impact of query result prefetching on the efficiency and effectiveness of web search engines. We propose offline and online strategies for selecting and ordering queries whose results are to be prefetched. The offline strategies rely on query log analysis and the queries are selected from the queries issued on the previous day. The online strategies select the queries from the result cache, relying on a machine learning model that estimates the arrival times of queries. We carefully evaluate the proposed prefetching techniques via simulation on a query log obtained from Yahoo! web search. We demonstrate that our strategies are able to improve various performance metrics, including the hit rate, query response time, result freshness, and query degradation rate, relative to a state-of-the-art baseline.
2348369	Online result cache invalidation for real-time web search Caches of results are critical components of modern Web search engines, since they enable lower response time to frequent queries and reduce the load to the search engine backend. Results in long-lived cache entries may become stale, however, as search engines continuously update their index to incorporate changes to the Web. Consequently, it is important to provide mechanisms that control the degree of staleness of cached results, ideally enabling the search engine to always return fresh results. In this paper, we present a new mechanism that identifies and invalidates query results that have become stale in the cache online. The basic idea is to evaluate at query time and against recent changes if cache hits have had their results have changed. For enhancing invalidation efficiency, the generation time of cached queries and their chronological order with respect to the latest index update are used to early prune unaffected queries. We evaluate the proposed approach using documents that change over time and query logs of the Yahoo! search engine. We show that the proposed approach ensures good query results (50% fewer stale results) and high invalidation accuracy (90% fewer unnecessary invalidations) compared to a baseline approach that makes invalidation decisions off-line. More importantly, the proposed approach induces less processing overhead, ensuring an average throughput 73% higher than that of the baseline approach.
2348353	Automatic refinement of patent queries using concept importance predictors Patent prior art queries are full patent applications which are much longer than standard web search topics. Such queries are composed of hundreds of terms and do not represent a focused information need. One way to make the queries more focused is to select a group of key terms as representatives. Existing works show that such a selection to reduce patent queries is a challenging task mainly because of the presence of ambiguous terms. Given this setup, we present a query modeling approach where we utilize patent-specific characteristics to generate more precise queries. We propose to automatically disambiguate query terms by employing noun phrases that are extracted using the global analysis of the patent collection. We further introduce a method for predicting whether expansion using noun phrases would improve the retrieval effectiveness. Our experiments show that we can obtain almost 20% improvement by performing query expansion using the true importance of the noun phrase queries. Based on this observation, we introduce various features that can be used to estimate the importance of the noun phrase query. We evaluated the effectiveness of the proposed method on the patent prior art search collection CLEF-IP 2010. Our experimental results indicate that the proposed features make good predictors of the noun phrase importance, and selective application of noun phrase queries using the importance predictors outperforms existing query generation methods.
2348354	Automatic term mismatch diagnosis for selective query expansion People are seldom aware that their search queries frequently mismatch a majority of the relevant documents. This may not be a big problem for topics with a large and diverse set of relevant documents, but would largely increase the chance of search failure for less popular search needs. We aim to address the mismatch problem by developing accurate and simple queries that require minimal effort to construct. This is achieved by targeting retrieval interventions at the query terms that are likely to mismatch relevant documents. For a given topic, the proportion of relevant documents that do not contain a term measures the probability for the term to mismatch relevant documents, or the term mismatch probability. Recent research demonstrates that this probability can be estimated reliably prior to retrieval. Typically, it is used in probabilistic retrieval models to provide query dependent term weights. This paper develops a new use: Automatic diagnosis of term mismatch. A search engine can use the diagnosis to suggest manual query reformulation, guide interactive query expansion, guide automatic query expansion, or motivate other responses. The research described here uses the diagnosis to guide interactive query expansion, and create Boolean conjunctive normal form (CNF) structured queries that selectively expand 'problem' query terms while leaving the rest of the query untouched. Experiments with TREC Ad-hoc and Legal Track datasets demonstrate that with high quality manual expansion, this diagnostic approach can reduce user effort by 33%, and produce simple and effective structured queries that surpass their bag of word counterparts.
2348355	Generating reformulation trees for complex queries Search queries have evolved beyond keyword queries. Many complex queries such as verbose queries, natural language question queries and document-based queries are widely used in a variety of applications. Processing these complex queries usually requires a series of query operations, which results in multiple sequences of reformulated queries. However, previous query representations, either the "bag of words" method or the recently proposed "query distribution" method, cannot effectively model these query sequences, since they ignore the relationships between two queries. In this paper, a reformulation tree framework is proposed to organize multiple sequences of reformulated queries as a tree structure, where each path of the tree corresponds to a sequence of reformulated queries. Specifically, a two-level reformulation tree is implemented for verbose queries. This tree effectively combines two query operations, i.e., subset selection and query substitution, within the same framework. Furthermore, a weight estimation approach is proposed to assign weights to each node of the reformulation tree by considering the relationships with other nodes and directly optimizing retrieval performance. Experiments on TREC collections show that this reformulation tree based representation significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art techniques.
2348356	Proximity-based rocchio's model for pseudo relevance Rocchio's relevance feedback model is a classic query expansion method and it has been shown to be effective in boosting information retrieval performance. The selection of expansion terms in this method, however, does not take into account the relationship between the candidate terms and the query terms (e.g., term proximity). Intuitively, the proximity between candidate expansion terms and query terms can be exploited in the process of query expansion, since terms closer to query terms are more likely to be related to the query topic. In this paper, we study how to incorporate proximity information into the Rocchio's model, and propose a proximity-based Rocchio's model, called PRoc, with three variants. In our PRoc models, a new concept (proximity-based term frequency, ptf) is introduced to model the proximity information in the pseudo relevant documents, which is then used in three kinds of proximity measures. Experimental results on TREC collections show that our proposed PRoc models are effective and generally superior to the state-of-the-art relevance feedback models with optimal parameters.A direct comparison with positional relevance model (PRM) on the GOV2 collection also indicates our proposed model is at least competitive to the most recent progress.
2348350	Personalized click shaping through lagrangian duality for online recommendation Online content recommendation aims to identify trendy articles in a continuously changing dynamic content pool. Most of existing works rely on online user feedback, notably clicks, as the objective and maximize it by showing articles with highest click-through rates. Recently, click shaping was introduced to incorporate multiple objectives in a constrained optimization framework. The work showed that significant tradeoff among the competing objectives can be observed and thus it is important to consider multiple objectives. However, the proposed click shaping approach is segment-based and can only work with a few non-overlapping user segments. It remains a challenge of how to enable deep personalization in click shaping. In this paper, we tackle the challenge by proposing personalized click shaping. The main idea is to work with the Lagrangian duality formulation and explore strong convexity to connect dual and primal solutions. We show that our formulation not only allows efficient conversion from dual to primal for online personalized serving, but also enables us to solve the optimization faster by approximation. We conduct extensive experiments on a large real data set and our experimental results show that the personalized click shaping can significantly outperform the segmented one, while achieving the same ability to balance competing objectives.
2348351	What reviews are satisfactory: novel features for automatic helpfulness voting This paper focuses on exploring the features of product reviews that satisfy users, by which to improve the automatic helpfulness voting for the reviews on commercial websites. Compared to the previous work, which single-mindedly adopts the textual features to assess the review helpfulness, we propose that user preferences are more explicit clues to infer the opinions of users on the review helpfulness. By using the user-preference based features, we firstly implement a binary helpfulness based review classification system to divide helpful reviews and useless, and on the basis, we secondly build a Ranking SVM based automatic helpfulness voting system (AHV) which rank reviews based on their helpfulness. Experiments used a large scale dataset containing over 34,266 reviews on 1289 products to test the systems, which achieves promising performances with accuracy of up to 0.72 and NDCG@10 of 0.25, and at least 9% accuracy improvement compared to the textual-feature based helpfulness assessment.
2348358	Modeling user posting behavior on social media User generated content is the basic element of social media websites. Relatively few studies have systematically analyzed the motivation to create and share content, especially from the perspective of a common user. In this paper, we perform a comprehensive analysis of user posting behavior on a popular social media website, Twitter. Specifically, we assume that user behavior is mainly influenced by three factors: breaking news, posts from social friends and user's intrinsic interest, and propose a mixture latent topic model to combine all these factors. We evaluated our model on a large-scale Twitter dataset from three different perspectives: the perplexity of held-out content, the performance of predicting retweets and the quality of generated latent topics. The results were encouraging, our model clearly outperformed its competitors.
2348359	Friend or frenemy?: predicting signed ties in social networks We study the problem of labeling the edges of a social network graph (e.g., acquaintance connections in Facebook) as either positive (i.e., trust, true friendship) or negative (i.e., distrust, possible frenemy) relations. Such signed relations provide much stronger signal in tying the behavior of online users than the unipolar Homophily effect, yet are largely unavailable as most social graphs only contain unsigned edges. We show the surprising fact that it is possible to infer signed social ties with good accuracy solely based on users' behavior of decision making (or using only a small fraction of supervision information) via unsupervised and semi-supervised algorithms. This work hereby makes it possible to turn an unsigned acquaintance network (e.g. Facebook, Myspace) into a signed trust-distrust network (e.g. Epinion, Slashdot). Our results are based on a mixed effects framework that simultaneously captures users' behavior, social interactions as well as the interplay between the two. The framework includes a series of latent factor models and it also encodes the principles of balance and status from Social psychology. Experiments on Epinion and Yahoo! Pulse networks illustrate that (1) signed social ties can be predicted with high-accuracy even in fully unsupervised settings, and (2) the predicted signed ties are significantly more useful for social behavior prediction than simple Homophily.
2348345	Image ranking based on user browsing behavior Ranking of images is difficult because many factors determine their importance (e.g., popularity, quality, entertainment value, context, etc.). In social media platforms, ranking also depends on social interactions and on the visibility of the images both inside and outside those platforms. In this context, the application of standard ranking methods is not clearly understood, and neither are the subtleties associated with taking into account social interaction, internal, and external factors. In this paper, we use a large Flickr dataset and investigate these factors by performing an in-depth analysis of several ranking algorithms using both internal (i.e., within Flickr) and external (i.e., links from outside of Flickr) factors. We analyze rankings given by common metrics used in image retrieval (e.g., number of favorites), and compare them with metrics based on page views (e.g., time spent, number of views). In addition, we represent users' navigation by a graph and combine session models with some of these metrics, comparing with PageRank and BrowseRank. Our experiments show significant differences between the rankings, providing insights on the impact of social interactions, internal, and external factors in image ranking.
2348342	A subjunctive exploratory search interface to support media studies researchers Media studies concerns the study of production, content, and/or reception of various types of media. Today's continuous production and storage of media is changing the way media studies researchers work and requires the development of new search models and tools. We investigate the research cycle of media studies researchers and find that it is an iterative process consisting of several search processes in which data is gathered and the research question is refined. Changes in the research question, however, trigger new data gathering processes. Based on these outcomes we propose a subjunctive exploratory search interface to support media studies researchers in refining their research question in an earlier stage of their research. To assess the subjunctive interface we conduct a user study and compare to a traditional exploratory search interface. We find that with the subjunctive interface users explore more diverse topics than with the standard interface and that users formulate more specific research questions. Although the subjunctive interface is more complex, this does not decrease its usability. These findings suggest that the subjunctive interface supports media studies researchers. The advantage of a subjunctive interface for exploration suggests a new direction for the development of exploratory search systems.
2348343	Task complexity, vertical display and user interaction in aggregated search Aggregated search is the task of blending results from specialized search services or verticals into the Web search results. While many studies have focused on aggregated search techniques, few studies have tried to better understand how users interact with aggregated search results. This study investigates how task complexity and vertical display (the blending of vertical results into the web results) affect the use of vertical content. Twenty-nine subjects completed six search tasks of varying levels of task complexity using two aggregated search interfaces: one that blended vertical results into the web results and one that only provided indirect vertical access. Our results show that more complex tasks required significantly more interaction and that subjects completing these tasks examined more vertical results. While the amount of interaction was the same between interfaces, subjects clicked on more vertical results when these were blended into the web results. Our results also show an interaction between task complexity and vertical display; subjects clicked on more verticals when completing the more complex tasks with the interface that blended vertical results. Subjects' evaluations of the two interfaces were nearly identical, but when analyzed with respect to their interface preferences, we found a positive relationship between system evaluations and individual preferences. Subjects justified their preference using similar rationales and their comments illustrate how the display itself can influence judgments of information quality, especially in cases when the vertical results might not be relevant to the search task.
2348341	Explanatory semantic relatedness and explicit spatialization for exploratory search Exploratory search, in which a user investigates complex concepts, is cumbersome with today's search engines. We present a new exploratory search approach that generates interactive visualizations of query concepts using thematic cartography (e.g. choropleth maps, heat maps). We show how the approach can be applied broadly across both geographic and non-geographic contexts through explicit spatialization, a novel method that leverages any figure or diagram -- from a periodic table, to a parliamentary seating chart, to a world map -- as a spatial search environment. We enable this capability by introducing explanatory semantic relatedness measures. These measures extend frequently-used semantic relatedness measures to not only estimate the degree of relatedness between two concepts, but also generate human-readable explanations for their estimates by mining Wikipedia's text, hyperlinks, and category structure. We implement our approach in a system called Atlasify, evaluate its key components, and present several use cases.
2348349	Predicting the ratings of multimedia items for making personalized recommendations Existing multimedia recommenders suggest a specific type of multimedia items rather than items of different types personalized for a user based on his/her preference. Assume that a user is interested in a particular family movie, it is appealing if a multimedia recommendation system can suggest other movies, music, books, and paintings closely related to the movie. We propose a comprehensive, personalized multimedia recommendation system, denoted MudRecS, which makes recommendations on movies, music, books, and paintings similar in content to other movies, music, books, and/or paintings that a MudRecS user is interested in. MudRecS does not rely on users' access patterns/histories, connection information extracted from social networking sites, collaborated filtering methods, or user personal attributes (such as gender and age) to perform the recommendation task. It simply considers the users' ratings, genres, role players (authors or artists), and reviews of different multimedia items, which are abundant and easy to find on the Web. MudRecS predicts the ratings of multimedia items that match the interests of a user to make recommendations. The performance ofMudRecS has been compared with current state-of-the-art multimedia recommenders using various multimedia datasets, and the experimental results show that MudRecS significantly outperforms other systems in accurately predicting the ratings of multimedia items to be recommended.
2348347	Finding translations in scanned book collections This paper describes an approach for identifying translations of books in large scanned book collections with OCR errors. The method is based on the idea that although individual sentences do not necessarily preserve the word order when translated, a book must preserve the linear progression of ideas for it to be a valid translation. Consider two books in two different languages, say English and German. The English book in the collection is represented by the sequence of words (in the order they appear in the text) which appear only once in the book. Similarly, the book in German is represented by its sequence of words which appear only once. An English-German dictionary is used to transform the word sequence of the English book into German by translating individual words in place. It is not necessary to translate all the words and this method works even with small dictionaries. Both sequences are now in German and can, therefore, be aligned using a Longest Common Subsequence (LCS) algorithm. We describe two scoring functions TRANS-cs and TRANS-its which account for both the LCS length and the lengths of the original word sequences. Experiments demonstrate that TRANS-its is particularly successful in finding translations of books and outperforms several baselines including metadata search based on matching titles and authors. Experiments performed on a Europarl parallel corpus for four language pairs, English-Finnish, English-French, English-German, English-Spanish, and a scanned book collection of 50K English-German books show that the proposed method retrieves translations of books with an average MAP score of 1.0 and a speed of 10K book pair comparisons per second on a single core.
2348346	Modeling concept dynamics for large scale music search Continuing advances in data storage and communication technologies have led to an explosive growth in digital music collections. To cope with their increasing scale, we need effective Music Information Retrieval (MIR) capabilities like tagging, concept search and clustering. Integral to MIR is a framework for modelling music documents and generating discriminative signatures for them. In this paper, we introduce a multimodal, layered learning framework called DMCM. Distinguished from the existing approaches that encode music as an ensemble of order-less feature vectors, our framework extracts from each music document a variety of acoustic features, and translates them into low-level encodings over the temporal dimension. From them, DMCM elucidates the concept dynamics in the music document, representing them with a novel music signature scheme called Stochastic Music Concept Histogram (SMCH) that captures the probability distribution over all the concepts. Experiment results with two large music collections confirm the advantages of the proposed framework over existing methods on various MIR tasks.
2348330	Language intent models for inferring user browsing behavior Modeling user browsing behavior is an active research area with tangible real-world applications, e.g., organizations can adapt their online presence to their visitors browsing behavior with positive effects in user engagement, and revenue. We concentrate on online news agents, and present a semi-supervised method for predicting news articles that a user will visit after reading an initial article. Our method tackles the problem using language intent models trained on historical data which can cope with unseen articles. We evaluate our method on a large set of articles and in several experimental settings. Our results demonstrate the utility of language intent models for predicting user browsing behavior within online news sites.
2348332	Efficient query recommendations in the long tail via center-piece subgraphs We present a recommendation method based on the well-known concept of center-piece subgraph, that allows for the time/space efficient generation of suggestions also for rare, i.e., long-tail queries. Our method is scalable with respect to both the size of datasets from which the model is computed and the heavy workloads that current web search engines have to deal with. Basically, we relate terms contained into queries with highly correlated queries in a query-flow graph. This enables a novel recommendation generation method able to produce recommendations for approximately 99% of the workload of a real-world search engine. The method is based on a graph having term nodes, query nodes, and two kinds of connections: term-query and query-query. The first connects a term to the queries in which it is contained, the second connects two query nodes if the likelihood that a user submits the second query after having issued the first one is sufficiently high. On such large graph we need to compute the center-piece subgraph induced by terms contained into queries. In order to reduce the cost of the above computation, we introduce a novel and efficient method based on an inverted index representation of the model. We experiment our solution on two real-world query logs and we show that its effectiveness is comparable (and in some case better) than state-of-the-art methods for head-queries. More importantly, the quality of the recommendations generated remains very high also for long-tail queries, where other methods fail even to produce any suggestion. Finally, we extensively investigate scalability and efficiency issues and we show the viability of our method in real world search engines.
2348333	Supporting efficient top-k queries in type-ahead search Type-ahead search can on-the-fly find answers as a user types in a keyword query. A main challenge in this search paradigm is the high-efficiency requirement that queries must be answered within milliseconds. In this paper we study how to answer top-k queries in this paradigm, i.e., as a user types in a query letter by letter, we want to efficiently find the k best answers. Instead of inventing completely new algorithms from scratch, we study challenges when adopting existing top-k algorithms in the literature that heavily rely on two basic list-access methods: random access and sorted access. We present two algorithms to support random access efficiently. We develop novel techniques to support efficient sorted access using list pruning and materialization. We extend our techniques to support fuzzy type-ahead search which allows minor errors between query keywords and answers. We report our experimental results on several real large data sets to show that the proposed techniques can answer top-k queries efficiently in type-ahead search.
2348334	SimFusion+: extending simfusion towards efficient estimation on large and dynamic networks SimFusion has become a captivating measure of similarity between objects in a web graph. It is iteratively distilled from the notion that "the similarity between two objects is reinforced by the similarity of their related objects". The existing SimFusion model usually exploits the Unified Relationship Matrix (URM) to represent latent relationships among heterogeneous data, and adopts an iterative paradigm for SimFusion computation. However, due to the row normalization of URM, the traditional SimFusion model may produce the trivial solution; worse still, the iterative computation of SimFusion may not ensure the global convergence of the solution. This paper studies the revision of this model, providing a full treatment from complexity to algorithms. (1) We propose SimFusion+ based on a notion of the Unified Adjacency Matrix (UAM), a modification of the URM, to prevent the trivial solution and the divergence issue of SimFusion. (2) We show that for any vertex-pair, SimFusion+ can be performed in O(1) time and O(n) space with an O(km)-time precomputation done only once, as opposed to the O(kn3) time and O(n2) space of its traditional counterpart, where n, m, and k denote the number of vertices, edges, and iterations respectively. (3) We also devise an incremental algorithm for further improving the computation of SimFusion+ when networks are dynamically updated, with performance guarantees for similarity estimation. We experimentally verify that these algorithms scale well, and the revised notion of SimFusion is able to converge to a non-trivial solution, and allows us to identify more sensible structure information in large real-world networks.
2348335	Group matrix factorization for scalable topic modeling Topic modeling can reveal the latent structure of text data and is useful for knowledge discovery, search relevance ranking, document classification, and so on. One of the major challenges in topic modeling is to deal with large datasets and large numbers of topics in real-world applications. In this paper, we investigate techniques for scaling up the non-probabilistic topic modeling approaches such as RLSI and NMF. We propose a general topic modeling method, referred to as Group Matrix Factorization (GMF), to enhance the scalability and efficiency of the non-probabilistic approaches. GMF assumes that the text documents have already been categorized into multiple semantic classes, and there exist class-specific topics for each of the classes as well as shared topics across all classes. Topic modeling is then formalized as a problem of minimizing a general objective function with regularizations and/or constraints on the class-specific topics and shared topics. In this way, the learning of class-specific topics can be conducted in parallel, and thus the scalability and efficiency can be greatly improved. We apply GMF to RLSI and NMF, obtaining Group RLSI (GRLSI) and Group NMF (GNMF) respectively. Experiments on a Wikipedia dataset and a real-world web dataset, each containing about 3 million documents, show that GRLSI and GNMF can greatly improve RLSI and NMF in terms of scalability and efficiency. The topics discovered by GRLSI and GNMF are coherent and have good readability. Further experiments on a search relevance dataset, containing 30,000 labeled queries, show that the use of topics learned by GRLSI and GNMF can significantly improve search relevance.
2348338	Fighting against web spam: a novel propagation method based on click-through data Combating Web spam is one of the greatest challenges for Web search engines. State-of-the-art anti-spam techniques focus mainly on detecting varieties of spam strategies, such as content spamming and link-based spamming. Although these anti-spam approaches have had much success, they encounter problems when fighting against a continuous barrage of new types of spamming techniques. We attempt to solve the problem from a new perspective, by noticing that queries that are more likely to lead to spam pages/sites have the following characteristics: 1) they are popular or reflect heavy demands for search engine users and 2) there are usually few key resources or authoritative results for them. From these observations, we propose a novel method that is based on click-through data analysis by propagating the spamicity score iteratively between queries and URLs from a few seed pages/sites. Once we obtain the seed pages/sites, we use the link structure of the click-through bipartite graph to discover other pages/sites that are likely to be spam. Experiments show that our algorithm is both efficient and effective in detecting Web spam. Moreover, combining our method with some popular anti-spam techniques such as TrustRank achieves improvement compared with each technique taken individually.
2348337	Detecting quilted web pages at scale Web-based advertising and electronic commerce, combined with the key role of search engines in driving visitors to ad-monetized and e-commerce web sites, has given rise to the phenomenon of web spam: web pages that are of little value to visitors, but that are created mainly to mislead search engines into driving traffic to target web sites. A large fraction of spam web pages is automatically generated, and some portion of these pages is generated by stitching together parts (sentences or paragraphs) of other web pages. This paper presents a scalable algorithm for detecting such "quilted" web pages. Previous work by the author and his collaborators introduced a sampling-based algorithm that was capable of detecting some, but by far not all quilted web pages in a collection. By contrast, the algorithm presented in this work identifies all quilted web pages, and it is scalable to very large corpora. We tested the algorithm on the half-billion page English-language subset of the ClueWeb09 collection, and evaluated its effectiveness in detecting web spam by manually inspecting small samples of the detected quilted pages. This manual inspection guided us in iteratively refining the algorithm to be more efficient in detecting real-world spam.
2348339	Learning hash codes for efficient content reuse detection Content reuse is extremely common in user generated mediums. Reuse detection serves as be the basis for many applications. However, along with the explosion of Internet and continuously growing uses of user generated mediums, the task becomes more critical and difficult. In this paper, we present a novel efficient and scalable approach to detect content reuse. We propose a new signature generation algorithm, which is based on learned hash functions for words. In order to deal with tens of billions of documents, we implement the detection approach on graphical processing units (GPUs). The experimental comparison in this paper involves studies of efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed approach in different types of document collections, including ClueWeb09, Tweets2011, and so on. Experimental results show that the proposed approach can achieve the same detection rates with state-of-the-art systems while uses significantly less execution time than them (from 400X to 1500X speedup).
2348322	Studies of the onset and persistence of medical concerns in search logs The Web provides a wealth of information about medical symptoms and disorders. Although this content is often valuable to consumers, studies have found that interaction with Web content may heighten anxiety and stimulate healthcare utilization. We present a longitudinal log-based study of medical search and browsing behavior on the Web. We characterize how users focus on particular medical concerns and how concerns persist and influence future behavior, including changes in focus of attention in searching and browsing for health information. We build and evaluate models that predict transitions from searches on symptoms to searches on health conditions, and escalations from symptoms to serious illnesses. We study the influence that the prior onset of concerns may have on future behavior, including sudden shifts back to searching on the concern amidst other searches. Our findings have implications for refining Web search and retrieval to support people pursuing diagnostic information.
2348323	A semi-supervised approach to modeling web search satisfaction Web search is an interactive process that involves actions from Web search users and responses from the search engine. Many research efforts have been made to address the problem of understanding search behavior in general. Some of this work focused on predicting whether a particular user has succeeded in achieving her search goal or not. Most of these studies have faced the problem of the lack of reliable labeled data to learn from. Unlike labeled data, unlabeled data recording behavioral signals in Web search is widely available in search logs. In this work, we study the plausibility of using labeled and unlabeled data to learn better models of user behavior that can be used to predict search success more effectively. We present a semi-supervised approach to modeling Web search satisfaction. The proposed approach can use either labeled data only or both labeled and unlabeled data. We show that the proposed model outperforms previous methods for modeling search success using labeled data. We also show that adding unlabeled data improves the effectiveness of the proposed models and that the proposed method outperforms other strong semi-supervised baselines.
2348320	To index or not to index: time-space trade-offs in search engines with positional ranking functions Positional ranking functions, widely used in Web search engines, improve result quality by exploiting the positions of the query terms within documents. However, it is well known that positional indexes demand large amounts of extra space, typically about three times the space of a basic nonpositional index. Textual data, on the other hand, is needed to produce text snippets. In this paper, we study time-space trade-offs for search engines with positional ranking functions and text snippet generation. We consider both index-based and non-index based alternatives for positional data. We aim to answer the question of whether one should index positional data or not. We show that there is a wide range of practical time-space trade-offs. Moreover, we show that both position and textual data can be stored using about 71% of the space used by traditional positional indexes, with a minor increase in query time. This yields considerable space savings and outperforms, both in space and time, recent alternatives from the literature. We also propose several efficient compressed text representations for snippet generation, which are able to use about half of the space of current state-of-the-art alternatives with little impact in query processing time.
2348327	Mining query subtopics from search log data Most queries in web search are ambiguous and multifaceted. Identifying the major senses and facets of queries from search log data, referred to as query subtopic mining in this paper, is a very important issue in web search. Through search log analysis, we show that there are two interesting phenomena of user behavior that can be leveraged to identify query subtopics, referred to as `one subtopic per search' and `subtopic clarification by keyword'. One subtopic per search means that if a user clicks multiple URLs in one query, then the clicked URLs tend to represent the same sense or facet. Subtopic clarification by keyword means that users often add an additional keyword or keywords to expand the query in order to clarify their search intent. Thus, the keywords tend to be indicative of the sense or facet. We propose a clustering algorithm that can effectively leverage the two phenomena to automatically mine the major subtopics of queries, where each subtopic is represented by a cluster containing a number of URLs and keywords. The mined subtopics of queries can be used in multiple tasks in web search and we evaluate them in aspects of the search result presentation such as clustering and re-ranking. We demonstrate that our clustering algorithm can effectively mine query subtopics with an F1 measure in the range of 0.896-0.956. Our experimental results show that the use of the subtopics mined by our approach can significantly improve the state-of-the-art methods used for search result clustering. Experimental results based on click data also show that the re-ranking of search result based on our method can significantly improve the efficiency of users' ability to find information.
2348325	An exploration of ranking heuristics in mobile local search Users increasingly rely on their mobile devices to search local entities, typically businesses, while on the go. Even though recent work has recognized that the ranking signals in mobile local search (e.g., distance and customer rating score of a business) are quite different from general Web search, they have mostly treated these signals as a black-box to extract very basic features (e.g., raw distance values and rating scores) without going inside the signals to understand how exactly they affect the relevance of a business. However, as it has been demonstrated in the development of general information retrieval models, it is critical to explore the underlying behaviors/heuristics of a ranking signal to design more effective ranking features. In this paper, we follow a data-driven methodology to study the behavior of these ranking signals in mobile local search using a large-scale query log. Our analysis reveals interesting heuristics that can be used to guide the exploitation of different signals. For example, users often take the mean value of a signal (e.g., rating) from the business result list as a "pivot" score, and tend to demonstrate different click behaviors on businesses with lower and higher signal values than the pivot; the clickrate of a business generally is sublinearly decreasing with its distance to the user, etc. Inspired by the understanding of these heuristics, we further propose different transformation methods to generate more effective ranking features. We quantify the improvement of the proposed new features using real mobile local search logs over a period of 14 months and show that the mean average precision can be improved by over 7%.
2348324	Social annotations: utility and prediction modeling Social features are increasingly integrated within the search results page of the main commercial search engines. There is, however, little understanding of the utility of social features in traditional search. In this paper, we study utility in the context of social annotations, which are markings indicating that a person in the social network of the user has liked or shared a result document. We introduce a taxonomy of social relevance aspects that influence the utility of social annotations in search, spanning query classes, the social network, and content relevance. We present the results of a user study quantifying the utility of social annotations and the interplay between social relevance aspects. Through the user study we gain insights on conditions under which social annotations are most useful to a user. Finally, we present machine learned models for predicting the utility of a social annotation using the user study judgments as an optimization criterion. We model the learning task with features drawn from web usage logs, and show empirical evidence over real-world head and tail queries that the problem is learnable and that in many cases we can predict the utility of a social annotation.
2348329	Multi-aspect query summarization by composite query Conventional search engines usually return a ranked list of web pages in response to a query. Users have to visit several pages to locate the relevant parts. A promising future search scenario should involve: (1) understanding user intents; (2) providing relevant information directly to satisfy searchers' needs, as opposed to relevant pages. In this paper, we present a search paradigm to summarize a query's information from different aspects. Query aspects could be aligned to user intents. The generated summaries for query aspects are expected to be both specific and informative, so that users can easily and quickly find relevant information. Specifically, we use a Composite Query for Summarization" method, where a set of component queries are used for providing additional information for the original query. The system leverages the search engine to proactively gather information by submitting multiple component queries according to the original query and its aspects. In this way, we could get more relevant information for each query aspect and roughly classify information. By comparative mining the search results of different component queries, it is able to identify query (dependent) aspect words, which help to generate more specific and informative summaries. The experimental results on two data sets, Wikipedia and TREC ClueWeb2009, are encouraging. Our method outperforms two baseline methods on generating informative summaries.
2348328	Search, interrupted: understanding and predicting search task continuation Many important search tasks require multiple search sessions to complete. Tasks such as travel planning, large purchases, or job searches can span hours, days, or even weeks. Inevitably, life interferes, requiring the searcher either to recover the "state" of the search manually (most common), or plan for interruption in advance (unlikely). The goal of this work is to better understand, characterize, and automatically detect search tasks that will be continued in the near future. To this end, we analyze a query log from the Bing Web search engine to identify the types of intents, topics, and search behavior patterns associated with long-running tasks that are likely to be continued. Using our insights, we develop an effective prediction algorithm that significantly outperforms both the previous state-of-the-art method, and even the ability of human judges, to predict future task continuation. Potential applications of our techniques would allow a search engine to pre-emptively "save state" for a searcher (e.g., by caching search results), perform more targeted personalization, and otherwise better support the searcher experience for interrupted search tasks.
2348288	Adaptation of the concept hierarchy model with search logs for query recommendation on intranets A concept hierarchy created from a document collection can be used for query recommendation on Intranets by ranking terms according to the strength of their links to the query within the hierarchy. A major limitation is that this model produces the same recommendations for identical queries and rebuilding it from scratch periodically can be extremely inefficient due to the high computational costs. We propose to adapt the model by incorporating query refinements from search logs. Our intuition is that the concept hierarchy built from the collection and the search logs provide complementary conceptual views on the same search domain, and their integration should continually improve the effectiveness of recommended terms. Two adaptation approaches using query logs with and without click information are compared. We evaluate the concept hierarchy models (static and adapted versions) built from the Intranet collections of two academic institutions and compare them with a state-of-the-art log-based query recommender, the Query Flow Graph, built from the same logs. Our adaptive model significantly outperforms its static version and the query flow graph when tested over a period of time on data (documents and search logs) from two institutions' Intranets.
2348289	Adaptive query suggestion for difficult queries Query suggestion is a useful tool to help users formulate better queries. Although this has been found highly useful globally, its effect on different queries may vary. In this paper, we examine the impact of query suggestion on queries of different degrees of difficulty. It turns out that query suggestion is much more useful for difficult queries than easy queries. In addition, the suggestions for difficult queries should rely less on their similarity to the original query. In this paper, we use a learning-to-rank approach to select query suggestions, based on several types of features including a query performance prediction. As query suggestion has different impacts on different queries, we propose an adaptive suggestion approach that makes suggestions only for difficult queries. We carry out experiments on real data from a search engine. Our results clearly indicate that an approach targeting difficult queries can bring higher gain than a uniform suggestion approach.
2348285	Salton award lecture: information retrieval as engineering science 
2348286	Retrieving information from the book of humanity: the personalized medicine data tsunami crashes on the beach of jeopardy From a mute but eloquent alphabet of 4 characters emerges a complex biological 'literature' whose highest expression is human existence. The rapidly advancing technologies of 'nextgen sequencing' will soon make it possible to inexpensively acquire and store the characters of our complete personal genetic instruction set and make it available for health assessment and disease management. This uniquely personal form of 'big data' brings with it challenges that will be discussed in this keynote presentation. Topics will include a brief introduction to the linguistic challenges of 'biology as literature', the impact of personal molecular variation on traditional approaches to disease prevention, diagnosis and treatment, and the challenges of information retrieval when a large volume of primary observations is made that is associated with an evanescent and rapidly changing corpus of scientific interpretation of those primary observations. Experience with extracting high quality pheonotypes from electronic medical records has shown that Natural Language Processing capability is an essential information extraction function for correlation of clinical events with personal genetic variation. Any powerful set of information can be used or misused, and put those who depend upon it in jeopardy. These issues, and a lesson from the long running Jeopardy TV series, will be discussed.
2348292	Privacy-aware image classification and search Modern content sharing environments such as Flickr or YouTube contain a large amount of private resources such as photos showing weddings, family holidays, and private parties. These resources can be of a highly sensitive nature, disclosing many details of the users' private sphere. In order to support users in making privacy decisions in the context of image sharing and to provide them with a better overview on privacy related visual content available on the Web, we propose techniques to automatically detect private images, and to enable privacy-oriented image search. To this end, we learn privacy classifiers trained on a large set of manually assessed Flickr photos, combining textual metadata of images with a variety of visual features. We employ the resulting classification models for specifically searching for private photos, and for diversifying query results to provide users with a better coverage of private and public content. Large-scale classification experiments reveal insights into the predictive performance of different visual and textual features, and a user evaluation of query result rankings demonstrates the viability of our approach.
2348293	Manhattan hashing for large-scale image retrieval Hashing is used to learn binary-code representation for data with expectation of preserving the neighborhood structure in the original feature space. Due to its fast query speed and reduced storage cost, hashing has been widely used for efficient nearest neighbor search in a large variety of applications like text and image retrieval. Most existing hashing methods adopt Hamming distance to measure the similarity (neighborhood) between points in the hashcode space. However, one problem with Hamming distance is that it may destroy the neighborhood structure in the original feature space, which violates the essential goal of hashing. In this paper, Manhattan hashing (MH), which is based on Manhattan distance, is proposed to solve the problem of Hamming distance based hashing. The basic idea of MH is to encode each projected dimension with multiple bits of natural binary code (NBC), based on which the Manhattan distance between points in the hashcode space is calculated for nearest neighbor search. MH can effectively preserve the neighborhood structure in the data to achieve the goal of hashing. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to adopt Manhattan distance with NBC for hashing. Experiments on several large-scale image data sets containing up to one million points show that our MH method can significantly outperform other state-of-the-art methods.
2348290	Learning to suggest: a machine learning framework for ranking query suggestions We consider the task of suggesting related queries to users after they issue their initial query to a web search engine. We propose a machine learning approach to learn the probability that a user may find a follow-up query both useful and relevant, given his initial query. Our approach is based on a machine learning model which enables us to generalize to queries that have never occurred in the logs as well. The model is trained on co-occurrences mined from the search logs, with novel utility and relevance models, and the machine learning step is done without any labeled data by human judges. The learning step allows us to generalize from the past observations and generate query suggestions that are beyond the past co-occurred queries. This brings significant gains in coverage while yielding modest gains in relevance. Both offline (based on human judges) and online (based on millions of user interactions) evaluations demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms strong baselines.
2348298	AspecTiles: tile-based visualization of diversified web search results A diversified search result for an underspecified query generally contains web pages in which there are answers that are relevant to different aspects of the query. In order to help the user locate such relevant answers, we propose a simple extension to the standard Search Engine Result Page (SERP) interface, called AspecTiles. In addition to presenting a ranked list of URLs with their titles and snippets, AspecTiles visualizes the relevance degree of a document to each aspect by means of colored squares ("tiles"). To compare AspecTiles with the standard SERP interface in terms of usefulness, we conducted a user study involving 30 search tasks designed based on the TREC web diversity task topics as well as 32 participants. Our results show that AspecTiles has some advantages in terms of search performance, user behavior, and user satisfaction. First, AspecTiles enables the user to gather relevant information significantly more efficiently than the standard SERP interface for tasks where the user considers several different aspects of the query to be important at the same time (multi-aspect tasks). Second, AspecTiles affects the user's information seeking behavior: with this interface, we observed significantly fewer query reformulations, shorter queries and deeper examinations of ranked lists in multi-aspect tasks. Third, participants of our user study found AspecTiles significantly more useful for finding relevant information and easy to use than the standard SERP interface. These results suggest that simple interfaces like AspecTiles can enhance the search performance and search experience of the user when their queries are underspecified.
2348296	Diversity by proportionality: an election-based approach to search result diversification This paper presents a different perspective on diversity in search results: diversity by proportionality. We consider a result list most diverse, with respect to some set of topics related to the query, when the number of documents it provides on each topic is proportional to the topic's popularity. Consequently, we propose a framework for optimizing proportionality for search result diversification, which is motivated by the problem of assigning seats to members of competing political parties. Our technique iteratively determines, for each position in the result ranked list, the topic that best maintains the overall proportionality. It then selects the best document on this topic for this position. We demonstrate empirically that our method significantly outperforms the top performing approach in the literature not only on our proposed metric for proportionality, but also on several standard diversity measures. This result indicates that promoting proportionality naturally leads to minimal redundancy, which is a goal of the current diversity approaches.
2348297	Explicit relevance models in intent-oriented information retrieval diversification The intent-oriented search diversification methods developed in the field so far tend to build on generative views of the retrieval system to be diversified. Core algorithm components in particular redundancy assessment are expressed in terms of the probability to observe documents, rather than the probability that the documents be relevant. This has been sometimes described as a view considering the selection of a single document in the underlying task model. In this paper we propose an alternative formulation of aspect-based diversification algorithms which explicitly includes a formal relevance model. We develop means for the effective computation of the new formulation, and we test the resulting algorithm empirically. We report experiments on search and recommendation tasks showing competitive or better performance than the original diversification algorithms. The relevance-based formulation has further interesting properties, such as unifying two well-known state of the art algorithms into a single version. The relevance-based approach opens alternative possibilities for further formal connections and developments as natural extensions of the framework. We illustrate this by modeling tolerance to redundancy as an explicit configurable parameter, which can be set to better suit the characteristics of the IR task, or the evaluation metrics, as we illustrate empirically.
2348294	Boosting multi-kernel locality-sensitive hashing for scalable image retrieval Similarity search is a key challenge for multimedia retrieval applications where data are usually represented in high-dimensional space. Among various algorithms proposed for similarity search in high-dimensional space, Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) is the most popular one, which recently has been extended to Kernelized Locality-Sensitive Hashing (KLSH) by exploiting kernel similarity for better retrieval efficacy. Typically, KLSH works only with a single kernel, which is often limited in real-world multimedia applications, where data may originate from multiple resources or can be represented in several different forms. For example, in content-based multimedia retrieval, a variety of features can be extracted to represent contents of an image. To overcome the limitation of regular KLSH, we propose a novel Boosting Multi-Kernel Locality-Sensitive Hashing (BMKLSH) scheme that significantly boosts the retrieval performance of KLSH by making use of multiple kernels. We conduct extensive experiments for large-scale content-based image retrieval, in which encouraging results show that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art techniques.
2484029	Learning latent friendship propagation networks with interest awareness for link prediction It's well known that the transitivity of friendship is a popular sociological principle in social networks. However, it's still unknown that to what extent people's friend-making behaviors follow this principle and to what extent it can benefit the link prediction task. In this paper, we try to adopt this sociological principle to explain the evolution of networks and study the latent friendship propagation. Unlike traditional link prediction approaches, we model link formation as results of individuals' friend-making behaviors combined with personal interests. We propose the Latent Friendship Propagation Network (LFPN), which depicts the evolution progress of one's egocentric network and reveals future growth potentials driven by the transitivity of friendship based on personal interests. We model individuals' social behaviors using the Latent Friendship Propagation Model (LFPM), a probabilistic generative model from which the LFPN can be learned effectively. To evaluate the power of the friendship propagation in link prediction, we design LFPN-RW which models the friend-making behavior as a random walk upon the LFPN naturally and captures the co-influence effect of the friend circles as well as personal interests to provide more accurate prediction. Experimental results on real-world datasets show that LFPN-RW outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches. This convinces that the transitivity of friendship actually plays important roles in the evolution of social networks.
2484047	Modeling user's receptiveness over time for recommendation Existing recommender systems model user interests and the social influences independently. In reality, user interests may change over time, and as the interests change, new friends may be added while old friends grow apart and the new friendships formed may cause further interests change. This complex interaction requires the joint modeling of user interest and social relationships over time. In this paper, we propose a probabilistic generative model, called Receptiveness over Time Model (RTM), to capture this interaction. We design a Gibbs sampling algorithm to learn the receptiveness and interest distributions among users over time. The results of experiments on a real world dataset demonstrate that RTM-based recommendation outperforms the state-of-the-art recommendation methods. Case studies also show that RTM is able to discover the user interest shift and receptiveness change over time
2484046	The impact of solid state drive on search engine cache management Caching is an important optimization in search engine architectures. Existing caching techniques for search engine optimization are mostly biased towards the reduction of random accesses to disks, because random accesses are known to be much more expensive than sequential accesses in traditional magnetic hard disk drive (HDD). Recently, solid state drive (SSD) has emerged as a new kind of secondary storage medium, and some search engines like Baidu have already used SSD to completely replace HDD in their infrastructure. One notable property of SSD is that its random access latency is comparable to its sequential access latency. Therefore, the use of SSDs to replace HDDs in a search engine infrastructure may void the cache management of existing search engines. In this paper, we carry out a series of empirical experiments to study the impact of SSD on search engine cache management. The results give insights to practitioners and researchers on how to adapt the infrastructure and how to redesign the caching policies for SSD-based search engines.
2484049	How query cost affects search behavior affects how users interact with a search system. Microeconomic theory is used to generate the cost-interaction hypothesis that states as the cost of querying increases, users will pose fewer queries and examine more documents per query. A between-subjects laboratory study with 36 undergraduate subjects was conducted, where subjects were randomly assigned to use one of three search interfaces that varied according to the amount of physical cost required to query: Structured (high cost), Standard (medium cost) and Query Suggestion (low cost). Results show that subjects who used the Structured interface submitted significantly fewer queries, spent more time on search results pages, examined significantly more documents per query, and went to greater depths in the search results list. Results also showed that these subjects spent longer generating their initial queries, saved more relevant documents and rated their queries as more successful. These findings have implications for the usefulness of microeconomic theory as a way to model and explain search interaction, as well as for the design of query facilities.
2484048	Competence-based song recommendation Singing is a popular social activity and a good way of expressing one's feelings. One important reason for unsuccessful singing performance is because the singer fails to choose a suitable song. In this paper, we propose a novel singing competence-based song recommendation framework. It is distinguished from most existing music recommendation systems which rely on the computation of listeners' interests or similarity. We model a singer's vocal competence as singer profile, which takes voice pitch, intensity, and quality into consideration. Then we propose techniques to acquire singer profiles. We also present a song profile model which is used to construct a human annotated song database. Finally, we propose a learning-to-rank scheme for recommending songs by singer profile. The experimental study on real singers demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach and its advantages over two baseline methods. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to study competence-based song recommendation.
2484043	Toward self-correcting search engines: using underperforming queries to improve search Search engines receive queries with a broad range of different search intents. However, they do not perform equally well for all queries. Understanding where search engines perform poorly is critical for improving their performance. In this paper, we present a method for automatically identifying poorly-performing query groups where a search engine may not meet searcher needs. This allows us to create coherent query clusters that help system design-ers generate actionable insights about necessary changes and helps learning-to-rank algorithms better learn relevance signals via spe-cialized rankers. The result is a framework capable of estimating dissatisfaction from Web search logs and learning to improve per-formance for dissatisfied queries. Through experimentation, we show that our method yields good quality groups that align with established retrieval performance metrics. We also show that we can significantly improve retrieval effectiveness via specialized rankers, and that coherent grouping of underperforming queries generated by our method is important in improving each group.
2484042	Ranking document clusters using markov random fields An important challenge in cluster-based document retrieval is ranking document clusters by their relevance to the query. We present a novel cluster ranking approach that utilizes Markov Random Fields (MRFs). MRFs enable the integration of various types of cluster-relevance evidence; e.g., the query-similarity values of the cluster's documents and query-independent measures of the cluster. We use our method to re-rank an initially retrieved document list by ranking clusters that are created from the documents most highly ranked in the list. The resultant retrieval effectiveness is substantially better than that of the initial list for several lists that are produced by effective retrieval methods. Furthermore, our cluster ranking approach significantly outperforms state-of- the-art cluster ranking methods. We also show that our method can be used to improve the performance of (state-of- the-art) results-diversification methods.
2484045	Sumblr: continuous summarization of evolving tweet streams With the explosive growth of microblogging services, short-text messages (also known as tweets) are being created and shared at an unprecedented rate. Tweets in its raw form can be incredibly informative, but also overwhelming. For both end-users and data analysts it is a nightmare to plow through millions of tweets which contain enormous noises and redundancies. In this paper, we study continuous tweet summarization as a solution to address this problem. While traditional document summarization methods focus on static and small-scale data, we aim to deal with dynamic, quickly arriving, and large-scale tweet streams. We propose a novel prototype called Sumblr (SUMmarization By stream cLusteRing) for tweet streams. We first propose an online tweet stream clustering algorithm to cluster tweets and maintain distilled statistics called Tweet Cluster Vectors. Then we develop a TCV-Rank summarization technique for generating online summaries and historical summaries of arbitrary time durations. Finally, we describe a topic evolvement detection method, which consumes online and historical summaries to produce timelines automatically from tweet streams. Our experiments on large-scale real tweets demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of our approach.
2484044	Exploiting hybrid contexts for Tweet segmentation Twitter has attracted hundred millions of users to share and disseminate most up-to-date information. However, the noisy and short nature of tweets makes many applications in information retrieval (IR) and natural language processing (NLP) challenging. Recently, segment-based tweet representation has demonstrated effectiveness in named entity recognition (NER) and event detection from tweet streams. To split tweets into meaningful phrases or segments, the previous work is purely based on external knowledge bases, which ignores the rich local context information embedded in the tweets. In this paper, we propose a novel framework for tweet segmentation in a batch mode, called HybridSeg. HybridSeg incorporates local context knowledge with global knowledge bases for better tweet segmentation. HybridSeg consists of two steps: learning from off-the-shelf weak NERs and learning from pseudo feedback. In the first step, the existing NER tools are applied to a batch of tweets. The named entities recognized by these NERs are then employed to guide the tweet segmentation process. In the second step, HybridSeg adjusts the tweet segmentation results iteratively by exploiting all segments in the batch of tweets in a collective manner. Experiments on two tweet datasets show that HybridSeg significantly improves tweet segmentation quality compared with the state-of-the-art algorithm. We also conduct a case study by using tweet segments for the task of named entity recognition from tweets. The experimental results demonstrate that HybridSeg significantly benefits the downstream applications.
2484040	Learning to name faces: a multimodal learning scheme for search-based face annotation Automated face annotation aims to automatically detect human faces from a photo and further name the faces with the corresponding human names. In this paper, we tackle this open problem by investigating a search-based face annotation (SBFA) paradigm for mining large amounts of web facial images freely available on the WWW. Given a query facial image for annotation, the idea of SBFA is to first search for top-n similar facial images from a web facial image database and then exploit these top-ranked similar facial images and their weak labels for naming the query facial image. To fully mine those information, this paper proposes a novel framework of Learning to Name Faces (L2NF) -- a unified multimodal learning approach for search-based face annotation, which consists of the following major components: (i) we enhance the weak labels of top-ranked similar images by exploiting the "label smoothness" assumption; (ii) we construct the multimodal representations of a facial image by extracting different types of features; (iii) we optimize the distance measure for each type of features using distance metric learning techniques; and finally (iv) we learn the optimal combination of multiple modalities for annotation through a learning to rank scheme. We conduct a set of extensive empirical studies on two real-world facial image databases, in which encouraging results show that the proposed algorithms significantly boost the naming accuracy of search-based face annotation task.
2484041	User model-based metrics for offline query suggestion evaluation Query suggestion or auto-completion mechanisms are widely used by search engines and are increasingly attracting interest from the research community. However, the lack of commonly accepted evaluation methodology and metrics means that it is not possible to compare results and approaches from the literature. Moreover, often the metrics used to evaluate query suggestions tend to be an adaptation from other domains without a proper justification. Hence, it is not necessarily clear if the improvements reported in the literature would result in an actual improvement in the users' experience. Inspired by the cascade user models and state-of-the-art evaluation metrics in the web search domain, we address the query suggestion evaluation, by first studying the users behaviour from a search engine's query log and thereby deriving a new family of user models describing the users interaction with a query suggestion mechanism. Next, assuming a query log-based evaluation approach, we propose two new metrics to evaluate query suggestions, pSaved and eSaved. Both metrics are parameterised by a user model. pSaved is defined as the probability of using the query suggestions while submitting a query. eSaved equates to the expected relative amount of effort (keypresses) a user can avoid due to the deployed query suggestion mechanism. Finally, we experiment with both metrics using four user model instantiations as well as metrics previously used in the literature on a dataset of 6.1M sessions. Our results demonstrate that pSaved and eSaved show the best alignment with the users satisfaction amongst the considered metrics.
2484039	A low rank structural large margin method for cross-modal ranking Cross-modal retrieval is a classic research topic in multimedia information retrieval. The traditional approaches study the problem as a pairwise similarity function problem. In this paper, we consider this problem from a new perspective as a listwise ranking problem and propose a general cross-modal ranking algorithm to optimize the listwise ranking loss with a low rank embedding, which we call Latent Semantic Cross-Modal Ranking (LSCMR). The latent low-rank embedding space is discriminatively learned by structural large margin learning to optimize for certain ranking criteria directly. We evaluate LSCMR on the Wikipedia and NUS-WIDE dataset. Experimental results show that this method obtains significant improvements over the state-of-the-art methods.
2484038	On the measurement of test collection reliability The reliability of a test collection is proportional to the number of queries it contains. But building a collection with many queries is expensive, so researchers have to find a balance between reliability and cost. Previous work on the measurement of test collection reliability relied on data-based approaches that contemplated random what if scenarios, and provided indicators such as swap rates and Kendall tau correlations. Generalizability Theory was proposed as an alternative founded on analysis of variance that provides reliability indicators based on statistical theory. However, these reliability indicators are hard to interpret in practice, because they do not correspond to well known indicators like Kendall tau correlation. We empirically established these relationships based on data from over 40 TREC collections, thus filling the gap in the practical interpretation of Generalizability Theory. We also review the computation of these indicators, and show that they are extremely dependent on the sample of systems and queries used, so much that the required number of queries to achieve a certain level of reliability can vary in orders of magnitude. We discuss the computation of confidence intervals for these statistics, providing a much more reliable tool to measure test collection reliability. Reflecting upon all these results, we review a wealth of TREC test collections, arguing that they are possibly not as reliable as generally accepted and that the common choice of 50 queries is insufficient even for stable rankings.
2484037	Semantic hashing using tags and topic modeling It is an important research problem to design efficient and effective solutions for large scale similarity search. One popular strategy is to represent data examples as compact binary codes through semantic hashing, which has produced promising results with fast search speed and low storage cost. Many existing semantic hashing methods generate binary codes for documents by modeling document relationships based on similarity in a keyword feature space. Two major limitations in existing methods are: (1) Tag information is often associated with documents in many real world applications, but has not been fully exploited yet; (2) The similarity in keyword feature space does not fully reflect semantic relationships that go beyond keyword matching. This paper proposes a novel hashing approach, Semantic Hashing using Tags and Topic Modeling (SHTTM), to incorporate both the tag information and the similarity information from probabilistic topic modeling. In particular, a unified framework is designed for ensuring hashing codes to be consistent with tag information by a formal latent factor model and preserving the document topic/semantic similarity that goes beyond keyword matching. An iterative coordinate descent procedure is proposed for learning the optimal hashing codes. An extensive set of empirical studies on four different datasets has been conducted to demonstrate the advantages of the proposed SHTTM approach against several other state-of-the-art semantic hashing techniques. Furthermore, experimental results indicate that the modeling of tag information and utilizing topic modeling are beneficial for improving the effectiveness of hashing separately, while the combination of these two techniques in the unified framework obtains even better results.
2484036	Incorporating vertical results into search click models In modern search engines, an increasing number of search result pages (SERPs) are federated from multiple specialized search engines (called verticals, such as Image or Video). As an effective approach to interpret users' click-through behavior as feedback information, most click models were designed to reduce the position bias and improve ranking performance of ordinary search results, which have homogeneous appearances. However, when vertical results are combined with ordinary ones, significant differences in presentation may lead to user behavior biases and thus failure of state-of-the-art click models. With the help of a popular commercial search engine in China, we collected a large scale log data set which contains behavior information on both vertical and ordinary results. We also performed eye-tracking analysis to study user's real-world examining behavior. According these analysis, we found that different result appearances may cause different behavior biases both for vertical results (local effect) and for the whole result lists (global effect). These biases include: examine bias for vertical results (especially those with multimedia components), trust bias for result lists with vertical results, and a higher probability of result revisitation for vertical results. Based on these findings, a novel click model considering these biases besides position bias was constructed to describe interaction with SERPs containing verticals. Experimental results show that the new Vertical-aware Click Model (VCM) is better at interpreting user click behavior on federated searches in terms of both log-likelihood and perplexity than existing models.
2484035	Addressing cold-start in app recommendation: latent user models constructed from twitter followers As a tremendous number of mobile applications (apps) are readily available, users have difficulty in identifying apps that are relevant to their interests. Recommender systems that depend on previous user ratings (i.e., collaborative filtering, or CF) can address this problem for apps that have sufficient ratings from past users. But for apps that are newly released, CF does not have any user ratings to base recommendations on, which leads to the cold-start problem. In this paper, we describe a method that accounts for nascent information culled from Twitter to provide relevant recommendation in such cold-start situations. We use Twitter handles to access an app's Twitter account and extract the IDs of their Twitter-followers. We create pseudo-documents that contain the IDs of Twitter users interested in an app and then apply latent Dirichlet allocation to generate latent groups. At test time, a target user seeking recommendations is mapped to these latent groups. By using the transitive relationship of latent groups to apps, we estimate the probability of the user liking the app. We show that by incorporating information from Twitter, our approach overcomes the difficulty of cold-start app recommendation and significantly outperforms other state-of-the-art recommendation techniques by up to 33%.
2484034	Deciding on an adjustment for multiplicity in IR experiments We evaluate statistical inference procedures for small-scale IR experiments that involve multiple comparisons against the baseline. These procedures adjust for multiple comparisons by ensuring that the probability of observing at least one false positive in the experiment is below a given threshold. We use only publicly available test collections and make our software available for download. In particular, we employ the TREC runs and runs constructed from the Microsoft learning-to-rank (MSLR) data set. Our focus is on non-parametric statistical procedures that include the Holm-Bonferroni adjustment of the permutation test p-values, the MaxT permutation test, and the permutation-based closed testing. In TREC-based simulations, these procedures retain from 66% to 92% of individually significant results (i.e., those obtained without taking other comparisons into account). Similar retention rates are observed in the MSLR simulations. For the largest evaluated query set size (i.e., 6400), procedures that adjust for multiplicity find at most 5% fewer true differences compared to unadjusted tests. At the same time, unadjusted tests produce many more false positives.
2484033	Taily: shard selection using the tail of score distributions Search engines can improve their efficiency by selecting only few promising shards for each query. State-of-the-art shard selection algorithms first query a central index of sampled documents, and their effectiveness is similar to searching all shards. However, the search in the central index also hurts efficiency. Additionally, we show that the effectiveness of these approaches varies substantially with the sampled documents. This paper proposes Taily, a novel shard selection algorithm that models a query's score distribution in each shard as a Gamma distribution and selects shards with highly scored documents in the tail of the distribution. Taily estimates the parameters of score distributions based on the mean and variance of the score function's features in the collections and shards. Because Taily operates on term statistics instead of document samples, it is efficient and has deterministic effectiveness. Experiments on large web collections (Gov2, CluewebA and CluewebB) show that Taily achieves similar effectiveness to sample-based approaches, and improves upon their efficiency by roughly 20% in terms of used resources and response time.
2484032	Topic hierarchy construction for the organization of multi-source user generated contents User generated contents (UGCs) carry a huge amount of high quality information. However, the information overload and diversity of UGC sources limit their potential uses. In this research, we propose a framework to organize information from multiple UGC sources by a topic hierarchy which is automatically generated and updated using the UGCs. We explore the unique characteristics of UGCs like blogs, cQAs, microblogs, etc., and introduce a novel scheme to combine them. We also propose a graph-based method to enable incremental update of the generated topic hierarchy. Using the hierarchy, users can easily obtain a comprehensive, in-depth and up-to-date picture of their topics of interests. The experiment results demonstrate how information from multiple heterogeneous sources improves the resultant topic hierarchies. It also shows that the proposed method achieves better F1 scores in hierarchy generation as compared to the state-of-the-art methods.
2484031	Summaries, ranked retrieval and sessions: a unified framework for information access evaluation We introduce a general information access evaluation framework that can potentially handle summaries, ranked document lists and even multi query sessions seamlessly. Our framework first builds a trailtext which represents a concatenation of all the texts read by the user during a search session, and then computes an evaluation metric called U-measure over the trailtext. Instead of discounting the value of a retrieved piece of information based on ranks, U-measure discounts it based on its position within the trailtext. U-measure takes the document length into account just like Time-Biased Gain (TBG), and has the diminishing return property. It is therefore more realistic than rank-based metrics. Furthermore, it is arguably more flexible than TBG, as it is free from the linear traversal assumption (i.e., that the user scans the ranked list from top to bottom), and can handle information access tasks other than ad hoc retrieval. This paper demonstrates the validity and versatility of the U-measure framework. Our main conclusions are: (a) For ad hoc retrieval, U-measure is at least as reliable as TBG in terms of rank correlations with traditional metrics and discriminative power; (b) For diversified search, our diversity versions of U-measure are highly correlated with state-of-the-art diversity metrics; (c) For multi-query sessions, U-measure is highly correlated with Session nDCG; and (d) Unlike rank-based metrics such as DCG, U-measure can quantify the differences between linear and nonlinear traversals in sessions. We argue that our new framework is useful for understanding the user's search behaviour and for comparison across different information access styles (e.g. examining a direct answer vs. examining a ranked list of web pages).
2484030	Time-aware point-of-interest recommendation The availability of user check-in data in large volume from the rapid growing location based social networks (LBSNs) enables many important location-aware services to users. Point-of-interest (POI) recommendation is one of such services, which is to recommend places where users have not visited before. Several techniques have been recently proposed for the recommendation service. However, no existing work has considered the temporal information for POI recommendations in LBSNs. We believe that time plays an important role in POI recommendations because most users tend to visit different places at different time in a day, eg visiting a restaurant at noon and visiting a bar at night. In this paper, we define a new problem, namely, the time-aware POI recommendation, to recommend POIs for a given user at a specified time in a day. To solve the problem, we develop a collaborative recommendation model that is able to incorporate temporal information. Moreover, based on the observation that users tend to visit nearby POIs, we further enhance the recommendation model by considering geographical information. Our experimental results on two real-world datasets show that the proposed approach outperforms the state-of-the-art POI recommendation methods substantially.
2484065	Faster upper bounding of intersection sizes There is a long history of developing efficient algorithms for set intersection, which is a fundamental operation in information retrieval and databases. In this paper, we describe a new data structure, a Cardinality Filter, to quickly compute an upper bound on the size of a set intersection. Knowing an upper bound of the size can be used to accelerate many applications such as top-k query processing in text mining. Given finite sets A and B, the expected computation time for the upper bound of the size of the intersection |A cap B| is O( (|A| + |B|) w), where w is the machine word length. This is much faster than the current best algorithm for the exact intersection, which runs in O((|A| + |B|) / &#8730;w + |A cap B|) expected time. Our performance studies show that our implementations of Cardinality Filters are from 2 to 10 times faster than existing set intersection algorithms, and the time for a top-k query in a text mining application can be reduced by half.
2484064	A location-based news article recommendation with explicit localized semantic analysis The interest of users in handheld devices is strongly related to their location. Therefore, the user location is important, as a user context, for news article recommendation in a mobile environment. This paper proposes a novel news article recommendation that reflects the geographical context of the user. For this purpose, we propose the Explicit Localized Semantic Analysis (ELSA), an ESA-based topical representation of documents. Every location has its own geographical topics, which can be captured from the geo-tagged documents related to the location. Thus, not only news articles but locations are also represented as topic vectors. The main advantage of ELSA is that it stresses only the topics that are relevant to a given location, whereas all topics are equally important in ESA. As a result, geographical topics have different importance according to the user location in ELSA, even if they come from the same article. Another advantage of ELSA is that it allows a simple comparison of the user location and news articles, because it projects both locations and articles onto an identical space composed of Wikipedia topics. In the evaluation of ELSA with the New York Times corpus, it outperformed two simple baselines of Bag-Of-Words and LDA as well as two ESA-based methods. Rt10 of ELSA was improved up to 46.25% over other methods, and its NDCG@k was always higher than those of the others regardless of k.
2484067	Opportunity model for e-commerce recommendation: right product; right time Most of existing e-commerce recommender systems aim to recommend the right product to a user, based on whether the user is likely to purchase or like a product. On the other hand, the effectiveness of recommendations also depends on the time of the recommendation. Let us take a user who just purchased a laptop as an example. She may purchase a replacement battery in 2 years (assuming that the laptop's original battery often fails to work around that time) and purchase a new laptop in another 2 years. In this case, it is not a good idea to recommend a new laptop or a replacement battery right after the user purchased the new laptop. It could hurt the user's satisfaction of the recommender system if she receives a potentially right product recommendation at the wrong time. We argue that a system should not only recommend the most relevant item, but also recommend at the right time. This paper studies the new problem: how to recommend the right product at the right time? We adapt the proportional hazards modeling approach in survival analysis to the recommendation research field and propose a new opportunity model to explicitly incorporate time in an e-commerce recommender system. The new model estimates the joint probability of a user making a follow-up purchase of a particular product at a particular time. This joint purchase probability can be leveraged by recommender systems in various scenarios, including the zero-query pull-based recommendation scenario (e.g. recommendation on an e-commerce web site) and a proactive push-based promotion scenario (e.g. email or text message based marketing). We evaluate the opportunity modeling approach with multiple metrics. Experimental results on a data collected by a real-world e-commerce website(shop.com) show that it can predict a user's follow-up purchase behavior at a particular time with descent accuracy. In addition, the opportunity model significantly improves the conversion rate in pull-based systems and the user satisfaction/utility in push-based systems.
2484066	Copulas for information retrieval In many domains of information retrieval, system estimates of document relevance are based on multidimensional quality criteria that have to be accommodated in a unidimensional result ranking. Current solutions to this challenge are often inconsistent with the formal probabilistic framework in which constituent scores were estimated, or use sophisticated learning methods that make it difficult for humans to understand the origin of the final ranking. To address these issues, we introduce the use of copulas, a powerful statistical framework for modeling complex multi-dimensional dependencies, to information retrieval tasks. We provide a formal background to copulas and demonstrate their effectiveness on standard IR tasks such as combining multidimensional relevance estimates and fusion of results from multiple search engines. We introduce copula-based versions of standard relevance estimators and fusion methods and show that these lead to significant performance improvements on several tasks, as evaluated on large-scale standard corpora, compared to their non-copula counterparts. We also investigate criteria for understanding the likely effect of using copula models in a given retrieval scenario.
2484069	Task-aware query recommendation When generating query recommendations for a user, a natural approach is to try and leverage not only the user's most recently submitted query, or reference query, but also information about the current search context, such as the user's recent search interactions. We focus on two important classes of queries that make up search contexts: those that address the same information need as the reference query (on-task queries), and those that do not (off-task queries). We analyze the effects on query recommendation performance of using contexts consisting of only on-task queries, only off-task queries, and a mix of the two. Using TREC Session Track data for simulations, we demonstrate that on-task context is helpful on average but can be easily overwhelmed when off-task queries are interleaved---a common situation according to several analyses of commercial search logs. To minimize the impact of off-task queries on recommendation performance, we consider automatic methods of identifying such queries using a state of the art search task identification technique. Our experimental results show that automatic search task identification can eliminate the effect of off-task queries in a mixed context. We also introduce a novel generalized model for generating recommendations over a search context. While we only consider query text in this study, the model can handle integration over arbitrary user search behavior, such as page visits, dwell times, and query abandonment. In addition, it can be used for other types of recommendation, including personalized web search.
2484068	Personalized ranking model adaptation for web search Search engines train and apply a single ranking model across all users, but searchers' information needs are diverse and cover a broad range of topics. Hence, a single user-independent ranking model is insufficient to satisfy different users' result preferences. Conventional personalization methods learn separate models of user interests and use those to re-rank the results from the generic model. Those methods require significant user history information to learn user preferences, have low coverage in the case of memory-based methods that learn direct associations between query-URL pairs, and have limited opportunity to markedly affect the ranking given that they only re-order top-ranked items. In this paper, we propose a general ranking model adaptation framework for personalized search. Using a given user-independent ranking model trained offline and limited number of adaptation queries from individual users, the framework quickly learns to apply a series of linear transformations, e.g., scaling and shifting, over the parameters of the given global ranking model such that the adapted model can better fit each individual user's search preferences. Extensive experimentation based on a large set of search logs from a major commercial Web search engine confirms the effectiveness of the proposed method compared to several state-of-the-art ranking model adaptation methods.
2484060	Sentiment diversification with different biases Prior search result diversification work focuses on achieving topical variety in a ranked list, typically equally across all aspects. In this paper, we diversify with sentiments according to an explicit bias. We want to allow users to switch the result perspective to better grasp the polarity of opinionated content, such as during a literature review. For this, we first infer the prior sentiment bias inherent in a controversial topic -- the 'Topic Sentiment'. Then, we utilize this information in 3 different ways to diversify results according to various sentiment biases: (1) Equal diversification to achieve a balanced and unbiased representation of all sentiments on the topic; (2) Diversification towards the Topic Sentiment, in which the actual sentiment bias in the topic is mirrored to emphasize the general perception of the topic; (3) Diversification against the Topic Sentiment, in which documents about the 'minority' or outlying sentiment(s) are boosted and those with the popular sentiment are demoted. Since sentiment classification is an essential tool for this task, we experiment by gradually degrading the accuracy of a perfect classifier down to 40%, and show which diversification approaches prove most stable in this setting. The results reveal that the proportionality-based methods and our SCSF model, considering sentiment strength and frequency in the diversified list, yield the highest gains. Further, in case the Topic Sentiment cannot be reliably estimated, we show how performance is affected by equal diversification when actually an emphasis either towards or against the Topic Sentiment is desired: in the former case, an average of 6.48% is lost across all evaluation measures, whereas in the latter case this is 16.23%, confirming that bias-specific sentiment diversification is crucial.
2484061	An information-theoretic account of static index pruning In this paper, we recast static index pruning as a model induction problem under the framework of Kullback's principle of minimum cross-entropy. We show that static index pruning has an approximate analytical solution in the form of convex integer program. Further analysis on computation feasibility suggests that one of its surrogate model can be solved efficiently. This result has led to the rediscovery of emph{uniform pruning}, a simple yet powerful pruning method proposed in 2001 and later easily ignored by many of us. To empirically verify this result, we conducted experiments under a new design in which prune ratio is strictly controlled. Our result on standard ad-hoc retrieval benchmarks has confirmed that uniform pruning is robust to high prune ratio and its performance is currently state of the art.
2484062	An unsupervised topic segmentation model incorporating word order We present a new unsupervised topic discovery model for a collection of text documents. In contrast to the majority of the state-of-the-art topic models, our model does not break the document's structure such as paragraphs and sentences. In addition, it preserves word order in the document. As a result, it can generate two levels of topics of different granularity, namely, segment-topics and word-topics. In addition, it can generate n-gram words in each topic. We also develop an approximate inference scheme using Gibbs sampling method. We conduct extensive experiments using publicly available data from different collections and show that our model improves the quality of several text mining tasks such as the ability to support fine grained topics with n-gram words in the correlation graph, the ability to segment a document into topically coherent sections, document classification, and document likelihood estimation.
2484063	Pseudo test collections for training and tuning microblog rankers Recent years have witnessed a persistent interest in generating pseudo test collections, both for training and evaluation purposes. We describe a method for generating queries and relevance judgments for microblog search in an unsupervised way. Our starting point is this intuition: tweets with a hashtag are relevant to the topic covered by the hashtag and hence to a suitable query derived from the hashtag. Our baseline method selects all commonly used hashtags, and all associated tweets as relevance judgments; we then generate a query from these tweets. Next, we generate a timestamp for each query, allowing us to use temporal information in the training process. We then enrich the generation process with knowledge derived from an editorial test collection for microblog search. We use our pseudo test collections in two ways. First, we tune parameters of a variety of well known retrieval methods on them. Correlations with parameter sweeps on an editorial test collection are high on average, with a large variance over retrieval algorithms. Second, we use the pseudo test collections as training sets in a learning to rank scenario. Performance close to training on an editorial test collection is achieved in many cases. Our results demonstrate the utility of tuning and training microblog search algorithms on automatically generated training material.
2484056	Leveraging conceptual lexicon: query disambiguation using proximity information for patent retrieval Patent prior art search is a task in patent retrieval where the goal is to rank documents which describe prior art work related to a patent application. One of the main properties of patent retrieval is that the query topic is a full patent application and does not represent a focused information need. This query by document nature of patent retrieval introduces new challenges and requires new investigations specific to this problem. Researchers have addressed this problem by considering different information resources for query reduction and query disambiguation. However, previous work has not fully studied the effect of using proximity information and exploiting domain specific resources for performing query disambiguation. In this paper, we first reduce the query document by taking the first claim of the document itself. We then build a query-specific patent lexicon based on definitions of the International Patent Classification (IPC). We study how to expand queries by selecting expansion terms from the lexicon that are focused on the query topic. The key problem is how to capture whether an expansion term is focused on the query topic or not. We address this problem by exploiting proximity information. We assign high weights to expansion terms appearing closer to query terms based on the intuition that terms closer to query terms are more likely to be related to the query topic. Experimental results on two patent retrieval datasets show that the proposed method is effective and robust for query expansion, significantly outperforming the standard pseudo relevance feedback (PRF) and existing baselines in patent retrieval.
2484055	Utilizing query change for session search Session search is the Information Retrieval (IR) task that performs document retrieval for a search session. During a session, a user constantly modifies queries in order to find relevant documents that fulfill the information need. This paper proposes a novel query change retrieval model (QCM), which utilizes syntactic editing changes between adjacent queries as well as the relationship between query change and previously retrieved documents to enhance session search. We propose to model session search as a Markov Decision Process (MDP). We consider two agents in this MDP: the user agent and the search engine agent. The user agent's actions are query changes that we observe and the search agent's actions are proposed in this paper. Experiments show that our approach is highly effective and outperforms top session search systems in TREC 2011 and 2012.
2484054	Query representation for cross-temporal information retrieval This paper addresses the problem of long-term language change in information retrieval (IR) systems. IR research has often ignored lexical drift. But in the emerging domain of massive digitized book collections, the risk of vocabulary mismatch due to language change is high. Collections such as Google Books and the Hathi Trust contain text written in the vernaculars of many centuries. With respect to IR, changes in vocabulary and orthography make 14th-Century English qualitatively different from 21st-Century English. This challenges retrieval models that rely on keyword matching. With this challenge in mind, we ask: given a query written in contemporary English, how can we retrieve relevant documents that were written in early English? We argue that search in historically diverse corpora is similar to cross-language retrieval (CLIR). By considering "modern" English and "archaic" English as distinct languages, CLIR techniques can improve what we call cross-temporal IR (CTIR). We focus on ways to combine evidence to improve CTIR effectiveness, proposing and testing several ways to handle language change during book search. We find that a principled combination of three sources of evidence during relevance feedback yields strong CTIR performance.
2484053	Beliefs and biases in web search People's beliefs, and unconscious biases that arise from those beliefs, influence their judgment, decision making, and actions, as is commonly accepted among psychologists. Biases can be observed in information retrieval in situations where searchers seek or are presented with information that significantly deviates from the truth. There is little understanding of the impact of such biases in search. In this paper we study search-related biases via multiple probes: an exploratory retrospective survey, human labeling of the captions and results returned by a Web search engine, and a large-scale log analysis of search behavior on that engine. Targeting yes-no questions in the critical domain of health search, we show that Web searchers exhibit their own biases and are also subject to bias from the search engine. We clearly observe searchers favoring positive information over negative and more than expected given base rates based on consensus answers from physicians. We also show that search engines strongly favor a particular, usually positive, perspective, irrespective of the truth. Importantly, we show that these biases can be counterproductive and affect search outcomes; in our study, around half of the answers that searchers settled on were actually incorrect. Our findings have implications for search engine design, including the development of ranking algorithms that con-sider the desire to satisfy searchers (by validating their beliefs) and providing accurate answers and properly considering base rates. Incorporating likelihood information into search is particularly important for consequential tasks, such as those with a medical focus.
2484059	An experimental study on implicit social recommendation Social recommendation problems have drawn a lot of attention recently due to the prevalence of social networking sites. The experiments in previous literature suggest that social information is very effective in improving traditional recommendation algorithms. However, explicit social information is not always available in most of the recommender systems, which limits the impact of social recommendation techniques. In this paper, we study the following two research problems: (1) In some systems without explicit social information, can we still improve recommender systems using implicit social information? (2) In the systems with explicit social information, can the performance of using implicit social information outperform that of using explicit social information? In order to answer these two questions, we conduct comprehensive experimental analysis on three recommendation datasets. The result indicates that: (1) Implicit user and item social information, including similar and dissimilar relationships, can be employed to improve traditional recommendation methods. (2) When comparing implicit social information with explicit social information, the performance of using implicit information is slightly worse. This study provides additional insights to social recommendation techniques, and also greatly widens the utility and spreads the impact of previous and upcoming social recommendation approaches.
2484058	Query expansion using path-constrained random walks This paper exploits Web search logs for query expansion (QE) by presenting a new QE method based on path-constrained random walks (PCRW), where the search logs are represented as a labeled, directed graph, and the probability of picking an expansion term for an input query is computed by a learned combination of constrained random walks on the graph. The method is shown to be generic in that it covers most of the popular QE models as special cases and flexible in that it provides a principled mathematical framework in which a wide variety of information useful for QE can be incorporated in a unified way. Evaluation is performed on the Web document ranking task using a real-world data set. Results show that the PCRW-based method is very effective for the expansion of rare queries, i.e., low-frequency queries that are unseen in search logs, and that it outperforms significantly other state-of-the-art QE meth-ods.
2484057	Emerging topic detection for organizations from microblogs Microblog services have emerged as an essential way to strengthen the communications among individuals and organizations. These services promote timely and active discussions and comments towards products, markets as well as public events, and have attracted a lot of attentions from organizations. In particular, emerging topics are of immediate concerns to organizations since they signal current concerns of, and feedback by their users. Two challenges must be tackled for effective emerging topic detection. One is the problem of real-time relevant data collection and the other is the ability to model the emerging characteristics of detected topics and identify them before they become hot topics. To tackle these challenges, we first design a novel scheme to crawl the relevant messages related to the designated organization by monitoring multi-aspects of microblog content, including users, the evolving keywords and their temporal sequence. We then develop an incremental clustering framework to detect new topics, and employ a range of content and temporal features to help in promptly detecting hot emerging topics. Extensive evaluations on a representative real-world dataset based on Twitter data demonstrate that our scheme is able to characterize emerging topics well and detect them before they become hot topics.
2484051	An incremental approach to efficient pseudo-relevance feedback Pseudo-relevance feedback is an important strategy to improve search accuracy. It is often implemented as a two-round retrieval process: the first round is to retrieve an initial set of documents relevant to an original query, and the second round is to retrieve final retrieval results using the original query expanded with terms selected from the previously retrieved documents. This two-round retrieval process is clearly time consuming, which could arguably be one of main reasons that hinder the wide adaptation of the pseudo-relevance feedback methods in real-world IR systems. In this paper, we study how to improve the efficiency of pseudo-relevance feedback methods. The basic idea is to reduce the time needed for the second round of retrieval by leveraging the query processing results of the first round. Specifically, instead of processing the expand query as a newly submitted query, we propose an incremental approach, which resumes the query processing results (i.e. document accumulators) for the first round of retrieval and process the second round of retrieval mainly as a step of adjusting the scores in the accumulators. Experimental results on TREC Terabyte collections show that the proposed incremental approach can improve the efficiency of pseudo-relevance feedback methods by a factor of two without sacrificing their effectiveness.
2484052	Personalized time-aware tweets summarization We focus on the problem of selecting meaningful tweets given a user's interests; the dynamic nature of user interests, the sheer volume, and the sparseness of individual messages make this an challenging problem. Specifically, we consider the task of time-aware tweets summarization, based on a user's history and collaborative social influences from ``social circles.'' We propose a time-aware user behavior model, the Tweet Propagation Model (TPM), in which we infer dynamic probabilistic distributions over interests and topics. We then explicitly consider novelty, coverage, and diversity to arrive at an iterative optimization algorithm for selecting tweets. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of our personalized time-aware tweets summarization method based on TPM.
2484050	Aggregated search interface preferences in multi-session search tasks Aggregated search interfaces provide users with an overview of results from various sources. Two general types of display exist: tabbed, with access to each source in a separate tab, and blended, which combines multiple sources into a single result page. Multi-session search tasks, e.g., a research project, consist of multiple stages, each with its own sub-tasks. Several factors involved in multi-session search tasks have been found to influence user search behavior. We investigate whether user preference for source presentation changes during a multi-session search task. The dynamic nature of multi-session search tasks makes the design of a controlled experiment a non-trivial challenge. We adopt a methodology based on triangulation and conduct two types of observational study: a longitudinal study and a laboratory study. In the longitudinal study we follow the use of tabbed and blended displays by 25 students during a project. We find that while a tabbed display is used more than a blended display, subjects repeatedly switch between displays during the project. Use of the tabbed display is motivated by a need to zoom in on a specific source, while the blended display is used to explore available material across sources whenever the information need changes. In a laboratory study 44 students completed a multi-session search task composed of three sub-tasks, the first with a tabbed display, the second and third with blended displays. The tasks were manipulated by either providing three task about the same topic or about three different topics. We find that a stable information need over multiple sub-tasks negatively influences perceived usability of the blended displays, while we do not find an influence when the information need changes.
2484086	Incorporating popularity in topic models for social network analysis Topic models are used to group words in a text dataset into a set of relevant topics. Unfortunately, when a few words frequently appear in a dataset, the topic groups identified by topic models become noisy because these frequent words repeatedly appear in "irrelevant" topic groups. This noise has not been a serious problem in a text dataset because the frequent words (e.g., the and is) do not have much meaning and have been simply removed before a topic model analysis. However, in a social network dataset we are interested in, they correspond to popular persons (e.g., Barack Obama and Justin Bieber) and cannot be simply removed because most people are interested in them. To solve this "popularity problem", we explicitly model the popularity of nodes (words) in topic models. For this purpose, we first introduce a notion of a "popularity component" and propose topic model extensions that effectively accommodate the popularity component. We evaluate the effectiveness of our models with a real-world Twitter dataset. Our proposed models achieve significantly lower perplexity (i.e., better prediction power) compared to the state-of-the-art baselines. In addition to the popularity problem caused by the nodes with high incoming edge degree, we also investigate the effect of the outgoing edge degree with another topic model extensions. We show that considering outgoing edge degree does not help much in achieving lower perplexity.
2484087	A candidate filtering mechanism for fast top-k query processing on modern cpus A large amount of research has focused on faster methods for finding top-k results in large document collections, one of the main scalability challenges for web search engines. In this paper, we propose a method for accelerating such top-k queries that builds on and generalizes methods recently proposed by several groups of researchers based on Block-Max Indexes. In particular, we describe a system that uses a new filtering mechanism, based on a combination of block maxima and bitmaps, that radically reduces the number of documents that have to be further evaluated. Our filtering mechanism exploits the SIMD processing capabilities of current microprocessors, and it is optimized through caching policies that select and store suitable filter structures based on properties of the query load. Our experimental evaluation shows that the mechanism results in very significant speed-ups for disjunctive top-k queries under several state-of-the-art algorithms, including a speed-up of more than a factor of 2 over the fastest previously known methods.
2484088	Faster and smaller inverted indices with treaps We introduce a new representation of the inverted index that performs faster ranked unions and intersections while using less space. Our index is based on the treap data structure, which allows us to intersect/merge the document identifiers while simultaneously thresholding by frequency, instead of the costlier two-step classical processing methods. To achieve compression we represent the treap topology using compact data structures. Further, the treap invariants allow us to elegantly encode differentially both document identifiers and frequencies. Results show that our index uses about 20% less space, and performs queries up to three times faster, than state-of-the-art compact representations.
2484089	Toward whole-session relevance: exploring intrinsic diversity in web search Current research on web search has focused on optimizing and evaluating single queries. However, a significant fraction of user queries are part of more complex tasks [20] which span multiple queries across one or more search sessions [26,24]. An ideal search engine would not only retrieve relevant results for a user's particular query but also be able to identify when the user is engaged in a more complex task and aid the user in completing that task [29,1]. Toward optimizing whole-session or task relevance, we characterize and address the problem of intrinsic diversity (ID) in retrieval [30], a type of complex task that requires multiple interactions with current search engines. Unlike existing work on extrinsic diversity [30] that deals with ambiguity in intent across multiple users, ID queries often have little ambiguity in intent but seek content covering a variety of aspects on a shared theme. In such scenarios, the underlying needs are typically exploratory, comparative, or breadth-oriented in nature. We identify and address three key problems for ID retrieval: identifying authentic examples of ID tasks from post-hoc analysis of behavioral signals in search logs; learning to identify initiator queries that mark the start of an ID search task; and given an initiator query, predicting which content to prefetch and rank.
2484083	Retrieving documents with mathematical content Many documents with mathematical content are published on the Web, but conventional search engines that rely on keyword search only cannot fully exploit their mathematical information. In particular, keyword search is insufficient when expressions in a document are not annotated with natural keywords or the user cannot describe her query with keywords. Retrieving documents by querying their mathematical content directly is very appealing in various domains such as education, digital libraries, engineering, patent documents, medical sciences, etc. Capturing the relevance of mathematical expressions also greatly enhances document classification in such domains. Unlike text retrieval, where keywords carry enough semantics to distinguish text documents and rank them, math symbols do not contain much semantic information on their own. In fact, mathematical expressions typically consist of few alphabetical symbols organized in rather complex structures. Hence, the structure of an expression, which describes the way such symbols are combined, should also be considered. Unfortunately, there is no standard testbed with which to evaluate the effectiveness of a mathematics retrieval algorithm. In this paper we study the fundamental and challenging problems in mathematics retrieval, that is how to capture the relevance of mathematical expressions, how to query them, and how to evaluate the results. We describe various search paradigms and propose retrieval systems accordingly. We discuss the benefits and drawbacks of each approach, and further compare them through an extensive empirical study.
2484082	Modeling click-through based word-pairs for web search Statistical translation models and latent semantic analysis (LSA) are two effective approaches to exploiting click-through data for Web search ranking. While the former learns semantic relationships between query terms and document terms directly, the latter maps a document and the queries for which it has been clicked to vectors in a lower dimensional semantic space. This paper presents two document ranking models that combine the strengths of both the approaches by explicitly modeling word-pairs. The first model, called PairModel, is a monolingual ranking model based on word-pairs derived from click-through data. It maps queries and documents into a concept space spanned by these word-pairs. The second model, called Bilingual Paired Topic Model (BPTM), uses bilingual word translations and can jointly model query-document collections written in multiple languages. This model uses topics to capture term dependencies and maps queries and documents in multiple languages into a lower dimensional semantic sub-space spanned by the topics. These models are evaluated on the Web search task using real world data sets in three different languages. Results show that they consistently outperform various state-of-the-art baseline models, and the best result is obtained by interpolating PairModel and BPTM.
2484085	Fast document-at-a-time query processing using two-tier indexes In this paper we present two new algorithms designed to reduce the overall time required to process top-k queries. These algorithms are based on the document-at-a-time approach and modify the best baseline we found in the literature, Blockmax WAND (BMW), to take advantage of a two-tiered index, in which the first tier is a small index containing only the higher impact entries of each inverted list. This small index is used to pre-process the query before accessing a larger index in the second tier, resulting in considerable speeding up the whole process. The first algorithm we propose, named BMW-CS, achieves higher performance, but may result in small changes in the top results provided in the final ranking. The second algorithm, named BMW-t, preserves the top results and, while slower than BMW-CS, it is faster than BMW. In our experiments, BMW-CS was more than 40 times faster than BMW when computing top 10 results, and, while it does not guarantee preserving the top results, it preserved all ranking results evaluated at this level.
2484084	Looking ahead: query preview in exploratory search Exploratory search is a complex, iterative information seeking activity that involves running multiple queries and finding and examining many documents. We designed a query preview control that visualizes the distribution of newly-retrieved and re-retrieved documents prior to running the query. When evaluating the preview control with a control condition, we found effects on both people's information seeking behavior and improved retrieval performance. People spent more time formulating a query and were more likely to explore search results more deeply, retrieved a more diverse set of documents, and found more different relevant documents when using the preview.
2484081	A general evaluation measure for document organization tasks A number of key Information Access tasks -- Document Retrieval, Clustering, Filtering, and their combinations -- can be seen as instances of a generic {em document organization} problem that establishes priority and relatedness relationships between documents (in other words, a problem of forming and ranking clusters). As far as we know, no analysis has been made yet on the evaluation of these tasks from a global perspective. In this paper we propose two complementary evaluation measures -- Reliability and Sensitivity -- for the generic Document Organization task which are derived from a proposed set of formal constraints (properties that any suitable measure must satisfy). In addition to be the first measures that can be applied to any mixture of ranking, clustering and filtering tasks, Reliability and Sensitivity satisfy more formal constraints than previously existing evaluation metrics for each of the subsumed tasks. Besides their formal properties, its most salient feature from an empirical point of view is their strictness: a high score according to the harmonic mean of Reliability and Sensitivity ensures a high score with any of the most popular evaluation metrics in all the Document Retrieval, Clustering and Filtering datasets used in our experiments.
2484080	News vertical search: when and what to display to users News reporting has seen a shift toward fast-paced online reporting in new sources such as social media. Web Search engines that support a news vertical have historically relied upon articles published by major newswire providers when serving news-related queries. In this paper, we investigate to what extent real-time content from newswire, blogs, Twitter and Wikipedia sources are useful to return to the user in the current fast-paced news search setting. In particular, we perform a detailed user study using the emerging medium of crowdsourcing to determine when and where integrating news-related content from these various sources can better serve the user's news need. We sampled approximately 300 news-related search queries using Google Trends and Bitly data in real-time for two time periods. For these queries, we have crowdsourced workers compare Web search rankings for each, with similar rankings integrating real-time news content from sources such as Twitter or the blogosphere. Our results show that users exhibited a preference for rankings integrating newswire articles for only half of our queries, indicating that relying solely on newswire providers for news-related content is now insufficient. Moreover, our results show that users preferred rankings that integrate tweets more often than those that integrate newswire articles, showing the potential of using social media to better serve news queries.
2484079	Document identifier reassignment and run-length-compressed inverted indexes for improved search performance Text search engines are a fundamental tool nowadays. Their efficiency relies on a popular and simple data structure: the inverted indexes. Currently, inverted indexes can be represented very efficiently using index compression schemes. Recent investigations also study how an optimized document ordering can be used to assign document identifiers (docIDs) to the document database. This yields important improvements in index compression and query processing time. In this paper we follow this line of research, yet from a different perspective. We propose a docID reassignment method that allows one to focus on a given subset of inverted lists to improve their performance. We then use run-length encoding to compress these lists (as many consecutive 1s are generated). We show that by using this approach, not only the performance of the particular subset of inverted lists is improved, but also that of the whole inverted index. Our experimental results indicate a reduction of about 10% in the space usage of the whole index docID reassignment was focused. Also, decompression speed is up to 1.22 times faster if the runs must be explicitly decompressed and up to 4.58 times faster if implicit decompression of runs is allowed. Finally, we also improve the Document-at-a-Time query processing time of AND queries (by up to 12%), WAND queries (by up to 23%) and full (non-ranked) OR queries (by up to 86%).
2484077	Cache-conscious performance optimization for similarity search All-pairs similarity search can be implemented in two stages. The first stage is to partition the data and group potentially similar vectors. The second stage is to run a set of tasks where each task compares a partition of vectors with other candidate partitions. Because of data sparsity, accessing feature vectors in memory for runtime comparison in the second stage, incurs significant overhead due to the presence of memory hierarchy. This paper proposes a cache-conscious data layout and traversal optimization to reduce the execution time through size-controlled data splitting and vector coalescing. It also provides an analysis to guide the optimal choice for the parameter setting. Our evaluation with several application datasets verifies the performance gains obtained by the optimization and shows that the proposed scheme is upto 2.74x as fast as the cache-oblivious baseline.
2484078	Efficient query construction for large scale data In recent years, a number of open databases have emerged on the Web, providing Web users with platforms to collaboratively create structured information. As these databases are intended to accommodate heterogeneous information and knowledge, they usually comprise a very large schema and billions of instances. Browsing and searching data on such a scale is not an easy task for a Web user. In this context, interactive query construction offers an intuitive interface for novice users to retrieve information from databases neither requiring any knowledge of structured query languages, nor any prior knowledge of the database schema. However, the existing mechanisms do not scale well on large scale datasets. This paper presents a set of techniques to boost the scalability of interactive query construction, from the perspective of both, user interaction cost and performance. We connect an abstract ontology layer to the database schema to shorten the process of user-computer interaction. We also introduce a search mechanism to enable efficient exploration of query interpretation spaces over large scale data. Extensive experiments show that our approach scales well on Freebase - an open database containing more than 7,000 relational tables in more than 100 domains.
2484075	Fighting search engine amnesia: reranking repeated results Web search engines frequently show the same documents repeatedly for different queries within the same search session, in essence forgetting when the same documents were already shown to users. Depending on previous user interaction with the repeated results, and the details of the session, we show that sometimes the repeated results should be promoted, while some other times they should be demoted. Analysing search logs from two different commercial search engines, we find that results are repeated in about 40% of multi-query search sessions, and that users engage differently with repeats than with results shown for the first time. We demonstrate how statistics about result repetition within search sessions can be incorporated into ranking for personalizing search results. Our results on query logs of two large-scale commercial search engines suggest that we successfully promote documents that are more likely to be clicked by the user in the future while maintaining performance over standard measures of non-personalized relevance.
2484076	Learning to personalize query auto-completion Query auto-completion (QAC) is one of the most prominent features of modern search engines. The list of query candidates is generated according to the prefix entered by the user in the search box and is updated on each new key stroke. Query prefixes tend to be short and ambiguous, and existing models mostly rely on the past popularity of matching candidates for ranking. However, the popularity of certain queries may vary drastically across different demographics and users. For instance, while instagram and imdb have comparable popularities overall and are both legitimate candidates to show for prefix i, the former is noticeably more popular among young female users, and the latter is more likely to be issued by men. In this paper, we present a supervised framework for personalizing auto-completion ranking. We introduce a novel labelling strategy for generating offline training labels that can be used for learning personalized rankers. We compare the effectiveness of several user-specific and demographic-based features and show that among them, the user's long-term search history and location are the most effective for personalizing auto-completion rankers. We perform our experiments on the publicly available AOL query logs, and also on the larger-scale logs of Bing. The results suggest that supervised rankers enhanced by personalization features can significantly outperform the existing popularity-based base-lines, in terms of mean reciprocal rank (MRR) by up to 9%.
2484074	An effective implicit relevance feedback technique using affective, physiological and behavioural features The effectiveness of various behavioural signals for implicit relevance feedback models has been exhaustively studied. Despite the advantages of such techniques for a real time information retrieval system, most of the behavioural signals are noisy and therefore not reliable enough to be employed. Among many, a combination of dwell time and task information has been shown to be effective for relevance judgement prediction. However, the task information might not be available to the system at all times. Thus, there is a need for other sources of information which can be used as a substitute for task information. Recently, affective and physiological signals have shown promise as a potential source of information for relevance judgement prediction. However, their accuracy is not high enough to be applicable on their own. This paper investigates whether affective and physiological signals can be used as a complementary source of information for behavioural signals (i.e. dwell time) to create a reliable signal for relevance judgement prediction. Using a video retrieval system as a use case, we study and compare the effectiveness of the affective and physiological signals on their own, as well as in combination with behavioural signals for the relevance judgment prediction task across four different search intentions: seeking information, re-finding a particular information object, and two different entertainment intentions (i.e. entertainment by adjusting arousal level, and entertainment by adjusting mood). Our experimental results show that the effectiveness of studied signals varies across different search intentions, and when affective and physiological signals are combined with dwell time, a significant improvement can be achieved. Overall, these findings will help to implement better search engines in the future.
2484073	A mutual information-based framework for the analysis of information retrieval systems We consider the problem of information retrieval evaluation and the methods and metrics used for such evaluations. We propose a probabilistic framework for evaluation which we use to develop new information-theoretic evaluation metrics. We demonstrate that these new metrics are powerful and generalizable, enabling evaluations heretofore not possible. We introduce four preliminary uses of our framework: (1) a measure of conditional rank correlation, information tau, a powerful meta-evaluation tool whose use we demonstrate on understanding novelty and diversity evaluation; (2) a new evaluation measure, relevance information correlation, which is correlated with traditional evaluation measures and can be used to (3) evaluate a collection of systems simultaneously, which provides a natural upper bound on metasearch performance; and (4) a measure of the similarity between rankers on judged documents, information difference, which allows us to determine whether systems with similar performance are in fact different.
2484072	Exploiting user feedback to learn to rank answers in q&#38;a forums: a case study with stack overflow Collaborative web sites, such as collaborative encyclopedias, blogs, and forums, are characterized by a loose edit control, which allows anyone to freely edit their content. As a consequence, the quality of this content raises much concern. To deal with this, many sites adopt manual quality control mechanisms. However, given their size and change rate, manual assessment strategies do not scale and content that is new or unpopular is seldom reviewed. This has a negative impact on the many services provided, such as ranking and recommendation. To tackle with this problem, we propose a learning to rank (L2R) approach for ranking answers in Q&#38;A forums. In particular, we adopt an approach based on Random Forests and represent query and answer pairs using eight different groups of features. Some of these features are used in the Q&#38;A domain for the first time. Our L2R method was trained to learn the answer rating, based on the feedback users give to answers in Q&#38;A forums. Using the proposed method, we were able (i) to outperform a state of the art baseline with gains of up to 21% in NDCG, a metric used to evaluate rankings; we also conducted a comprehensive study of the features, showing that (ii) review and user features are the most important in the Q&#38;A domain although text features are useful for assessing quality of new answers; and (iii) the best set of new features we proposed was able to yield the best quality rankings.
2484071	Click model-based information retrieval metrics In recent years many models have been proposed that are aimed at predicting clicks of web search users. In addition, some information retrieval evaluation metrics have been built on top of a user model. In this paper we bring these two directions together and propose a common approach to converting any click model into an evaluation metric. We then put the resulting model-based metrics as well as traditional metrics (like DCG or Precision) into a common evaluation framework and compare them along a number of dimensions. One of the dimensions we are particularly interested in is the agreement between offline and online experimental outcomes. It is widely believed, especially in an industrial setting, that online A/B-testing and interleaving experiments are generally better at capturing system quality than offline measurements. We show that offline metrics that are based on click models are more strongly correlated with online experimental outcomes than traditional offline metrics, especially in situations when we have incomplete relevance judgements.
2484070	A novel TF-IDF weighting scheme for effective ranking Term weighting schemes are central to the study of information retrieval systems. This article proposes a novel TF-IDF term weighting scheme that employs two different within document term frequency normalizations to capture two different aspects of term saliency. One component of the term frequency is effective for short queries, while the other performs better on long queries. The final weight is then measured by taking a weighted combination of these components, which is determined on the basis of the length of the corresponding query. Experiments conducted on a large number of TREC news and web collections demonstrate that the proposed scheme almost always outperforms five state of the art retrieval models with remarkable significance and consistency. The experimental results also show that the proposed model achieves significantly better precision than the existing models.
2484099	Search engine switching detection based on user personal preferences and behavior patterns Sometimes, during a search task users may switch from one search engine to another for several reasons, e.g., dissatisfaction with the current search results or desire for broader topic coverage. Detecting the fact of switching is difficult but important for understanding users' satisfaction with the search engine and the complexity of their search tasks, leading to economic significance for search providers. Previous research on switching detection mainly focused on studying different signals useful for the task and particular reasons for switching. Although it is known that switching is a personal choice of a user and different users have different search behavior, little has been done to understand how these differences could be used for switching detection. In this paper we study the effectiveness of learning personal behavior patterns for switching detection and present a personalized approach which uses user's session history containing sessions with and without switches. Experiments show that users' personal habits and behavior patterns are indeed among the most informative signals. Our findings can be used by a search log analyzer for engine switching detection and potentially other log mining problems, thus providing valuable signals for search providers to improve user experience.
2484097	Extracting query facets from search results Web search queries are often ambiguous or multi-faceted, which makes a simple ranked list of results inadequate. To assist information finding for such faceted queries, we explore a technique that explicitly represents interesting facets of a query using groups of semantically related terms extracted from search results. As an example, for the query ``baggage allowance'', these groups might be different airlines, different flight types (domestic, international), or different travel classes (first, business, economy). We name these groups query facets and the terms in these groups facet terms. We develop a supervised approach based on a graphical model to recognize query facets from the noisy candidates found. The graphical model learns how likely a candidate term is to be a facet term as well as how likely two terms are to be grouped together in a query facet, and captures the dependencies between the two factors. We propose two algorithms for approximate inference on the graphical model since exact inference is intractable. Our evaluation combines recall and precision of the facet terms with the grouping quality. Experimental results on a sample of web queries show that the supervised method significantly outperforms existing approaches, which are mostly unsupervised, suggesting that query facet extraction can be effectively learned.
2484098	Modeling term dependencies with quantum language models for IR Traditional information retrieval (IR) models use bag-of-words as the basic representation and assume that some form of independence holds between terms. Representing term dependencies and defining a scoring function capable of integrating such additional evidence is theoretically and practically challenging. Recently, Quantum Theory (QT) has been proposed as a possible, more general framework for IR. However, only a limited number of investigations have been made and the potential of QT has not been fully explored and tested. We develop a new, generalized Language Modeling approach for IR by adopting the probabilistic framework of QT. In particular, quantum probability could account for both single and compound terms at once without having to extend the term space artificially as in previous studies. This naturally allows us to avoid the weight-normalization problem, which arises in the current practice by mixing scores from matching compound terms and from matching single terms. Our model is the first practical application of quantum probability to show significant improvements over a robust bag-of-words baseline and achieves better performance on a stronger non bag-of-words baseline.
2484092	How do users respond to voice input errors?: lexical and phonetic query reformulation in voice search Voice search offers users with a new search experience: instead of typing, users can vocalize their search queries. However, due to voice input errors (such as speech recognition errors and improper system interruptions), users need to frequently reformulate queries to handle the incorrectly recognized queries. We conducted user experiments with native English speakers on their query reformulation behaviors in voice search and found that users often reformulate queries with both lexical and phonetic changes to previous queries. In this paper, we first characterize and analyze typical voice input errors in voice search and users' corresponding reformulation strategies. Then, we evaluate the impacts of typical voice input errors on users' search progress and the effectiveness of different reformulation strategies on handling these errors. This study provides a clearer picture on how to further improve current voice search systems.
2484091	Search result diversification in resource selection for federated search Prior research in resource selection for federated search mainly focused on selecting a small number of information sources that are most relevant to a user query. However, result novelty and diversification are largely unexplored, which does not reflect the various kinds of information needs of users in real world applications. This paper proposes two general approaches to model both result relevance and diversification in selecting sources, in order to provide more comprehensive coverage of multiple aspects of a user query. The first approach focuses on diversifying the document ranking on a centralized sample database before selecting information sources under the framework of Relevant Document Distribution Estimation (ReDDE). The second approach first evaluates the relevance of information sources with respect to each aspect of the query, and then ranks the sources based on the novelty and relevance that they offer. Both approaches can be applied with a wide range of existing resource selection algorithms such as ReDDE, CRCS, CORI and Big Document. Moreover, this paper proposes a learning based approach to combine multiple resource selection algorithms for result diversification, which can further improve the performance. We propose a set of new metrics for resource selection in federated search to evaluate the diversification performance of different approaches. To our best knowledge, this is the first piece of work that addresses the problem of search result diversification in federated search. The effectiveness of the proposed approaches has been demonstrated by an extensive set of experiments on the federated search testbed of the Clueweb dataset.
2484090	The effect of threshold priming and need for cognition on relevance calibration and assessment Human assessments of document relevance are needed for the construction of test collections, for ad-hoc evaluation, and for training text classifiers. Showing documents to assessors in different orderings, however, may lead to different assessment outcomes. We examine the effect that defineterm{threshold priming}, seeing varying degrees of relevant documents, has on people's calibration of relevance. Participants judged the relevance of a prologue of documents containing highly relevant, moderately relevant, or non-relevant ocuments, followed by a common epilogue of documents of mixed relevance. We observe that participants exposed to only non-relevant documents in the prologue assigned significantly higher average relevance scores to prologue and epilogue documents than participants exposed to moderately or highly relevant documents in the prologue. We also examine how defineterm{need for cognition}, an individual difference measure of the extent to which a person enjoys engaging in effortful cognitive activity, impacts relevance assessments. High need for cognition participants had a significantly higher level of agreement with expert assessors than low need for cognition participants did. Our findings indicate that assessors should be exposed to documents from multiple relevance levels early in the judging process, in order to calibrate their relevance thresholds in a balanced way, and that individual difference measures might be a useful way to screen assessors.
2484096	Compact query term selection using topically related text Many recent and highly effective retrieval models for long queries use query reformulation methods that jointly optimize term weights and term selection. These methods learn using word context and global context but typically fail to capture query context. In this paper, we present a novel term ranking algorithm, PhRank, that extends work on Markov chain frameworks for query expansion to select compact and focused terms from within a query itself. This focuses queries so that one to five terms in an unweighted model achieve better retrieval effectiveness than weighted term selection models that use up to 30 terms. PhRank terms are also typically compact and contain 1-2 words compared to competing models that use query subsets up to 7 words long. PhRank captures query context with an affinity graph constructed using word co-occurrence in pseudo-relevant documents. A random walk of the graph is used for term ranking in combination with discrimination weights. Empirical evaluation using newswire and web collections demonstrates that performance of reformulated queries is significantly improved for long queries and at least as good for short, keyword queries compared to highly competitive information retrieval (IR) models.
2484095	Term level search result diversification Current approaches for search result diversification have been categorized as either implicit or explicit. The implicit approach assumes each document represents its own topic, and promotes diversity by selecting documents for different topics based on the difference of their vocabulary. On the other hand, the explicit approach models the set of query topics, or aspects. While the former approach is generally less effective, the latter usually depends on a manually created description of the query aspects, the automatic construction of which has proven difficult. This paper introduces a new approach: term-level diversification. Instead of modeling the set of query aspects, which are typically represented as coherent groups of terms, our approach uses terms without the grouping. Our results on the ClueWeb collection show that the grouping of topic terms provides very little benefit to diversification compared to simply using the terms themselves. Consequently, we demonstrate that term-level diversification, with topic terms identified automatically from the search results using a simple greedy algorithm, significantly outperforms methods that attempt to create a full topic structure for diversification.
2484094	Preference based evaluation measures for novelty and diversity Novel and diverse document ranking is an effective strategy that involves reducing redundancy in a ranked list to maximize the amount of novel and relevant information available to users. Evaluation for novelty and diversity typically involves an assessor judging each document for relevance against a set of pre-identified subtopics, which may be disambiguations of the query, facets of an information need, or nuggets of information. Alternately, when expressing a emph{preference} for document A or document B, users may implicitly take subtopics into account, but may also take into account other factors such as recency, readability, length, and so on, each of which may have more or less importance depending on user. A emph{user profile} contains information about the extent to which each factor, including subtopic relevance, plays a role in the user's preference for one document over another. A preference-based evaluation can then take this user profile information into account to better model utility to the space of users. In this work, we propose an evaluation framework that not only can consider implicit factors but also handles differences in user preference due to varying underlying information need. Our proposed framework is based on the idea that a user scanning a ranked list from top to bottom and stopping at rank $k$ gains some utility from every document that is relevant their information need. Thus, we model the expected utility of a ranked list by estimating the utility of a document at a given rank using preference judgments and define evaluation measures based on the same. We validate our framework by comparing it to existing measures such as $alpha$-nDCG, ERR-IA, and subtopic recall that require explicit subtopic judgments We show that our proposed measures correlate well with existing measures while having the potential to capture various other factors when real data is used. We also show that the proposed measures can easily handle relevance assessments against multiple user profiles, and that they are robust to noisy and incomplete judgments.
2484093	Improving search result summaries by using searcher behavior data Query-biased search result summaries, or "snippets", help users decide whether a result is relevant for their information need, and have become increasingly important for helping searchers with difficult or ambiguous search tasks. Previously published snippet generation algorithms have been primarily based on selecting document fragments most similar to the query, which does not take into account which parts of the document the searchers actually found useful. We present a new approach to improving result summaries by incorporating post-click searcher behavior data, such as mouse cursor movements and scrolling over the result documents. To achieve this aim, we develop a method for collecting behavioral data with precise association between searcher intent, document examination behavior, and the corresponding document fragments. In turn, this allows us to incorporate page examination behavior signals into a novel Behavior-Biased Snippet generation system (BeBS). By mining searcher examination data, BeBS infers document fragments of most interest to users, and combines this evidence with text-based features to select the most promising fragments for inclusion in the result summary. Our extensive experiments and analysis demonstrate that our method improves the quality of result summaries compared to existing state-of-the-art methods. We believe that this work opens a new direction for improving search result presentation, and we make available the code and the search behavior data used in this study to encourage further research in this area.
2484149	Extractive summarisation via sentence removal: condensing relevant sentences into a short summary Many on-line services allow users to describe their opinions about a product or a service through a review. In order to help other users to find out the major opinion about a given topic, without the effort to read several reviews, multi-document summarisation is required. This research proposes an approach for extractive summarisation, supporting different scoring techniques, such as cosine similarity or divergence, as a method for finding representative sentences. The main contribution of this paper is the definition of an algorithm for sentence removal, developed to maximise the score between the summary and the original document. Instead of ranking the sentences and selecting the most important ones, the algorithm iteratively removes unimportant sentences until a desired compression rate is reached. Experimental results show that variations of the sentence removal algorithm provide good performance.
2484143	Time-aware structured query suggestion Most commercial search engines have a query suggestion feature, which is designed to capture various possible search intents behind the user's original query. However, even though different search intents behind a given query may have been popular at different time periods in the past, existing query suggestion methods neither utilize nor present such information. In this study, we propose Time-aware Structured Query Suggestion (TaSQS) which clusters query suggestions along a timeline so that the user can narrow down his search from a temporal point of view. Moreover, when a suggested query is clicked, TaSQS presents web pages from query-URL bipartite graphs after ranking them according to the click counts within a particular time period. Our experiments using data from a commercial search engine log show that the time-aware clustering and the time-aware document ranking features of TaSQS are both effective.
2484144	What can pictures tell us about web pages?: improving document search using images Traditional Web search engines do not use the images in the HTML pages to find relevant documents for a given query. Instead, they typically operate by computing a measure of agreement between the keywords provided by the user and only the text portion of each page. In this paper we study whether the content of the pictures appearing in a Web page can be used to enrich the semantic description of an HTML document and consequently boost the performance of a keyword-based search engine. We present a Web-scalable system that exploits a pure text-based search engine to find an initial set of candidate documents for a given query. Then, the candidate set is reranked using semantic information extracted from the images contained in the pages. The resulting system retains the computational efficiency of traditional text-based search engines with only a small additional storage cost needed to encode the visual information. We test our approach on the TREC 2009 Million Query Track, where we show that our use of visual content yields improvement in accuracies for two distinct text-based search engines, including the system with the best reported performance on this benchmark.
2484141	Browse with a social web directory Browse with either web directories or social bookmarks is an important complementation to search by keywords in web information retrieval. To improve users' browse experiences and facilitate the web directory construction, in this paper, we propose a novel browse system called Social Web Directory (SWD for short) by integrating web directories and social bookmarks. In SWD, (1) web pages are automatically categorized to a hierarchical structure to be retrieved efficiently, and (2) the popular web pages, hottest tags, and expert users in each category are ranked to help users find information more conveniently. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our SWD system.
2484142	The bag-of-repeats representation of documents n-gram representations of documents may improve over a simple bag-of-word representation by relaxing the independence assumption of word and introducing context. However, this comes at a cost of adding features which are non-descriptive, and increasing the dimension of the vector space model exponentially. We present new representations that avoid both pitfalls. They are based on sound theoretical notions of stringology, and can be computed in optimal asymptotic time with algorithms using data structures from the suffix family. While maximal repeats have been used in the past for similar tasks, we show how another equivalence class of repeats -- largest-maximal repeats -- obtain similar or better results, with only a fraction of the features. This class acts as a minimal generative basis of all repeated substrings. We also report their use for topic modeling, showing easier to interpret models.
2484147	Pursuing insights about healthcare utilization via geocoded search queries Mobile devices provide people with a conduit to the rich infor-mation resources of the Web. With consent, the devices can also provide streams of information about search activity and location that can be used in population studies and real-time assistance. We analyzed geotagged mobile queries in a privacy-sensitive study of potential transitions from health information search to in-world healthcare utilization. We note differences in people's health infor-mation seeking before, during, and after the appearance of evidence that a medical facility has been visited. We find that we can accu-rately estimate statistics about such potential user engagement with healthcare providers. The findings highlight the promise of using geocoded search for sensing and predicting activities in the world.
2484148	Estimating topical context by diverging from external resources Improving query understanding is crucial for providing the user with information that suits her needs. To this end, the retrieval system must be able to deal with several sources of knowledge from which it could infer a topical context. The use of external sources of information for improving document retrieval has been extensively studied. Improvements with either structured or large sets of data have been reported. However, in these studies resources are often used separately and rarely combined together. We experiment in this paper a method that discounts documents based on their weighted divergence from a set of external resources. We present an evaluation of the combination of four resources on two standard TREC test collections. Our proposed method significantly outperforms a state-of-the-art Mixture of Relevance Models on one test collection, while no significant differences are detected on the other one.
2484145	Relating retrievability, performance and length Retrievability provides a different way to evaluate an Information Retrieval (IR) system as it focuses on how easily documents can be found. It is intrinsically related to retrieval performance because a document needs to be retrieved before it can be judged relevant. In this paper, we undertake an empirical investigation into the relationship between the retrievability of documents, the retrieval bias imposed by a retrieval system, and the retrieval performance, across different amounts of document length normalization. To this end, two standard IR models are used on three TREC test collections to show that there is a useful and practical link between retrievability and performance. Our findings show that minimizing the bias across the document collection leads to good performance (though not the best performance possible). We also show that past a certain amount of document length normalization the retrieval bias increases, and the retrieval performance significantly and rapidly decreases. These findings suggest that the relationship between retrievability and effectiveness may offer a way to automatically tune systems.
2484146	Hybrid retrieval approaches to geospatial music recommendation Recent advances in music retrieval and recommendation algorithms highlight the necessity to follow multimodal approaches in order to transcend limits imposed by methods that solely use audio, web, or collaborative filtering data. In this paper, we propose hybrid music recommendation algorithms that combine information on the music content, the music context, and the user context, in particular, integrating location-aware weighting of similarities. Using state-of-the-art techniques to extract audio features and contextual web features, and a novel standardized data set of music listening activities inferred from microblogs (MusicMicro), we propose several multimodal retrieval functions. The main contributions of this paper are (i) a systematic evaluation of mixture coefficients between state-of-the-art audio features and web features, using the first standardized microblog data set of music listening events for retrieval purposes and (ii) novel geospatial music recommendation approaches using location information of microblog users, and a comprehensive evaluation thereof.
2484140	Document classification by topic labeling In this paper, we propose Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [1] based document classification algorithm which does not require any labeled dataset. In our algorithm, we construct a topic model using LDA, assign one topic to one of the class labels, aggregate all the same class label topics into a single topic using the aggregation property of the Dirichlet distribution and then automatically assign a class label to each unlabeled document depending on its "closeness" to one of the aggregated topics. We present an extension to our algorithm based on the combination of Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm and a naive Bayes classifier. We show effectiveness of our algorithm on three real world datasets.
2484138	Mapping queries to questions: towards understanding users' information needs In this paper, for the first time, we study the problem of mapping keyword queries to questions on community-based question answering (CQA) sites. Mapping general web queries to questions enables search engines not only to discover explicit and specific information needs (questions) behind keywords queries, but also to find high quality information (answers) for answering keyword queries. In order to map queries to questions, we propose a ranking algorithm containing three steps: Candidate Question Selection, Candidate Question Ranking, and Candidate Question Grouping. Preliminary experimental results using 60 queries from search logs of a commercial engine show that the presented approach can efficiently find the questions which capture user's information needs explicitly.
2484139	Building a web test collection using social media Community Question Answering (CQA) platforms contain a large number of questions and associated answers. Answerers sometimes include URLs as part of the answers to provide further information. This paper describes a novel way of building a test collection for web search by exploiting the link information from this type of social media data. We propose to build the test collection by regarding CQA questions as queries and the associated linked web pages as relevant documents. To evaluate this approach, we collect approximately ten thousand CQA queries, whose answers contained links to ClueWeb09 documents after spam filtering. Experimental results using this collection show that the relative effectiveness between different retrieval models on the ClueWeb-CQA query set is consistent with that on the TREC Web Track query sets, confirming the reliability of our test collection. Further analysis shows that the large number of queries generated through this approach compensates for the sparse relevance judgments in determining significant differences.
2484130	Using social annotations to enhance document representation for personalized search In this paper, we present a contribution to IR modeling. We propose an approach that computes on the fly, a Personalized Social Document Representation (PSDR) of each document per user based on his social activities. The PSDRs are used to rank documents with respect to a query. This approach has been intensively evaluated on a large public dataset, showing significant benefits for personalized search.
2484131	Sopra: a new social personalized ranking function for improving web search We present in this paper a contribution to IR modeling by proposing a new ranking function called SoPRa that considers the social dimension of the Web. This social dimension is any social information that surrounds documents along with the social context of users. Currently, our approach relies on folksonomies for extracting these social contexts, but it can be extended to use any social meta-data, e.g. comments, ratings, tweets, etc. The evaluation performed on our approach shows its benefits for personalized search.
2484132	Effectiveness/efficiency tradeoffs for candidate generation in multi-stage retrieval architectures This paper examines a multi-stage retrieval architecture consisting of a candidate generation stage, a feature extraction stage, and a reranking stage using machine-learned models. Given a fixed set of features and a learning-to-rank model, we explore effectiveness/efficiency tradeoffs with three candidate generation approaches: postings intersection with SvS, conjunctive query evaluation with WAND, and disjunctive query evaluation with WAND. We find no significant differences in end-to-end effectiveness as measured by NDCG between conjunctive and disjunctive WAND, but conjunctive query evaluation is substantially faster. Postings intersection with SvS, while fast, yields substantially lower end-to-end effectiveness, suggesting that document and term frequencies remain important in the initial ranking stage. These findings show that conjunctive WAND is the best overall candidate generation strategy of those we examined.
2484133	Finding impressive social content creators: searching for SNS illustrators using feedback on motifs and impressions We propose a method for finding impressive creators in online social network sites (SNSs). Many users are actively engaged in publishing their own works, sharing visual content on sites such as YouTube or Flickr. In this paper, we focus on the Japanese illustration-sharing SNS, Pixiv. We implement an illustrator search system based on user impression categories. The impressions of illustrators are estimated from clues in the crowdsourced social-tag annotations on their illustrations. We evaluated our system in terms of normalized discounted cumulative gain and found that using feedback on motifs and impressions for illustrations of relevant illustrators improved illustrator search by 11%.
2484134	Self reinforcement for important passage retrieval In general, centrality-based retrieval models treat all elements of the retrieval space equally, which may reduce their effectiveness. In the specific context of extractive summarization (or important passage retrieval), this means that these models do not take into account that information sources often contain lateral issues, which are hardly as important as the description of the main topic, or are composed by mixtures of topics. We present a new two-stage method that starts by extracting a collection of key phrases that will be used to help centrality-as-relevance retrieval model. We explore several approaches to the integration of the key phrases in the centrality model. The proposed method is evaluated using different datasets that vary in noise (noisy vs clean) and language (Portuguese vs English). Results show that the best variant achieves relative performance improvements of about 31% in clean data and 18% in noisy data.
2484135	Shame to be sham: addressing content-based grey hat search engine optimization We present an initial study identifying a form of content-based grey hat search engine optimization, in which a Web page contains both potentially relevant content and manipulated content: we call such pages sham documents, because they lie in the grey area between 'ham' (clearly normal) and 'spam' (clearly fake). Sham documents are often ranked artificially high in response to certain queries, but also may contain some useful information and cannot be considered as absolute spam. We report a novel annotation effort performed with the ClueWeb09 benchmark where pages were labeled as being spam, sham, or legitimate content. Significant inter-annotator agreement rates support the claim that there are sham documents that are highly ranked by a very effective retrieval approach, yet are not spam. We also present an initial study of predictors that may indicate whether a query is the target of shamming.
2484136	Linking transcribed conversational speech As large collections of historically significant recorded speech become increasingly available, scholars are faced with the challenge of making sense of what they hear. This paper proposes automatically linking conversational speech to related resources as one way of supporting that sense-making task. Experiment results with transcribed conversations suggest that this kind of linking has promise for helping to contextualize recordings of detail-oriented conversations, and that simple sliding-window bag-of-words techniques can identify some useful links.
2484137	Flat vs. hierarchical phrase-based translation models for cross-language information retrieval Although context-independent word-based approaches remain popular for cross-language information retrieval, many recent studies have shown that integrating insights from modern statistical machine translation systems can lead to substantial improvements in effectiveness. In this paper, we compare flat and hierarchical phrase-based translation models for query translation. Both approaches yield significantly better results than either a token-based or a one-best translation baseline on standard test collections. The choice of model manifests interesting tradeoffs in terms of effectiveness, efficiency, and model compactness.
2484129	Question retrieval with user intent Community Question Answering (CQA) services, such as Yahoo! Answers and WikiAnswers, have become popular with users as one of the central paradigms for satisfying users' information needs. The task of question retrieval in CQA aims to resolve one's query directly by finding the most relevant questions (together with their answers) from an archive of past questions. However, as users can ask any question that they like, a large number of questions in CQA are not about objective (factual) knowledge, but about subjective (sentiment-based) opinions or social interactions. The inhomogeneous nature of CQA leads to reduced performance of standard retrieval models. To address this problem, we present a hybrid approach that blends several language modelling techniques for question retrieval, namely, the classic (query-likelihood) language model, the state-of-the-art translation-based language model, and our proposed intent-based language model. The user intent of each candidate question (objective/subjective/social) is given by a probabilistic classifier which makes use of both textual features and metadata features. Our experiments on two real-world datasets show that our approach can significantly outperform existing ones.
2484127	Bias-variance decomposition of ir evaluation It has been recognized that, when an information retrieval (IR) system achieves improvement in mean retrieval effectiveness (e.g. mean average precision (MAP)) over all the queries, the performance (e.g., average precision (AP)) of some individual queries could be hurt, resulting in retrieval instability. Some stability/robustness metrics have been proposed. However, they are often defined separately from the mean effectiveness metric. Consequently, there is a lack of a unified formulation of effectiveness, stability and overall retrieval quality (considering both). In this paper, we present a unified formulation based on the bias-variance decomposition. Correspondingly, a novel evaluation methodology is developed to evaluate the effectiveness and stability in an integrated manner. A case study applying the proposed methodology to evaluation of query language modeling illustrates the usefulness and analytical power of our approach.
2484128	The cluster hypothesis for entity oriented search In this work we study the cluster hypothesis for entity oriented search (EOS). Specifically, we show that the hypothesis can hold to a substantial extent for several entity similarity measures. We also demonstrate the retrieval effectiveness merits of using clusters of similar entities for EOS.
2484125	Here and there: goals, activities, and predictions about location from geotagged queries A significant portion of Web search is performed in mobile settings. We explore the links between users' queries on mobile devices and their locations and movement, with a focus on interpreting queries about addresses. We find that users tend to have a primary location, likely corresponding to home or workplace, and that a user's location relative to this primary location systematically influences the patterns of address searches. We apply our findings to construct a statistical model that can predict with high accuracy whether a user will be soon observed at an address that had been recently retrieved via search. Such an ability to predict that a user will transition to a location can be harnessed for multiple uses including provision of directions and traffic information, the rendering of competitive advertising, and guiding the opportunistic completion of pending tasks that can be accomplished en route to a target location.
2484126	Optimizing top-n collaborative filtering via dynamic negative item sampling Collaborative filtering techniques rely on aggregated user preference data to make personalized predictions. In many cases, users are reluctant to explicitly express their preferences and many recommender systems have to infer them from implicit user behaviors, such as clicking a link in a webpage or playing a music track. The clicks and the plays are good for indicating the items a user liked (i.e., positive training examples), but the items a user did not like (negative training examples) are not directly observed. Previous approaches either randomly pick negative training samples from unseen items or incorporate some heuristics into the learning model, leading to a biased solution and a prolonged training period. In this paper, we propose to dynamically choose negative training samples from the ranked list produced by the current prediction model and iteratively update our model. The experiments conducted on three large-scale datasets show that our approach not only reduces the training time, but also leads to significant performance gains.
2484123	Explicit feedback in local search tasks Modern search engines make extensive use of people's contextual information to finesse result rankings. Using a searcher's location provides an especially strong signal for adjusting results for certain classes of queries where people may have clear preference for local results, without explicitly specifying the location in the query direct-ly. However, if the location estimate is inaccurate or searchers want to obtain many results from a particular location, they have limited control on the location focus in the search results returned. In this paper we describe a user study that examines the effect of offering searchers more control over how local preferences are gathered and used. We studied providing users with functionality to offer explicit relevance feedback (ERF) adjacent to results automatically identi-fied as location-dependent (i.e., more from this location). They can use this functionality to indicate whether they are interested in a particular search result and desire more results from that result's location. We compared the ERF system against a baseline (NoERF) that used the same underlying mechanisms to retrieve and rank results, but did not offer ERF support. User performance was as-sessed across 12 experimental participants over 12 location-sensitive topics, in a fully counter-balanced design. We found that participants interacted with ERF frequently, and there were signs that ERF has the potential to improve success rates and lead to more efficient searching for location-sensitive search tasks than NoERF.
2484124	Mining web search topics with diverse spatiotemporal patterns Mining the latent topics from web search data and capturing their spatiotemporal patterns have many applications in information retrieval. As web search is heavily influenced by the spatial and temporal factors, the latent topics usually demonstrate a variety of spatiotemporal patterns. In the face of the diversity of these patterns, existing models are increasingly ineffective, since they capture only one dimension of the spatiotemporal patterns (either the spatial or temporal dimension) or simply assume that there exists only one kind of spatiotemporal patterns. Such oversimplification risks distorting the latent data structure and hindering the downstream usage of the discovered topics. In this paper, we introduce the Spatiotemporal Search Topic Model (SSTM) to discover the latent topics from web search data with capturing their diverse spatiotemporal patterns simultaneously. The SSTM can flexibly support diverse spatiotemporal patterns and seamlessly integrate the unique features in web search such as query words, URLs, timestamps and search sessions. The SSTM is demonstrated as an effective exploratory tool for large-scale web search data and it performs superiorly in quantitative comparisons to several state-of-the-art topic models.
2484121	Composition of TF normalizations: new insights on scoring functions for ad hoc IR Previous papers in ad hoc IR reported that scoring functions should satisfy a set of heuristic retrieval constraints, providing a mathematical justification for the normalizations historically applied to the term frequency (TF). In this paper, we propose a further level of abstraction, claiming that the successive normalizations are carried out through composition. Thus we introduce a principled framework that fully explains BM25 as a variant of TF-IDF with an inverse order of function composition. Our experiments over standard datasets indicate that the respective orders of composition chosen in the original papers for both TF-IDF and BM25 are the most effective ones. Moreover, since the order is different between the two models, they also demonstrated that the order is instrumental in the design of weighting models. In fact, while considering more complex scoring functions such as BM25+, we discovered a novel weighting model in terms of order of composition that consistently outperforms all the rest. Our contribution here is twofold: we provide a unifying mathematical framework for IR and a novel scoring function discovered using this framework.
2484122	Interoperability ranking for mobile applications At present, most major app marketplaces perform ranking and recommendation based on search relevance features or marketplace ``popularity'' statistics. For instance, they check similarity between app descriptions and user search queries, or rank-order the apps according to statistics such as number of downloads, user ratings etc. Rankings derived from such signals, important as they are, are insufficient to capture the dynamics of the apps ecosystem. Consider for example the questions: In a particular user context, is app A more likely to be launched than app B? Or does app C provide complementary functionality to app D-- Answering these questions requires identifying and analyzing the dependencies between apps in the apps ecosystem. Ranking mechanisms that reflect such interdependences are thus necessary. In this paper we introduce the notion of interoperability ranking for mobile applications. Intuitively, apps with high rank are such apps which are inferred to be somehow important to other apps in the ecosystem. We demonstrate how interoperability ranking can help answer the above questions and also provide the basis for solving several problems which are rapidly attracting the attention of both researchers and the industry, such as building personalized real-time app recommender systems or intelligent mobile agents. We describe a set of methods for computing interoperability ranks and analyze their performance on real data from the Windows Phone app marketplace.
2484120	Commodity query by snapping Commodity information such as prices and public reviews is always the concern of consumers. Helping them conveniently acquire these information as an instant reference is often of practical significance for their purchase activities. Nowadays, Web 2.0, linked data clouds, and the pervasiveness of smart hand held devices have created opportunities for this demand, i.e., users could just snap a photo of any commodity that is of interest at anytime and anywhere, and retrieve the relevant information via their Internet-linked mobile devices. Nonetheless, compared with the traditional keyword-based information retrieval, extracting the hidden information related to the commodities in photos is a much more complicated and challenging task, involving techniques such as pattern recognition, knowledge base construction, semantic comprehension, and statistic deduction. In this paper, we propose a framework to address this issue by leveraging on various techniques, and evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of this framework with experiments on a prototype.
2484116	Sentiment analysis of user comments for one-class collaborative filtering over ted talks User-generated texts such as reviews, comments or discussions are valuable indicators of users' preferences. Unlike previous works which focus on labeled data from user-contributed reviews, we focus here on user comments which are not accompanied by explicit rating labels. We investigate their utility for a one-class collaborative filtering task such as bookmarking, where only the user actions are given as ground truth. We propose a sentiment-aware nearest neighbor model (SANN) for multimedia recommendations over TED talks, which makes use of user comments. The model outperforms significantly, by more than 25% on unseen data, several competitive baselines.
2484117	Report from the NTCIR-10 1CLICK-2 Japanese subtask: baselines, upperbounds and evaluation robustness The One Click Access Task (1CLICK) of NTCIR requires systems to return a concise multi-document summary of web pages in response to a query which is assumed to have been submitted in a mobile context. Systems are evaluated based on information units (or iUnits), and are required to present important pieces of information first and to minimise the amount of text the user has to read. Using the official Japanese results of the second round of the 1CLICK task from NTCIR-10, we discuss our task setting and evaluation framework. Our analyses show that: (1) Simple baseline methods that leverage search engine snippets or Wikipedia are effective for 'lookup' type queries but not necessarily for other query types; (2) There is still a substantial gap between manual and automatic runs; and (3) Our evaluation metrics are relatively robust to the incompleteness of iUnits.
2484118	Leveraging viewer comments for mood classification of music video clips This short paper proposes a method to classify music video clips uploaded to a video sharing service into music mood categories such as 'cheerful,' 'wistful,' and 'aggressive.' The method leverages viewer comments posted to the music video clips for the music mood classification. It extracts specific features from the comments: (1) adjectives in comments, (2) lengthened words in comments, and (3) comments in chorus sections. Our experimental results classifying 695 video clips into six mood categories showed that our method outperformed the baseline in terms of macro and micro averaged F-measures. In addition, our method outperformed the existing approaches that utilize lyrics and audio signals of songs.
2484119	RecSys for distributed events: investigating the influence of recommendations on visitor plans Distributed events are collections of events taking place within a small area over the same time period and relating to a single topic. There are often a large number of events on offer and the times in which they can be visited are heavily constrained, therefore the task of choosing events to visit and in which order can be very difficult. In this work we investigate how visitors can be assisted by means of a recommender system via 2 large-scale naturalistic studies (n=860 and n=1047). We show that a recommender system can influence users to select events that result in tighter and more compact routes, thus allowing users to spend less time travelling and more time visiting events.
2484112	Displaying relevance scores for search results Internet search engines typically compute a relevance score for webpages given the query terms, and then rank the pages by decreasing relevance scores. The popular search engines do not, however, present the relevance scores that were computed during this process. We suggest that these relevance scores may contain information that can help users make conscious decisions. In this paper we evaluate in a user study how users react to the display of such scores. The results indicate that users understand graphical displays of relevance, and make decisions based on these scores. Our results suggest that in the context of exploratory search, relevance scores may cause users to explore more search results.
2484113	Ranking-oriented nearest-neighbor based method for automatic image annotation Automatic image annotation plays a critical role in keyword-based image retrieval systems. Recently, the nearest-neighbor based scheme has been proposed and achieved good performance for image annotation. Given a new image, the scheme is to first find its most similar neighbors from labeled images, and then propagate the keywords associated with the neighbors to it. Many studies focused on designing a suitable distance metric between images so that all labeled images can be ranked by their distance to the given image. However, higher accuracy in distance prediction does not necessarily lead to better ordering of labeled images. In this paper, we propose a ranking-oriented neighbor search mechanism to rank labeled images directly without going through the intermediate step of distance prediction. In particular, a new learning to rank algorithm is developed, which exploits the implicit preference information of labeled images and underlines the accuracy of the top-ranked results. Experiments on two benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach for image annotation.
2484114	IRWR: incremental random walk with restart Random Walk with Restart (RWR) has become an appealing measure of node proximities in emerging applications eg recommender systems and automatic image captioning. In practice, a real graph is typically large, and is frequently updated with small changes. It is often cost-inhibitive to recompute proximities from scratch via emph{batch} algorithms when the graph is updated. This paper focuses on the incremental computations of RWR in a dynamic graph, whose edges often change over time. The prior attempt of RWR [1] deploys kdash to find top-$k$ highest proximity nodes for a given query, which involves a strategy to incrementally emph{estimate} upper proximity bounds. However, due to its aim to prune needless calculation, such an incremental strategy is emph{approximate}: in $O(1)$ time for each node. The main contribution of this paper is to devise an emph{exact} and fast incremental algorithm of RWR for edge updates. Our solution, IRWR!, can incrementally compute any node proximity in $O(1)$ time for each edge update without loss of exactness. The empirical evaluations show the high efficiency and exactness of IRWR for computing proximities on dynamic networks against its batch counterparts.
2484115	Interpretation of coordinations, compound generation, and result fusion for query variants We investigate interpreting coordinations (e.g. word sequences connected with coordinating conjunctions such as "and" and "or") as logical disjunctions of terms to generate a set of disjunctionfree query variants for information retrieval (IR) queries. In addition, so-called hyphen coordinations are resolved by generating full compound forms and rephrasing the original query, e.g. "rice im-and export" is transformed into "rice import and export". Query variants are then processed separately and retrieval results are merged using a standard data fusion technique. We evaluate the approach on German standard IR benchmarking data. The results show that: i) Our proposed approach to generate compounds from hyphen coordinations produces the correct results for all test topics. ii) Our proposed heuristics to identify coordinations and generate query variants based on shallow natural language processing (NLP) techniques is highly accurate on the topics and does not rely on parsing or part-of-speech tagging. iii) Using query variants to produce multiple retrieval results and merging the results decreases precision at top ranks. However, in combination with blind relevance feedback (BRF), this approach can show significant improvement over the standard BRF baseline using the original queries.
2484110	An LDA-smoothed relevance model for document expansion: a case study for spoken document retrieval Document expansion (DE) in information retrieval (IR) involves modifying each document in the collection by introducing additional terms into the document. It is particularly useful to improve retrieval of short and noisy documents where the additional terms can improve the description of the document content. Existing approaches to DE assume that documents to be expanded are from a single topic. In the case of multi-topic documents this can lead to a topic bias in terms selected for DE and hence may result in poor retrieval quality due to the lack of coverage of the original document topics in the expanded document. This paper proposes a new DE technique providing a more uniform selection and weighting of DE terms from all constituent topics. We show that our proposed method significantly outperforms the most recently reported relevance model based DE method on a spoken document retrieval task for both manual and automatic speech recognition transcripts.
2484111	Kinship contextualization: utilizing the preceding and following structural elements The textual context of an element, structurally, contains traces of evidences. Utilizing this context in scoring is called contextualization. In this study we hypothesize that the context of an XML-element originated from its textit{preceding} and textit{following} elements in the sequential ordering of a document improves the quality of retrieval. In the tree form of the document's structure, textit{kinship} contextualization means, contextualization based on the horizontal and vertical elements in the textit{kinship tree,} or elements in closer to a wider structural kinship. We have tested several variants of kinship contextualization and verified notable improvements in comparison with the baseline system and gold standards in the retrieval of focused elements.
2484100	Mining touch interaction data on mobile devices to predict web search result relevance Fine-grained search interactions in the desktop setting, such as mouse cursor movements and scrolling, have been shown valuable for understanding user intent, attention, and their preferences for Web search results. As web search on smart phones and tablets becomes increasingly popular, previously validated desktop interaction models have to be adapted for the available touch interactions such as pinching and swiping, and for the different device form factors. In this paper, we present, to our knowledge, the first in-depth study of modeling interactions on touch-enabled device for improving Web search ranking. In particular, we evaluate a variety of touch interactions on a smart phone as implicit relevance feedback, and compare them with the corresponding fine-grained interactions on a desktop computer with mouse and keyboard as the primary input devices. Our experiments are based on a dataset collected from two user studies with 56 users in total, using a specially instrumented version of a popular mobile browser to capture the interaction data. We report a detailed analysis of the similarities and differences of fine-grained search interactions between the desktop and the smart phone modalities, and identify novel patterns of touch interactions indicative of result relevance. Finally, we demonstrate significant improvements to search ranking quality by mining touch interaction data.
2484104	Summary of the NTCIR-10 INTENT-2 task: subtopic mining and search result diversification The NTCIR INTENT task comprises two subtasks: {em Subtopic Mining}, where systems are required to return a ranked list of {em subtopic strings} for each given query; and {em Document Ranking}, where systems are required to return a diversified web search result for each given query. This paper summarises the novel features of the Second INTENT task at NTCIR-10 and its main findings, and poses some questions for future diversified search evaluation.
2484103	Timeline generation with social attention Timeline generation is an important research task which can help users to have a quick understanding of the overall evolution of any given topic. It thus attracts much attention from research communities in recent years. Nevertheless, existing work on timeline generation often ignores an important factor, the attention attracted to topics of interest (hereafter termed "social attention"). Without taking into consideration social attention, the generated timelines may not reflect users' collective interests. In this paper, we study how to incorporate social attention in the generation of timeline summaries. In particular, for a given topic, we capture social attention by learning users' collective interests in the form of word distributions from Twitter, which are subsequently incorporated into a unified framework for timeline summary generation. We construct four evaluation sets over six diverse topics. We demonstrate that our proposed approach is able to generate both informative and interesting timelines. Our work sheds light on the feasibility of incorporating social attention into traditional text mining tasks.
2484102	Modeling the uniqueness of the user preferences for recommendation systems In this paper we propose a novel framework for modeling the uniqueness of the user preferences for recommendation systems. User uniqueness is determined by learning to what extent the user's item preferences deviate from those of an "average user" in the system. Based on this framework, we suggest three different recommendation strategies that trade between uniqueness and conformity. Using two real item datasets, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our uniqueness based recommendation framework.
2484101	Improve collaborative filtering through bordered block diagonal form matrices Collaborative Filtering-based recommendation algorithms have achieved widespread success on the Web, but little work has been performed to investigate appropriate user-item relationship structures of rating matrices. This paper presents a novel and general collaborative filtering framework based on (Approximate) Bordered Block Diagonal Form structure of user-item rating matrices. We show formally that matrices in (A)BBDF structures correspond to community detection on the corresponding bipartite graphs, and they reveal relationships among users and items intuitionally in recommendation tasks. By this framework, general and special interests of a user are distinguished, which helps to improve prediction accuracy in collaborative filtering tasks. Experimental results on four real-world datasets, including the Yahoo! Music dataset, which is currently the largest, show that the proposed framework helps many traditional collaborative filtering algorithms, such as User-based, Item-based, SVD and NMF approaches, to make more accurate rating predictions. Moreover, by leveraging smaller and denser submatrices to make predictions, this framework contributes to the scalability of recommender systems.
2484108	Tagcloud-based explanation with feedback for recommender systems Personalized recommender systems aim to push only the relevant items and information directly to the users without requiring them to browse through millions of web resources. The challenge of these systems is to achieve a high user acceptance rate on their recommendations. In this paper, we aim to increase the user acceptance of recommendations by providing more intuitive tag-based explanations of why the items are recommended. Tags are used as intermediary entities that not only relate target users to the recommended items but also understand users' intents. Our system also allows tag-based online relevance feedback. Experiment results on the Movielens dataset show that the proposed approach is able to increase the acceptance rate of recommendations and improve user satisfaction.
2484107	Estimating query representativeness for query-performance prediction The query-performance prediction (QPP) task is estimating retrieval effectiveness with no relevance judgments. We present a novel probabilistic framework for QPP that gives rise to an important aspect that was not addressed in previous work; namely, the extent to which the query effectively represents the information need for retrieval. Accordingly, we devise a few query-representativeness measures that utilize relevance language models. Experiments show that integrating the most effective measures with state-of-the-art predictors in our framework often yields prediction quality that significantly transcends that of using the predictors alone.
2484106	A novel topic model for automatic term extraction Automatic term extraction (ATE) aims at extracting domain-specific terms from a corpus of a certain domain. Termhood is one essential measure for judging whether a phrase is a term. Previous researches on termhood mainly depend on the word frequency information. In this paper, we propose to compute termhood based on semantic representation of words. A novel topic model, namely i-SWB, is developed to map the domain corpus into a latent semantic space, which is composed of some general topics, a background topic and a documents-specific topic. Experiments on four domains demonstrate that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art ATE approaches.
2484105	The impact of intent selection on diversified search evaluation To construct a diversified search test collection, a set of possible subtopics (or intents) needs to be determined for each topic, in one way or another, and perintent relevance assessments need to be obtained. In the TREC Web Track Diversity Task, subtopics are manually developed at NIST, based on results of automatic click log analysis; in the NTCIR INTENT Task, intents are determined by manually clustering 'subtopics strings' returned by participating systems. In this study, we address the following research question: Does the choice of intents for a test collection affect relative performances of diversified search systems? To this end, we use the TREC 2012 Web Track Diversity Task data and the NTCIR-10 INTENT-2 Task data, which share a set of 50 topics but have different intent sets. Our initial results suggest that the choice of intents may affect relative performances, and that this choice may be far more important than how many intents are selected for each topic
2484109	Finding knowledgeable groups in enterprise corpora The task of finding groups is a natural extension of search tasks aimed at retrieving individual entities. We introduce a group finding task: given a query topic, find knowledgeable groups that have expertise on that topic. We present four general strategies to this task. The models are formalized using generative language models. Two of the models aggregate expertise scores of the experts in the same group for the task, one locates documents associated with experts in the group and then determines how closely the documents are associated with the topic, whilst the remaining model directly estimates the degree to which a group is a knowledgeable group for a given topic. We construct a test collections based on the TREC 2005 and 2006 Enterprise collections. We find significant differences between different ways of estimating the association between a topic and a group. Experiments show that our knowledgeable group finding models achieve high absolute scores.
2484195	Searching in the city of knowledge: challenges and recent developments Today plenty of data is emerging from various city systems. Beyond the classical Web resources, large amounts of data are retrieved from sensors, devices, social networks, governmental applications, or service networks. In such a diversity of information, answering specific information needs of city inhabitants requires holistic IR techniques, capable of harnessing different types of city data and turned it into actionable insights to answer different queries. This tutorial will present deep insights, challenges, opportunities and techniques to make heterogeneous city data searchable and show how emerging IR techniques models can be employed to retrieve relevant information for the citizens.
2484194	Multimedia recommendation: technology and techniques In recent years, we have witnessed a rapid growth in the availability of digital multimedia on various application platforms and domains. Consequently, the problem of information overload has become more and more serious. In order to tackle the challenge, various multimedia recommendation technologies have been developed by different research communities (e.g., multimedia systems, information retrieval, machine learning and computer version). Meanwhile, many commercial web systems (e.g., Flick, YouTube, and Last.fm) have successfully applied recommendation techniques to provide users personalized content and services in a convenient and flexible way. When looking back, the information retrieval (IR) community has a long history of studying and contributing recommender system design and related issues. It has been proven that the recommender systems can effectively assist users in handling information overload and provide high-quality personalization. While several courses were dedicated to multimedia retrieval in the recent decade, to the best of our knowledge, the tutorial is the first one specifically focusing on multimedia recommender systems and their applications on various domains and media contents. We plan to summarize the research along this direction and provide an impetus for further research on this important topic
2484193	Music similarity and retrieval This tutorial serves as an introductory course to the field of and state-of-the-art in music information retrieval (MIR) and in particular to music similarity estimation which is an essential component of music retrieval. Apart from explaining approaches that estimate similarity based on acoustic properties of an audio signal, we review methods that exploit (mostly textual) meta-data from the Web to build representations of music then used for similarity calculation. Additionally, topics such as (large-scale) music indexing, information extraction for music, personalization in music retrieval, and evaluation of MIR systems are addressed.
2484192	The cluster hypothesis in information retrieval 
2484191	Designing search usability Search is not just a box and ten blue links. Search is a journey: an exploration where what we encounter along the way changes what we seek. But in order to guide people along this journey, we must understand both the art and science of search experience design. The aim of this tutorial is to deliver a course grounded in good scholarship, integrating the latest research findings with insights derived from the practical experience of designing and optimizing an extensive range of commercial search applications. It focuses on the development of transferable, practical skills that can be learnt and practiced within a half-day session.
2484190	Building test collections: an interactive tutorial for students and others without their own evaluation conference series While existing test collections and evaluation conference efforts may sufficiently support one's research, one can easily find oneself wanting to solve problems no one else is solving yet. But how can research in IR be done (or be published!) without solid data and experiments? Not everyone can talk TREC, CLEF, INEX, or NTCIR into running a track to build a collection. This tutorial aims to teach how to build a test collection using resources at hand, how to measure the quality of that collection, how to understand its limitations, and how to communicate them. The intended audience is advanced students who find themselves in need of a test collection, or actually in the process of building a test collection, to support their own research. The goal of this tutorial is to lay out issues, procedures, pitfalls, and practical advice.
2484198	SearchResultFinder: federated search made easy Building a federated search engine based on a large number existing web search engines is a challenge: implementing the programming interface (API) for each search engine is an exacting and time-consuming job. In this demonstration we present SearchResultFinder, a browser plugin which speeds up determining reusable XPaths for extracting search result items from HTML search result pages. Based on a single search result page, the tool presents a ranked list of candidate extraction XPaths and allows highlighting to view the extraction result. An evaluation with 148 web search engines shows that in 90% of the cases a correct XPath is suggested.
2484199	BATC: a benchmark for aggregation techniques in crowdsourcing As the volumes of AI problems involving human knowledge are likely to soar, crowdsourcing has become essential in a wide range of world-wide-web applications. One of the biggest challenges of crowdsourcing is aggregating the answers collected from crowd workers; and thus, many aggregate techniques have been proposed. However, given a new application, it is difficult for users to choose the best-suited technique as well as appropriate parameter values since each of these techniques has distinct performance characteristics depending on various factors (e.g. worker expertise, question difficulty). In this paper, we develop a benchmarking tool that allows to (i) simulate the crowd and (ii) evaluate aggregate techniques in different aspects (accuracy, sensitivity to spammers, etc.). We believe that this tool will be able to serve as a practical guideline for both researchers and software developers. While researchers can use our tool to assess existing or new techniques, developers can reuse its components to reduce the development complexity.
2484196	Kernel-based learning to rank with syntactic and semantic structures Kernel Methods (KMs) are powerful machine learning techniques that can alleviate the data representation problem as they substitute scalar product between feature vectors with similarity functions (kernels) directly defined between data instances, e.g., syntactic trees, (thus features are not needed any longer). This tutorial aims at introducing essential and simplified theory of Support Vector Machines and KMs for the design of practical applications. It will describe effective kernels for easily engineering automatic classifiers and learning to rank algorithms using structured data and semantic processing. Some examples will be drawn from Question Answering, Passage Re-ranking, Short and Long Text Categorization, Relation Extraction, Named Entity Recognition, Co-Reference Resolution. Moreover, some practical demonstrations will be given using the SVM-Light-TK (tree kernel) toolkit.
2484197	Accurate and robust text detection: a step-in for text retrieval in natural scene images We propose and implement a robust text detection system, which is a prominent step-in for text retrieval in natural scene images or videos. Our system includes several key components: (1) A fast and effective pruning algorithm is designed to extract Maximally Stable Extremal Regions as character candidates using the strategy of minimizing regularized variations. (2) Character candidates are grouped into text candidates by the single-link clustering algorithm, where distance weights and threshold of clustering are learned automatically by a novel self-training distance metric learning algorithm. (3) The posterior probabilities of text candidates corresponding to non-text are estimated with an character classifier; text candidates with high probabilities are then eliminated and finally texts are identified with a text classifier. The proposed system is evaluated on the ICDAR 2011 Robust Reading Competition dataset and a publicly available multilingual dataset; the f measures are over 76% and 74% which are significantly better than the state-of-the-art performances of 71% and 65%, respectively.
2484180	A weakly-supervised detection of entity central documents in a stream Filtering a time-ordered corpus for documents that are highly relevant to an entity is a task receiving more and more attention over the years. One application is to reduce the delay between the moment an information about an entity is being first observed and the moment the entity entry in a knowledge base is being updated. Current state-of-the-art approaches are highly supervised and require training examples for each entity monitored. We propose an approach which does not require new training data when processing a new entity. To capture intrinsic characteristics of highly relevant documents our approach relies on three types of features: document centric features, entity profile related features and time features. Evaluated within the framework of the "Knowledge Base Acceleration" track at TREC 2012, it outperforms current state-of-the-art approaches.
2484181	From keywords to keyqueries: content descriptors for the web We introduce the concept of keyqueries as dynamic content descriptors for documents. Keyqueries are defined implicitly by the index and the retrieval model of a reference search engine: keyqueries for a document are the minimal queries that return the document in the top result ranks. Besides applications in the fields of information retrieval and data mining, keyqueries have the potential to form the basis of a dynamic classification system for future digital libraries---the modern version of keywords for content description. To determine the keyqueries for a document, we present an exhaustive search algorithm along with effective pruning strategies. For applications where a small number of diverse keyqueries is sufficient, two tailored search strategies are proposed. Our experiments emphasize the role of the reference search engine and show the potential of keyqueries as innovative document descriptors for large, fast evolving bodies of digital content such as the web.
2484182	A financial cost metric for result caching Web search engines cache results of frequent and/or recent queries. Result caching strategies can be evaluated using different metrics, hit rate being the most well-known. Recent works take the processing overhead of queries into account when evaluating the performance of result caching strategies and propose cost-aware caching strategies. In this paper, we propose a financial cost metric that goes one step beyond and takes also the hourly electricity prices into account when computing the cost. We evaluate the most well-known static, dynamic, and hybrid result caching strategies under this new metric. Moreover, we propose a financial-cost-aware version of the well-known LRU strategy and show that it outperforms the original LRU strategy in terms of the financial cost metric.
2484183	Competition-based networks for expert finding Finding experts in question answering platforms has important applications, such as question routing or identification of best answers. Addressing the problem of ranking users with respect to their expertise, we propose Competition-Based Expertise Networks (CBEN), a novel community expertise network structure based on the principle of competition among the answerers of a question. We evaluate our approach on a very large dataset from Yahoo! Answers using a variety of centrality measures. We show that it outperforms state-of-the-art network structures and, unlike previous methods, is able to consistly outperform simple metrics like best answer count. We also analyse question answering forums in Yahoo! Answers, and show that they can be characterised by factual or subjective information seeking behavior, social discussions and the conducting of polls or surveys. We find that the ability to identify experts greatly depends on the type of forum, which is directly reflected in the structural properties of the expertise networks.
2484184	#trapped!: social media search system requirements for emergency management professionals Social media provides a new and potentially rich source of information for emergency management services. However, extracting the relevant information from such streams poses a number of difficult challenges. In this short paper, we survey emergency management professionals to ascertain how social media is used when responding to incidents, the search strategies that they undertake, and the challenges that they face when using social media streams. This research indicates that emergency management professionals employ two main strategies when searching social media streams: keyword-centric and account-centric search strategies. Furthermore, current search interfaces are inadequate regarding the requirements of command and control environments in the emergency management domain, where the process of information seeking is collaborative in nature and needs to support multiple information seekers.
2484186	Fresh BrowseRank In the last years, a lot of attention was attracted by the problem of page authority computation based on user browsing behavior. However, the proposed methods have a number of limitations. In particular, they run on a single snapshot of a user browsing graph ignoring substantially dynamic nature of user browsing activity, which makes such methods recency unaware. This paper proposes a new method for computing page importance, referred to as Fresh BrowseRank. The score of a page by our algorithm equals to the weight in a stationary distribution of a flexible random walk, which is controlled by recency-sensitive weights of vertices and edges. Our method generalizes some previous approaches, provides better capability for capturing the dynamics of the Web and users behavior, and overcomes essential limitations of BrowseRank. The experimental results demonstrate that our method enables to achieve more relevant and fresh ranking results than the classic BrowseRank.
2484185	Studying page life patterns in dynamical web With the ever-increasing speed of content turnover on the web, it is particularly important to understand the patterns that pages' popularity follows. This paper focuses on the dynamical part of the web, i.e. pages that have a limited lifespan and experience a short popularity outburst within it. We classify these pages into five patterns based on how quickly they gain popularity and how quickly they lose it. We study the properties of pages that belong to each pattern and determine content topics that contain disproportionately high fractions of particular patterns. These developments are utilized to create an algorithm that approximates with reasonable accuracy the expected popularity pattern of a web page based on its URL and, if available, prior knowledge about its domain's topics.
2484188	Entity linking and retrieval This full-day tutorial presents a comprehensive introduction to entity linking and retrieval. Part I provides a detailed overview of entity linking: identifying and disambiguating entity occurrences in unstructured text. Part II focuses on entity retrieval, by first considering scenarios where explicit representations of entities are available, and then moving to a setting where evidence needs to be collected and aggregated from multiple documents or even collections, thereby combining techniques from both entity linking and entity retrieval. Part III concludes the tutorial with an overview and hands-on comparative analysis of applications and publicly available toolkits and web services.
2484187	Diversity and novelty in information retrieval This tutorial aims to provide a unifying account of current research on diversity and novelty in different IR domains, namely, in the context of search engines, recommender systems, and data streams.
2484189	Scalability and efficiency challenges in commercial web search engines Commercial web search engines rely on very large compute infrastructures to be able to cope with the continuous growth of the Web and user bases. Achieving scalability and efficiency in such large-scale search engines requires making careful architectural design choices while devising algorithmic performance optimizations. Unfortunately, most details about the internal functioning of commercial web search engines remain undisclosed due to their financial value and the high level of competition in the search market. The main objective of this tutorial is to provide an overview of the fundamental scalability and efficiency challenges in commercial web search engines, bridging the existing gap between the industry and academia.
2484172	Ranking explanatory sentences for opinion summarization We introduce a novel sentence ranking problem called explanatory sentence extraction (ESE) which aims to rank sentences in opinionated text based on their usefulness for helping users understand the detailed reasons of sentiments (i.e., "explanatoriness"). We propose and study several general methods for scoring the explanatoriness of a sentence. We create new data sets and propose a new measure for evaluation. Experiment results show that the proposed methods are effective, outperforming a state of the art sentence ranking method for standard text summarization.
2484173	The knowing camera: recognizing places-of-interest in smartphone photos This paper presents a framework called Knowing Camera for real-time recognizing places-of-interest in smartphone photos, with the availability of online geotagged images of such places. We propose a probabilistic field-of-view model which captures the uncertainty in camera sensor data. This model can be used to retrieve a set of candidate images. The visual similarity computation of the candidate images relies on the sparse coding technique. We also propose an ANN filtering technique to speedup the sparse coding. The final ranking combines an uncertain geometric relevance with the visual similarity. Our preliminary experiments conducted in an urban area of a large city show promising results. The most distinguishing feature of our framework is its ability to perform well in contaminated, real-world online image database. Besides, our framework is highly scalable as it does not incur any complex data structure.
2484170	A document rating system for preference judgements High quality relevance judgments are essential for the evaluation of information retrieval systems. Traditional methods of collecting relevance judgments are based on collecting binary or graded nominal judgments, but such judgments are limited by factors such as inter-assessor disagreement and the arbitrariness of grades. Previous research has shown that it is easier for assessors to make pairwise preference judgments. However, unless the preferences collected are largely transitive, it is not clear how to combine them in order to obtain document relevance scores. Another difficulty is that the number of pairs that need to be assessed is quadratic in the number of documents. In this work, we consider the problem of inferring document relevance scores from pairwise preference judgments by analogy to tournaments using the Elo rating system. We show how to combine a linear number of pairwise preference judgments from multiple assessors to compute relevance scores for every document.
2484171	Query change as relevance feedback in session search Session search is the Information Retrieval (IR) task that performs document retrieval for an entire session. During a session, users often change queries to explore and investigate the information needs. In this paper, we propose to use query change as a new form of relevance feedback for better session search. Evaluation conducted over TREC 2012 Session Track shows that query change is a highly effective form of feedback as compared with existing relevance feedback methods. The proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art relevance feedback methods for the TREC 2012 Session Track by a significant improvement of &#62;25%.
2484177	Learning to combine representations for medical records search The complexity of medical terminology raises challenges when searching medical records. For example, 'cancer', 'tumour', and 'neoplasms', which are synonyms, may prevent a traditional search system from retrieving relevant records that contain only synonyms of the query terms. Prior works use bag-of-concepts approaches, to deal with this by representing medical terms sharing the same meanings using concepts from medical resources (e.g. MeSH). The relevance scores are then combined with a traditional bag-of-words representation, when inferring the relevance of medical records. Even though the existing approaches are effective, the predicted retrieval effectiveness of either the bag-of-words or bag-of-concepts representation, which may be used to effectively model the score combination and hence improve retrieval performance, is not taken into account. In this paper, we propose a novel learning framework that models the importance of the bag-of-words and the bag-of-concepts representations, combining their scores on a per-query basis. Our proposed framework leverages retrieval performance predictors, such as the clarity score and AvIDF, calculated on both representations as learning features. We evaluate our proposed framework using the TREC Medical Records track's test collections. As our proposed framework can significantly outperform an existing approach that linearly merges the relevance scores, we conclude that retrieval performance predictors can be effectively leveraged when combining the relevance scores.
2484176	Collaborative factorization for recommender systems Recommender system has become an effective tool for information filtering, which usually provides the most useful items to users by a top-k ranking list. Traditional recommendation techniques such as Nearest Neighbors (NN) and Matrix Factorization (MF) have been widely used in real recommender systems. However, neither approaches can well accomplish recommendation task since that: (1) most NN methods leverage the neighbor's behaviors for prediction, which may suffer the severe data sparsity problem; (2) MF methods are less sensitive to sparsity, but neighbors' influences on latent factors are not fully explored, since the latent factors are often used independently. To overcome the above problems, we propose a new framework for recommender systems, called collaborative factorization. It expresses the user as the combination of his own factors and those of the neighbors', called collaborative latent factors, and a ranking loss is then utilized for optimization. The advantage of our approach is that it can both enjoy the merits of NN and MF methods. In this paper, we take the logistic loss in RankNet and the likelihood loss in ListMLE as examples, and the corresponding collaborative factorization methods are called CoF-Net and CoF-MLE. Our experimental results on three benchmark datasets show that they are more effective than several state-of-the-art recommendation methods.
2484175	An adaptive evidence weighting method for medical record search In this paper, we present a medical record search system which is useful for identifying cohorts required in clinical studies. In particular, we propose a query-adaptive weighting method that can dynamically aggregate and score evidence in multiple medical reports (from different hospital departments or from different tests within the same department) of a patient. Furthermore, we explore several informative features for learning our retrieval model.
2484174	Boosting novelty for biomedical information retrieval through probabilistic latent semantic analysis In information retrieval, we are interested in the information that is not only relevant but also novel. In this paper, we study how to boost novelty for biomedical information retrieval through probabilistic latent semantic analysis. We conduct the study based on TREC Genomics Track data. In TREC Genomics Track, each topic is considered to have an arbitrary number of aspects, and the novelty of a piece of information retrieved, called a passage, is assessed based on the amount of new aspects it contains. In particular, the aspect performance of a ranked list is rewarded by the number of new aspects reached at each rank and penalized by the amount of irrelevant passages that are rated higher than the novel ones. Therefore, to improve aspect performance, we should reach as many aspects as possible and as early as possible. In this paper, we make a preliminary study on how probabilistic latent semantic analysis can help capture different aspects of a ranked list, and improve its performance by re-ranking. Experiments indicate that the proposed approach can greatly improve the aspect-level performance over baseline algorithm Okapi BM25.
2484179	Informational friend recommendation in social media It is well recognized that users rely on social media (e.g. Twitter or Digg) to fulfill two common needs (i.e. social need and informational need) that is to keep in touch with their friends in the real world and to have access to information they are interested in. Traditional friend recommendation methods in social media mainly focus on a user's social need, but seldom address their informational need (i.e. suggesting friends that can provide information one may be interested in but have not been able to obtain so far). In this paper, we propose to recommend friends according to the informational utility, which stands for the degree to which a friend satisfies the target user's unfulfilled informational need, called informational friend recommendation. In order to capture users' informational need, we view a post in social media as an item and utilize collaborative filtering techniques to predict the rating for each post. The candidate friends are then ranked according to their informational utility for recommendation. In addition, we also show how to further consider diversity in such recommendations. Experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that our approach can significantly outperform the traditional friend recommendation methods under informational evaluation measures.
2484178	Characterizing stages of a multi-session complex search task through direct and indirect query modifications Search systems use context to effectively satisfy a user's information need as expressed by a query. Tasks are important factors in determining user context during search and many studies have been conducted that identify tasks and task stages through users' interaction behavior with search systems. The type of interaction available to users, however, depends on the type of search interface features available. Queries are the most pervasive input from users to express their information need regardless of the input method, e.g., typing keywords or clicking facets. Instead of characterizing interaction behavior in terms of interface specific components, we propose to characterize users' search behavior in terms of two types of query modification: (i) direct modification, which refers to reformulations of queries; and (ii) indirect modification, which refers to user operations on additional input components provided by various search interfaces. We investigate the utility of characterizing task stages through direct and indirect query reformulations in a case study and find that it is possible to effectively differentiate subsequent stages of the search task. We found that describing user interaction behavior in such a generic form allowed us to relate user actions to search task stages independent from the specific search interface deployed. The next step will then be to validate this idea in a setting with a wider palette of search tasks and tools.
2484160	On contextual photo tag recommendation Image tagging is a growing application on social media websites, however, the performance of many auto-tagging methods are often poor. Recent work has exploited an image's context (e.g. time and location) in the tag recommendation process, where tags which co-occur highly within a given time interval or geographical area are promoted. These models, however, fail to address how and when different image contexts can be combined. In this paper, we propose a weighted tag recommendation model, building on an existing state-of-the-art, which varies the importance of time and location in the recommendation process, based on a given set of input tags. By retrieving more temporally and geographically relevant tags, we achieve statistically significant improvements to recommendation accuracy when testing on 519k images collected from Flickr. The result of this paper is an important step towards more effective image annotation and retrieval systems.
2484161	Document features predicting assessor disagreement The notion of relevance differs between assessors, thus giving rise to assessor disagreement. Although assessor disagreement has been frequently observed, the factors leading to disagreement are still an open problem. In this paper we study the relationship between assessor disagreement and various topic independent factors such as readability and cohesiveness. We build a logistic model using reading level and other simple document features to predict assessor disagreement and rank documents by decreasing probability of disagreement. We compare the predictive power of these document-level features with that of a meta-search feature that aggregates a document's ranking across multiple retrieval runs. Our features are shown to be on a par with the meta-search feature, without requiring a large and diverse set of retrieval runs to calculate. Surprisingly, however, we find that the reading level features are negatively correlated with disagreement, suggesting that they are detecting some other aspect of document content.
2484162	Neighbourhood preserving quantisation for LSH We introduce a scheme for optimally allocating multiple bits per hyperplane for Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH). Existing approaches binarise LSH projections by thresholding at zero yielding a single bit per dimension. We demonstrate that this is a sub-optimal bit allocation approach that can easily destroy the neighbourhood structure in the original feature space. Our proposed method, dubbed Neighbourhood Preserving Quantization (NPQ), assigns multiple bits per hyperplane based upon adaptively learned thresholds. NPQ exploits a pairwise affinity matrix to discretise each dimension such that nearest neighbours in the original feature space fall within the same quantisation thresholds and are therefore assigned identical bits. NPQ is not only applicable to LSH, but can also be applied to any low-dimensional projection scheme. Despite using half the number of hyperplanes, NPQ is shown to improve LSH-based retrieval accuracy by up to 65% compared to the state-of-the-art.
2484168	Relevance dimensions in preference-based IR evaluation Evaluation of information retrieval (IR) systems has recently been exploring the use of preference judgments over two search result lists. Unlike the traditional method of collecting relevance labels per single result, this method allows to consider the interaction between search results as part of the judging criteria. For example, one result list may be preferred over another if it has a more diverse set of relevant results, covering a wider range of user intents. In this paper, we investigate how assessors determine their preference for one list of results over another with the aim to understand the role of various relevance dimensions in preference-based evaluation. We run a series of experiments and collect preference judgments over different relevance dimensions in side-by-side comparisons of two search result lists, as well as relevance judgments for the individual documents. Our analysis of the collected judgments reveals that preference judgments combine multiple dimensions of relevance that go beyond the traditional notion of relevance centered on topicality. Measuring performance based on single document judgments and NDCG aligns well with topicality based preferences, but shows misalignment with judges' overall preferences, largely due to the diversity dimension. As a judging method, dimensional preference judging is found to lead to improved judgment quality.
2484167	Exploiting semantics for improving clinical information retrieval Clinical information retrieval (IR) presents several challenges including terminology mismatch and granularity mismatch. One of the main objectives in clinical IR is to fill the semantic gap among the queries and documents and go beyond keywords matching. To address these issues, in this paper we attempt to use semantic information to improve the performance of clinical IR systems by representing queries in an expressive and meaningful context. To model a query context initially we model and develop query domain ontology. The query domain ontology represents concepts closely related with query concepts. Query context represents concepts extracted from query domain ontology and weighted according to their semantic relatedness to query concept(s). The query context is then exploited in query expansion and patients records re-ranking for improving clinical retrieval performance. We evaluate our approach on the TREC Medical Records dataset. Results show that our proposed approach significantly improves the retrieval performance compare to classic keyword-based IR model.
2484169	Temporal variance of intents in multi-faceted event-driven information needs Time is often important for understanding user intent during search activity, especially for information needs related to event-driven topics. Diversity for multi-faceted information needs ensures that ranked documents optimally cover multiple facets when a user's intent is uncertain. Effective diversity is reliant on methods to (i) discover and represent facets, and (ii) determine how likely each facet is the user's intent (i.e., its popularity). Past work has developed several techniques addressing these issues, however, they have concentrated on static approaches which do not consider the temporal nature of new and evolving intents and their popularity. In many cases, what a user expects may change dramatically over time as events develop. In this work we study the temporal variance of search intents for event-driven information needs using Wikipedia. First, we model intents based upon the structure represented by the section hierarchy of Wikipedia articles closely related to the information need. Using this technique, we investigate whether temporal changes in the content structure, i.e. in a section's text, reflect the temporal popularity of the intent. We map intents taken from a query-log (as ground-truth) to Wikipedia article sections and found that a large proportion are indeed reflected in topic-related article structure. By correlating the change activity of each section with the use of the intent query over time, we found that section change activity does reflect temporal popularity of many intents. Furthermore, we show that popularity between intents changes over time for event-driven topics.
2484164	Towards retrieving relevant information graphics Information retrieval research has made significant progress in the retrieval of text documents and images. However, relatively little attention has been given to the retrieval of information graphics (non-pictorial images such as bar charts and line graphs) despite their proliferation in popular media such as newspapers and magazines. Our goal is to build a system for retrieving bar charts and line graphs that reasons about the content of the graphic itself in deciding its relevance to the user query. This paper presents the first steps toward such a system, with a focus on identifying the category of intended message of potentially relevant bar charts and line graphs. Our learned model achieves accuracy higher than 80% on a corpus of collected user queries.
2484163	A comparison of the optimality of statistical significance tests for information retrieval evaluation Previous research has suggested the permutation test as the theoretically optimal statistical significance test for IR evaluation, and advocated for the discontinuation of the Wilcoxon and sign tests. We present a large-scale study comprising nearly 60 million system comparisons showing that in practice the bootstrap, t-test and Wilcoxon test outperform the permutation test under different optimality criteria. We also show that actual error rates seem to be lower than the theoretically expected 5%, further confirming that we may actually be underestimating significance.
2484166	Improving LDA topic models for microblogs via tweet pooling and automatic labeling Twitter, or the world of 140 characters poses serious challenges to the efficacy of topic models on short, messy text. While topic models such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) have a long history of successful application to news articles and academic abstracts, they are often less coherent when applied to microblog content like Twitter. In this paper, we investigate methods to improve topics learned from Twitter content without modifying the basic machinery of LDA; we achieve this through various pooling schemes that aggregate tweets in a data preprocessing step for LDA. We empirically establish that a novel method of tweet pooling by hashtags leads to a vast improvement in a variety of measures for topic coherence across three diverse Twitter datasets in comparison to an unmodified LDA baseline and a variety of pooling schemes. An additional contribution of automatic hashtag labeling further improves on the hashtag pooling results for a subset of metrics. Overall, these two novel schemes lead to significantly improved LDA topic models on Twitter content.
2484165	A test collection for entity search in DBpedia We develop and make publicly available an entity search test collection based on the DBpedia knowledge base. This includes a large number of queries and corresponding relevance judgments from previous benchmarking campaigns, covering a broad range of information needs, ranging from short keyword queries to natural language questions. Further, we present baseline results for this collection with a set of retrieval models based on language modeling and BM25. Finally, we perform an initial analysis to shed light on certain characteristics that make this data set particularly challenging.
2484150	Is relevance hard work?: evaluating the effort of making relevant assessments The judging of relevance has been a subject of study in information retrieval for a long time, especially in the creation of relevance judgments for test collections. While the criteria by which assessors? judge relevance has been intensively studied, little work has investigated the process individual assessors go through to judge the relevance of a document. In this paper, we focus on the process by which relevance is judged, and in particular, the degree of effort a user must expend to judge relevance. By better understanding this effort in isolation, we may provide data which can be used to create better models of search. We present the results of an empirical evaluation of the effort users must exert to judge the relevance of document, investigating the effect of relevance level and document size. Results suggest that 'relevant' documents require more effort to judge when compared to highly relevant and not relevant documents, and that effort increases as document size increases.
2484151	Cumulative citation recommendation: classification vs. ranking Cumulative citation recommendation refers to the task of filtering a time-ordered corpus for documents that are highly relevant to a predefined set of entities. This task has been introduced at the TREC Knowledge Base Acceleration track in 2012, where two main families of approaches emerged: classification and ranking. In this paper we perform an experimental comparison of these two strategies using supervised learning with a rich feature set. Our main finding is that ranking outperforms classification on all evaluation settings and metrics. Our analysis also reveals that a ranking-based approach has more potential for future improvements.
2484159	Sequential testing in classifier evaluation yields biased estimates of effectiveness It is common to develop and validate classifiers through a process of repeated testing, with nested training and/or test sets of increasing size. We demonstrate in this paper that such repeated testing leads to biased estimates of classifier effectiveness. Experiments on a range of text classification tasks under three sequential testing frameworks show all three lead to optimistic estimates of effectiveness. We calculate empirical adjustments to unbias estimates on our data set, and identify directions for research that could lead to general techniques for avoiding bias while reducing labeling costs.
2484158	Who will retweet me?: finding retweeters in twitter An important aspect of communication in Twitter (and other Social Network is message propagation -- people creating posts for others to share. Although there has been work on modelling how tweets in Twitter are propagated (retweeted), an untackled problem has been who will retweet a message. Here we consider the task of finding who will retweet a message posted on Twitter. Within a learning to-rank framework, we explore a wide range of features, such as retweet history, followers status, followers active time and followers interests. We find that followers who retweeted or mentioned the author's tweets frequently before and have common interests are more likely to be retweeters.
2484157	Author disambiguation by hierarchical agglomerative clustering with adaptive stopping criterion Entity disambiguation is an important step in many information retrieval applications. This paper proposes new research for entity disambiguation with the focus of name disambiguation in digital libraries. In particular, pairwise similarity is first learned for publications that share the same author name string (ANS) and then a novel Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering approach with Adaptive Stopping Criterion (HACASC) is proposed to adaptively cluster a set of publications that share a same ANS to individual clusters of publications with different author identities. The HACASC approach utilizes a mixture of kernel ridge regressions to intelligently determine the threshold in clustering. This obtains more appropriate clustering granularity than non-adaptive stopping criterion. We conduct a large scale empirical study with a dataset of more than 2 million publication record pairs to demonstrate the advantage of the proposed HACASC approach.
2484156	Assessor disagreement and text classifier accuracy Text classifiers are frequently used for high-yield retrieval from large corpora, such as in e-discovery. The classifier is trained by annotating example documents for relevance. These examples may, however, be assessed by people other than those whose conception of relevance is authoritative. In this paper, we examine the impact that disagreement between actual and authoritative assessor has upon classifier effectiveness, when evaluated against the authoritative conception. We find that using alternative assessors leads to a significant decrease in binary classification quality, though less so ranking quality. A ranking consumer would have to go on average 25% deeper in the ranking produced by alternative-assessor training to achieve the same yield as for authoritative-assessor training.
2484155	Recommending personalized touristic sights using google places The purpose of the Contextual Suggestion track, an evaluation task at the TREC 2012 conference, is to suggest personalized tourist activities to an individual, given a certain location and time. In our content-based approach, we collected initial recommendations using the location context as search query in Google Places. We first ranked the recommendations based on their textual similarity to the user profiles. In order to improve the ranking of popular sights, we combined the initial ranking with rankings based on Google Search, popularity and categories. Finally, we performed filtering based on the temporal context. Overall, our system performed well above average and median, and outperformed the baseline - Google Places only -- run.
2484154	A study on the accuracy of Flickr's geotag data Obtaining geographically tagged multimedia items from social Web platforms such as Flickr is beneficial for a variety of applications including the automatic creation of travelogues and personalized travel recommendations. In order to take advantage of the large number of photos and videos that do not contain (GPS-based) latitude/longitude coordinates, a number of approaches have been proposed to estimate the geographic location where they were taken. Such location estimation methods rely on existing geotagged multimedia items as training data. Across application and usage scenarios, it is commonly assumed that the available geotagged items contain (reasonably) accurate latitude/longitude coordinates. Here, we consider this assumption and investigate how accurate the provided location data is. We conduct a study of Flickr images and videos and find that the accuracy of the geotag information is highly dependent on the popularity of the location: images/videos taken at popular (unpopular) locations, are likely to be geotagged with a high (low) degree of accuracy with respect to the ground truth.
2484153	Exploring semi-automatic nugget extraction for Japanese one click access evaluation Building test collections based on nuggets is useful evaluating systems that return documents, answers, or summaries. However, nugget construction requires a lot of manual work and is not feasible for large query sets. Towards an efficient and scalable nugget-based evaluation, we study the applicability of semi-automatic nugget extraction in the context of the ongoing NTCIR  One Click Access (1CLICK) task. We compare manually-extracted and semi-automatically-extracted Japanese nuggets to demonstrate the coverage and efficiency of the semi-automatic nugget extraction. Our findings suggest that the manual nugget extraction can be replaced with a direct adaptation of the English semi-automatic nugget extraction system, especially for queries for which the user desires broad answers from free-form text.
2484152	Is uncertain logical-matching equivalent to conditional probability? Logic-based Information Retrieval (IR) models represent the retrieval decision as a logical implication d-&#62;q between a document d and a query q, where d and q are logical sentences. However, d-&#62;q is a binary decision, we thus need a measure to estimate the degree to which d implies q, denoted P(d-&#62;q). In this study, we revisit the Van Rijsbergen's assumptions about: 1- the logical implication -&#62;' is not the material one, and 2- P(d-&#62;q) could be estimated by the conditional probability P(q|d). More precisely, we claim that the material implication is an appropriate implication for IR, and also we mathematically prove that replacing P(d-&#62;q) by P(q|d) is a correct choice. In order to prove the Van Rijsbergen's assumption, we use the Propositional Logic and the Lattice theory. We also exploit the notion of degree of implication that is proposed by Knuth.
2491801	Exploration, navigation and retrieval of information in cultural heritage: ENRICH 2013 The Exploration, Navigation and Retrieval of Information in Cultural Heritage Workshop (ENRICH 2013) offers a forum to 1) discuss the challenges and opportunities in Information Retrieval research in the area of Cultural Heritage; 2) encourage collaboration between researchers engaged in work in this specialist area of Information Retrieval, and to foster the formation of a research community; and 3) identify a set of actions which the community should undertake to progress the research agenda. The workshop will foster a new stream of Information Retrieval research and support the design of search tools that can help end-users fully exploit the wonderful Cultural Heritage material that is available across the globe.
2491802	SIGIR 2013 workshop on time aware information access (#TAIA2013) Web content increasingly reflects the current state of the physical and social world, manifested both in traditional news media sources along with user-generated publishing sites such as Twitter, Foursquare, and Facebook. At the same time, web searching increasingly reflects problems grounded in the real world. As a result of this blending of the web with the real world, we observe that the web, both in its composition and use, has incorporated many of the dynamics of the real world. Few of the problems associated with searching dynamic collections are well understood, such as defining time-sensitive relevance, understanding user query behavior over time and understanding why certain web content changes. We believe that, just as static collections often benefit from modeling topics, dynamic collections will likely benefit from temporal modeling of events and time-sensitive user interests and intents, which were rarely addressed in the literature. There have been preliminary efforts in the research and industrial communities to address algorithms, architectures, evaluation methodologies and metrics. We aim to bring together practitioners and researchers to discuss their recent breakthroughs and the challenges with addressing time-aware information access, both from the algorithmic and the architectural perspectives. This workshop is a successor to the successful SIGIR 2012 Workshop on Time Aware Information Access (#TAIA2012). Where the 2012 edition was the first to bring together a broad set of academic and industrial researchers around the topic of time-aware information access, the specific focus of this workshop is on the many time-aware benchmarking activities that are ongoing in 2013.
2484233	Semantic models for answer re-ranking in question answering The task of Question Answering (QA) is to find correct answers to users' questions expressed in natural language. In the last few years non-factoid QA received more attention. It focuses on causation, manner and reason questions, where the expected answer has the form of a passage of text. The presence of question and answers corpora allows the adoption of Learning to Rank (MLR) algorithms in order to out- put a sensible ranking of the candidate answers. The importance and effectiveness of linguistically motivated features, obtained from syntax, lexical semantics and semantic role labeling, was shown in literature [2-4], but there are still several different possible semantic features that have not been taken into account so far and our goal is to find out if their use could lead to performance improvement. In particular features coming from Semantic Models (SM) like Distributional Semantic Models (DSMs), Explicit Semantic Analysis (ESA), Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) induced topics have never been applied to the task so far. Based on the usefulness that those models show in other tasks, we think that SM can have a significant role in improving current state-of-the-art systems' performance in answer re-ranking. The questions this research wants to answer are: 1) Do semantic features bring information that is not present in the bag-of-words and syntactic features? 2) Do they bring different information or does it overlap with that of other features? 3) Are additional semantic features useful for answer re-ranking? Does their adoption improve systems' performance? 4) Which of them is more effective and under which circumstances? We performed a preliminary evaluation of DSMs on the ResPubliQA 2010 Dataset. We built a DSM based answer scorer that represents the question and the answer as the sums of the vectors of their terms taken term-term co-occurrence matrix and calculates their cosine similarity. We replaced the term-term matrix with the ones obtained by Random Indexing (RI), Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) and LSA over the RI. Considering each DSM on its own, the results prove that all the DSMs are better than the baseline (the standard term-term co-occurrence matrix), and the improvement is always significant. The best improvement for the MRR in English is obtained by LSA (+180%), while in Italian by LSARI (+161%). We also showed that combining the DSMs with overlap based measures via CombSum the ranking is significantly better than the baseline obtained by the overlap measures alone. For English we have obtained an improvement in MRR of about 16% and for Italian, we achieve a even higher improvement in MRR of 26%. Finally, adopting RankNet for combining the overlap features and the DSMs features, improves the MRR of about 13%. More details can be found in [1]. In order to investigate the effectiveness of the semantic features, we still need to incorporate other semantic features, such as ESA, LDA and other state-of-the-art linguistic features. Other operators for semantic compositionality, like product, tensor product and circular convolution, will also be investigated. Moreover we will experiment on different datasets, focus- ing mainly on non-factoid QA. The Yahoo! Answers Manner Questions datasets are a good starting point. A new dataset will also be collected with questions from the users of Wikiedi (a QA system over Wikipedia articles, www.wikiedi.it) and answers in the form of paragraphs from Wikipedia pages.
2484234	Indexing and querying overlapping structures Structural information retrieval is mostly based on hierarchy. However, in real life information is not purely hierarchical and structural elements may overlap each other. The most common example is a document with two distinct structural views, where the logical view is section/ subsection/ paragraph and the physical view is page/ line. Each single structural view of this document is a hierarchy and the components are either disjoint or nested inside each other. The overlapping issue arises when one structural element cannot be neatly nested into others. For instance, when a paragraph starts in one page and terminates in the next page. Similar situations can appear in videos and other multimedia contents, where temporal or spatial constituents of a media file may overlap each other. Querying over overlapping structures is one of the challenges of large scale search engines. For instance, FSIS (FAST Search for Internet Sites) [1] is a Microsoft search platform, which encounters overlaps while analysing content of textual data. FSIS uses a pipeline process to extract structure and semantic information of documents. The pipeline contains several components, where each component writes annotations to the input data. These annotations consist of structural elements and some of them may overlap each other. Handling overlapping structures in search engines will add a novel capability of searching, where users can ask queries such as "Find all the words that overlap two lines" or "Find the music played during Intro scene of Avatar movie". There are also other use cases, where the user of the search engine is not a person, but is a specific program with complex, non-traditional information retrieval needs. This research attempts to index overlapping structures and provide efficient query processing for large-scale search engines. The current research on overlapping structures revolves around encoding and modelling data, while indexing and query processing methods need investigations. Moreover, due to intrinsic complexity of overlaps, XML indexing and query processing techniques cannot be used for overlapping structures. Hence, my research on overlapping structures comprises three main parts: (1) an indexing method that supports both hierarchies and overlaps; (2) a query processing method based on the indexing technique and (3) a query language that is close to natural language and supports both full text and structural queries. Our approach for indexing overlaps is to adapt the PrePost [3] XML indexing method to overlapping structures. This method labels each node with its start and end positions and requires modest storage space. However, PrePost indexing cannot be used for overlapping nodes. To overcome this issue, we need to define a data model for overlapping structures. Since hierarchies are not sufficient to describe overlapping components, several data structures have been introduced by scholars. One of the most interesting data models is GODDAG [2]. GODDAG is a tree-like graph, where nodes can have multiple parentage. This model can support overlaps as well as simple inheritance. Our proposed data model for indexing overlaps is such a tree-like structure, where we can define overlapping, parent-child and ancestor-descendant relationships.
2484235	Group-support for task-based information searching: a knowledge-based approach 
2484236	Task differentiation for personal search evaluation 
2484230	Effective approaches to retrieving and using expertise in social media Expert retrieval has been widely studied especially after the introduction of Expert Finding task in the TREC's Enterprise Track in 2005 [3]. This track provided two different test collections crawled from two organizations' public-facing websites and internal emails which led to the development of many state-of-the-art algorithms on expert retrieval [1]. Until recently, these datasets were considered good representatives of the information resources available within enterprise. However, the recent growth of social media also influenced the work environment, and social media became a common communication and collaboration tool within organizations. According to a recent survey by McKinsey Global Institute [2], 29% of the companies use at least one social media tool for matching their employees to tasks, and 26% of them assess their employees' performance by using social media. This shows that intra-organizational social media became an important resource to identify expertise within organizations. In recent years, in addition to the intra-organizational social media, public social media tools like Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn also became common environments for searching expertise. These tools provide an opportunity for their users to show their specific skills to the world which motivates recruiters to look for talented job candidates on social media, or writers and reporters to find experts for consulting on specific topics they are working on. With these motivations in mind, in this work we propose to develop expert retrieval algorithms for intra-organizational and public social media tools. Social media datasets have both challenges and advantages. In terms of challenges, they do not always contain context on one specific domain, instead one social media tool may contain discussions on technical stuff, hobbies or news concurrently. They may also contain spam posts or advertisements. Compared to well-edited enterprise documents, they are much more informal in language. Furthermore, depending on the social media platform, they may have limits on the number of characters used in posts. Even though they include the challenges stated above, they also bring some unique authority signals, such as votes, comments, follower/following information, which can be useful in estimating expertise. Furthermore, compared to previously used enterprise documents, social media provides clear associations between documents and candidates in the context of authorship information. In this work, we propose to develop expert retrieval approaches which will handle these challenges while making use of the advantages. Expert retrieval is a very useful application by itself; furthermore, it can be a step towards improving other social media applications. Social media is different than other web based tools mainly because it is dependent on its users. In social media, users are not just content consumers, but they are also the primary and sometimes the only content creators. Therefore, the quality of any user-generated content in social media depends on its creator. In this thesis, we propose to use expertise of users in order to improve the existing applications so that they can estimate the relevancy of a content not just based on the content, but also based on the expertise of the content creator. By using expertise of the content generator, we also hope to boost contents that are more reliable. We propose to apply this user's expertise information in order to improve ad-hoc search and question answering applications in social media. In this work, previous TREC enterprise datasets, available intra-organizational social media and public social media datasets will be used to test the proposed algorithms.
2484231	The role of current working context in professional search Today's working world of knowledge workers is changing rapidly. The available information that they need to process is ever growing. In addition, the characteristics of their work are changing as people can and do their work from home. This has resulted in the need to support knowledge workers in order to prevent burnouts. The project SWELL (http://www.swell-project.net) targets this by developing systems that support user's mental and physical well-being at work and at home. In the PhD project presented in this abstract we aim at maintaining well-being at work through information support.
2484232	How far will you go?: characterizing and predicting online search stopping behavior using information scent and need for cognition 
2484237	Segmentation strategies for passage retrieval in audio-visual documents The importance of Information Retrieval (IR) in audio-visual recordings has been increasing with steeply growing numbers of audio-visual documents available on-line. Compared to traditional IR methods, this task requires specific techniques, such as Passage Retrieval which can accelerate the search process by retrieving the exact relevant passage of a recording instead of the full document. In Passage Retrieval, full recordings are divided into shorter segments which serve as individual documents for the further IR setup. This technique also allows normalizing document length and applying positional information. It was shown that it can even improve retrieval results. In this work, we examine two general strategies for Passage Retrieval: blind segmentation into overlapping regular-length passages and segmentation into variable-length passages based on semantics of their content. Time-based segmentation was already shown to improve retrieval of textual documents and audio-visual recordings. Our experiments performed on the test collection used in the Search subtask of the Search and Hyperlinking Task in MediaEval Benchmarking 2012 confirm those findings and show that parameters (segment length and shift) tuning for a specific test collection can further improve the results. Our best results on this collection were achieved by using 45-second long segments with 15-second shifts. Semantic-based segmentation can be divided into three types: similarity-based (producing segments with high intra-similarity and low inter-similarity), lexical-chain-based (producing segments with frequent lexically connected words), and feature-based (combining various features which signalize a segment break in a machine-learning setting). In this work, we mainly focus on feature-based segmentation which allows exploiting various features from all modalities of the data (including segment length) in a single trainable model and produces segments which can eventually overlap. Our preliminary results show that even simple semantic-based segmentation outperforms regular segmentation. Our model is a decision tree incorporating the following features: shot segments, output of TextTiling algorithm, cue words (well, thanks, so, I, now), sentence breaks, and the length of the silence after the previous word. In terms of the MASP, the relative improvement over regular segmentation is more than 19%.
2484209	Answering natural language queries over linked data graphs: a distributional semantics approach This paper demonstrates Treo, a natural language query mechanism for Linked Data graphs. The approach uses a distributional semantic vector space model to semantically match user query terms with data, supporting vocabulary-independent (or schema-agnostic) queries over structured data.
2484208	Match the news: a firefox extension for real-time news recommendation We present Match the News, a browser extension for real time news recommendation. Our extension works on the client side to recommend in real time recently published articles that are relevant to the web page the user is currently visiting. Match the News is fed from Google News RSS and applies syntactic matching to find the relevant articles. We implement an innovative weighting function to perform the keyword extraction task, BM25H. With BM25H we extract keywords not only relevant to currently browsed web page, but also novel with respect to the user's recent browsing history. The novelty feature in keyword extraction task results in meaningful news recommendations with regards to the web page the users currently visits. Moreover the extension offers a salient visualization of the terms corresponding to the users recent browsing history making thus the extension a comprehensive tool for real time news recommendation and self assessment.
2484207	A framework for specific term recommendation systems In this paper we present the IRSA framework that enables the automatic creation of search term suggestion or recommendation systems (TS). Such TS are used to operationalize interactive query expansion and help users in refining their information need in the query formulation phase. Our recent research has shown TS to be more effective when specific to a certain domain. The presented technical framework allows owners of Digital Libraries to create their own specific TS constructed via OAI-harvested metadata with very little effort.
2484206	YaLi: a crowdsourcing plug-in for NERD We demonstrate the YaLi browser plug-in which discovers named entities in Web pages and provides background knowledge about them. The plug-in is implemented with two purposes. From a user perspective, it enriches the browsing experience with entities, helping users with their information needs. From the research perspective, we aim to improve the methods that are used for named entity recognition and disambiguation (NERD) by leveraging the plug-in as an implicit crowdsourcing platform. YaLi tracks the system's errors and the users' corrections, and also gathers implicit training data for improving NERD accuracy.
2484205	ProductSeeker: entity-based product retrieval for e-commerce The retrieval results of online products information in e-commerce web sites are often difficult for users to use because of different descriptions for the same product. This paper proposes ProductSeeker, a product retrieval system organizing results according to their referring real-world entities for the conveniences of users. In the demonstration, we will present our system providing friendly interface to retrieve fresh product information and refining results according to feedback.
2484204	Online matching of web content to closed captions in IntoNow IntoNow is a mobile application that provides a second-screen experience to television viewers. IntoNow uses the microphone of the companion device to sample the audio coming from the TV set, and compares it against a database of TV shows in order to identify the program being watched. The system we demonstrate is activated by IntoNow for specific types of shows. It retrieves information related to the program the user is watching by using closed captions, which are provided by each broadcasting network along the TV signal. It then matches the stream of closed captions in real-time against multiple sources of content. More specifically, during news programs it displays links to online news articles and the profiles of people and organizations in the news, and during music shows it displays links to songs. The matching models are machine-learned from editorial judgments, and tuned to achieve approximately 90% precision.
2484203	Spacious: an interactive mental search interface We introduce in this work a novel approach for semantic indexing and mental image search. Given semantic concepts defined by few training examples, our formulation is transductive and learns a mapping from an initial ambient space, related to low level visual features, to an output space spanned by a well defined semantic basis where data can be easily explored. With this method, searching for a mental visual target reduces to scanning data according to their coordinates in the learned semantic space. We illustrate the proposed method through our graphical user interface "Spacious", for the purpose of visualization and interactive navigation in generic image databases and satellite images.
2484202	TopicVis: a GUI for topic-based feedback and navigation This paper describes a search system which includes topic model visualization to improve the user search experience. The system graphically renders the topics in a retrieved set of documents, enables a user to selectively refine search results and allows easy navigation through information on selective topics within documents.
2484201	A multilingual and multiplatform application for medicinal plants prescription from medical symptoms This paper presents an application for medicinal plants prescription based on text classification techniques. The system receives as an input a free text describing the symptoms of a user, and retrieves a ranked list of medicinal plants related to those symptoms. In addition, a set of links to Wikipedia are also provided, enriching the information about every medicinal plant presented to the user. In order to improve the accessibility to the application, the input can be written in six different languages, adapting the results accordingly. The application interface can be accessed from different devices and platforms.
2484200	X-ENS: semantic enrichment of web search results at real-time While more and more semantic data are published on the Web, an important question is how typical web users can access and exploit this body of knowledge. Although, existing interaction paradigms in semantic search hide the complexity behind an easy-to-use interface, they have not managed to cover common search needs. In this paper, we present X-ENS (eXplore ENtities in Search), a web search application that enhances the classical, keyword-based, web searching with semantic information, as a means to combine the pros of both Semantic Web standards and common Web Searching. X-ENS identifies entities of interest in the snippets of the top search results which can be further exploited in a faceted interaction scheme, and thereby can help the user to limit the - often very large - search space to those hits that contain a particular piece of information. Moreover, X-ENS permits the exploration of the identified entities by exploiting semantic repositories.
2484229	Beyond relevance: on novelty and diversity in tag recommendation We propose to explicitly exploit issues related to novelty and diversity in tag recommendation tasks, an unexplored research avenue (only relevance issues have been investigated so far), in order to improve user experience and satisfaction. We propose new tag recommendation strategies to cover these issues and highlight the involved challenges.
2484228	A query and patient understanding framework for medical records search Electronic medical records (EMRs) are being increasingly used worldwide to facilitate improved healthcare services [2,3]. They describe the clinical decision process relating to a patient, detailing the observed symptoms, the conducted diagnostic tests, the identified diagnoses and the prescribed treatments. However, medical records search is challenging, due to the implicit knowledge inherent within the medical records - such knowledge may be known by medical practitioners, but hidden to an information retrieval (IR) system [3]. For instance, the mention of a treatment such as a drug may indicate to a practitioner that a particular diagnosis has been made even if this was not explicitly mentioned in the patient's EMRs. Moreover, the fact that a symptom has not been observed by a clinician may rule out some specific diagnoses. Our work focuses on searching EMRs to identify patients with medical histories relevant to the medical condition(s) stated in a query. The resulting system can be beneficial to healthcare providers, administrators, and researchers who may wish to analyse the effectiveness of a particular medical procedure to combat a specific disease [2,4]. During retrieval, a healthcare provider may indicate a number of inclusion criteria to describe the type of patients of interest. For example, the used criteria may include personal profiles (e.g. age and gender) or some specific medical symptoms and tests, allowing to identify patients that have EMRs matching the criteria. To attain effective retrieval performance, we hypothesise that, in such a medical IR system, both the information needs and patients should be modelled based on how the medical process is developed. Specifically, our thesis states that since the medical decision process typically encompasses four aspects (symptom, diagnostic test, diagnosis, and treatment), a medical search system should take into account these aspects and apply inferences to recover possible implicit knowledge. We postulate that considering these aspects and their derived implicit knowledge at different levels of the retrieval process (namely, sentence, record, and inter-record level) enhances the retrieval performance. Indeed, we propose to build a query and patient understanding framework that can gain insights from EMRs and queries, by modelling and reasoning during retrieval in terms of the four aforementioned aspects (symptom, diagnostic test, diagnosis, and treatment) at three different levels of the retrieval process.
2484227	Diversified relevance feedback The need for a search engine to deal with ambiguous queries has been known for a long time (diversification). However, it is only recently that this need has become a focus within information retrieval research. How to respond to indications that a result is relevant to a query (relevance feedback) has also been a long focus of research. When thinking about the results for a query as being clustered by topic, these two areas of information retrieval research appear to be opposed to each other. Interestingly though, they both appear to improve the performance of search engines, raising the question: they can be combined or made to work with each other? When presented with an ambiguous query there are a number of techniques that can be employed to better select results. The primary technique being researched now is diversification, which aims to populate the results with a set of documents that cover different possible interpretations for the query, while maintaining a degree of relevance, as determined by the search engine. For example, given a query of "java" it is unclear whether the user, without any other information, means the programming language, the coffee, the island of Indonesia or a multitude of other meanings. In order to do this the assumption that documents are independent of each other when assessing potential relevance has to be broken. That is, a documents relevance, as calculated by the search engine, is no longer dependent only on the query, but also the other documents that have been selected. How a document is identified as being similar to previously selected documents, and the trade off between estimated relevance and topic coverage are current areas for information retrieval research. For unambiguous queries, or for search engines that do not perform diversification, it is possible to improve the results selected by reacting to information identifying a given result as truly relevant or not. This mechanism is known as relevance feedback. The most common response to relevance feedback is to investigate the documents for their most content-bearing terms, and either add, or subtract, their influence to a newly formed query which is then re-run on the remaining documents to re-order them. There has been a scant amount of research into the combination of these methods. However, Carbonell et al. [1] show that an initially diverse result set can provide a better approach for identifying the topic a user is interested in for a relevance feedback style approach. This approach was further extended by Raman et al. [4]. An important aspect of relevance feedback is the selection of documents to use. In the 2008 TREC relevance feedback track, Meij et al. [3] generated a diversified result set which outperformed other rankings as a source of feedback documents. The use of pseudo-relevance feedback (assuming the top ranked documents are relevant) to extract sub-topics for use in diversification was explored by Santos et al. [5]. These previous approaches suggest that these two ideas are more linked than expected. The ATIRE search engine [6] will be used to further explore the relationship between diversification and relevance feedback. ATIRE was selected because it is developed locally, and is designed to be small and fast. ATIRE also produces a competitive baseline, which would have placed 6th in the 2011 TREC diversity task while performing no diversification and index-time spam filtering [2], although we concede this is not equivalent to submitting a run.
2484221	Internet advertising: theory and practice Internet advertising, a form of advertising that utilizes the Internet to deliver marketing messages and attract customers, has seen exponential growth since its inception around twenty years ago; it has been pivotal to the success of the World Wide Web. The dramatic growth of internet advertising poses great challenges to information retrieval, machine learning, data mining and game theory, and it calls for novel technologies to be developed. The main purpose of this workshop is to bring together researchers and practitioners in the area of Internet Advertising and enable them to share their latest research results, to express their opinions, and to discuss future directions.
2484220	Workshop on health search and discovery: helping users and advancing medicine This workshop brings together researchers and practitioners from industry and academia to discuss search and discovery in the medi-cal domain. The event focuses on ways to make medical and health information more accessible to laypeople (including enhancements to ranking algorithms and search interfaces), and how we can dis-cover new medical facts and phenomena from information sought online, as evidenced in query streams and other sources such as social media. This domain also offers many opportunities for appli-cations that monitor and improve quality of life of those affected by medical conditions, by providing tools to support their health-related information behavior.
2484224	Workshop on benchmarking adaptive retrieval and recommender systems: BARS 2013 Evaluating adaptive and personalized information retrieval tech-niques is known to be a difficult endeavor. The rapid evolution of novel technologies in this scope raises additional challenges that further stress the need for new evaluation approaches and method-ologies. The BARS 2013 workshop seeks to provide a specific venue for work on novel, personalization-centric benchmarking approaches to evaluate adaptive retrieval and recommender systems.
2484223	EuroHCIR2013: the 3rd European workshop on human-computer interaction and information retrieval A proposal summary for the EuroHCIR workshop at SIGIR2013.
2484222	SIGIR 2013 workshop on modeling user behavior for information retrieval evaluation The SIGIR 2013 Workshop on Modeling User Behavior for Information Retrieval Evaluation (MUBE 2013) brings together people to discuss existing and new approaches, ways to collaborate, and other ideas and issues involved in improving information retrieval evaluation through the modeling of user behavior.
2484216	Flex-BaseX: an XML engine with a flexible extension of Xquery full-text XML is the most used language for structuring data and documents, besides being the de-facto standard for data exchange. Keyword based search has been implemented by the XQuery Full-Text language extension, allowing document fragments to be retrieved and ranked via keyword-based matching in the Information Retrieval style. In this demo the implementation of an XQuery extension allowing users to express their vague knowledge of the underlying XML structure is presented. The integration has been performed on top of the BaseX query engine; the work, as initially done by Panzeri at al. in IIR 2013 as a proof-of-concept has been further enhanced and extended.
2484215	ThemeStreams: visualizing the stream of themes discussed in politics The political landscape is fluid. Discussions are always ongoing and new "hot topics" continue to appear in the headlines. But what made people start talking about that topic? And who started it? Because of the speed at which discussions sometimes take place this can be difficult to track down. We describe ThemeStreams: a demonstrator that maps political discussions to themes and influencers and illustrate how this mapping is used in an interactive visualization that shows us which themes are being discussed, and that helps us answer the question "Who put this issue on the map?" in streams of political data.
2484218	Removing the mismatch headache in XML keyword search In this demo, we study one category of query refinement problems in the context of XML keyword search, where what users search for do not exist in the data while useless results are returned by the search engine. It is a hidden but important problem. We refer to it as the MisMatch problem. We propose a practical yet efficient way to detect the MisMatch problem and generate helpful suggestions to users, namely MisMatch detector and suggester. Our approach can be viewed as a post-processing job of query evaluation. An online XML keyword search engine embedding the MisMatch detector and suggester has been built and is available at [1].
2484217	A portable multilingual medical directory by automatic categorization of Wikipedia articles Wikipedia has become one of the most important sources of information available all over the world. However, the categorization of Wikipedia articles is not standardized and the searches are mainly performed on keywords rather than concepts. In this paper we present an application that builds a hierarchical structure to organize all Wikipedia entries, so that medical articles can be reached from general to particular, using the well known Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) thesaurus. Moreover, the language links between articles will allow using the directory created in different languages. The final system can be packed and ported to mobile devices as a standalone offline application.
2484219	A geolinguistic web application based on linked open data Digital Geolinguistic systems encourage collaboration between linguists, historians, archaeologists, ethnographers, as they explore the relationship between language and cultural adaptation and change. In this demo, we propose a Linked Open Data approach for increasing the level of interoperability of geolinguistic applications and the reuse of the data. We present a case study of a geolinguistic project named Atlante Sintattico d'Italia, Syntactic Atlas of Italy (ASIt).
2484210	Information seeking in digital cultural heritage with PATHS Current Information Retrieval systems for digital cultural heritage support only the actual search aspect of the information seeking process. This demonstration presents the second PATHS system which provides the exploration, analysis, and sense-making features to support the full information seeking process.
2484212	TweetMogaz: a news portal of tweets Twitter is currently one of the largest social hubs for users to spread and discuss news. For most of the top news stories happening, there are corresponding discussions on social media. In this demonstration TweetMogaz is presented, which is a platform for microblog search and filtering. It creates a real-time comprehensive report about what people discuss and share around news happening in certain regions. TweetMogaz reports the most popular tweets, jokes, videos, images, and news articles that people share about top news stories. Moreover, it allows users to search for specific topics. A scalable automatic technique for microblog filtering is used to obtain relevant tweets to a certain news category in a region. TweetMogaz.com demonstrates the effectiveness of our filtering technique for reporting public response toward news in different Arabic regions including Egypt and Syria in real-time.
2484211	Live nuggets extractor: a semi-automated system for text extraction and test collection creation The Live Nugget Extractor system provides users with a method of efficiently and accurately collecting relevant information for any web query rather than providing a simple ranked lists of documents. The system utilizes an online learning procedure to infer relevance of unjudged documents while extracting and ranking information from judged documents. This creates a set of judged and inferred relevance scores for both documents and text fragments, which can be used for test collections, summarization, and other tasks where high accuracy and large collections with minimal human effort are needed.
2484214	Demonstration of citation pattern analysis for plagiarism detection 
2484213	InfoLand: information lay-of-land for session search Search result clustering (SRC) is a post-retrieval process that hierarchically organizes search results. The hierarchical structure offers overview for the search results and displays an "information lay-of-land" that intents to guide the users throughout a search session. However, SRC hierarchies are sensitive to query changes, which are common among queries in the same session. This instability may leave users seemly random overviews throughout the session. We present a new tool called InfoLand that integrates external knowledge from Wikipedia when building SRC hierarchies and increase their stability. Evaluation on TREC 2010-2011 Session Tracks shows that InfoLand produces more stable results organization than a commercial search engine.
2494492	Riding the multimedia big data wave In this talk we present a perspective across multiple industry problems, including safety and security, medical, Web, social and mobile media, and motivate the need for large-scale analysis and retrieval of multimedia data. We describe a multi-layer architecture that incorporates capabilities for audio-visual feature extraction, machine learning and semantic modeling and provides a powerful framework for learning and classifying contents of multimedia data. We discuss the role semantic ontologies for representing audio-visual concepts and relationships, which are essential for training semantic classifiers. We discuss the importance of using faceted classification schemes in particular for organizing multimedia semantic concepts in order to achieve effective learning and retrieval. We also show how training and scoring of multimedia semantics can be implemented on big data distributed computing platforms to address both massive-scale analysis and low-latency processing. We describe multiple efforts at IBM on image and video analysis and retrieval, including IBM Multimedia Analysis and Retrieval System (IMARS), and show recent results for semantic-based classification and retrieval. We conclude with future directions for improving analysis of multimedia through interactive and curriculum-based techniques for multimedia semantics-based learning and retrieval.
