automated cleansing for spend analytics the development of an aggregate view of the procurement spend across an enterprise using transactional data is increasingly becoming a very important and strategic activity . not only does it provide a complete and accurate picture of what the enterprise is buying and from whom , it also allows it to consolidate suppliers , as well as negotiate better prices . the importance , as well as the complexity , of this cleansing exercise is further magnified by the increasing popularity of business-transformation outsourcing (bto) wherein enterprises are turning over non-core activities , such as indirect procurement , to third parties , who now need to develop an integrated view of spend across multiple enterprises in order to optimize procurement and generate maximum savings . however , the creation of such an integrated view of procurement spend requires the creation of a homogeneous data-repository from disparate (heterogeneous) data sources across various geographic and functional organizations throughout the enterprise (s) . such repositories get transactional data from various sources such as invoices , purchase orders , account ledgers . as such , the transactions are not cross-indexed , refer to the same suppliers by different names , and use different ways of representing information about the same commodities . before an aggregated spend view can be developed , this data needs to be cleansed , primarily to normalize the supplier names and correctly map each transaction to the appropriate commodity code . commodity-mapping , in particular , is made more difficult by the fact that it has to be done on the basis of unstructured-text descriptions found in the various data sources . we describe an on-demand system to automatically perform this cleansing activity using techniques from information-retrieval and machine-learning . built on standard integration and application infrastructure software , this system provides enterprises with a fast , reliable , accurate and on-demand way of cleansing transactional data and generating an integrated view of spend . this system is currently in the process of being deployed by ibm for use in its bto practice .