how i learned to stop worrying and love the imminent internet singularity in 1993 , verner vinge [3] introduced the notion of the singularity -- a step function to nearly unlimited technological capability -- which would be realized if the acceleration of scientific progress continues to produce such things as strong ai , nanotechnology , and super-human intelligence . since its introduction , the idea of the singularity has been met with both evangelism (by ray kurzweil [2]) and apocalyptic warnings (by bill joy [1]) . in this talk , i will introduce a more modest version of the idea , which i call the-internet singularity . like the original , the-internet singularity suggests continued acceleration of progress , but makes greater emphasis on our ability to improve science , analytic methods , and engineering on data as opposed to the physical world . i make the case for the-internet singularity in four steps.first , there is a general-trend of more capabilities being more available to more people . these increasing capabilities span content-creation , community , and commerce , yielding more power to today 's `` amateur '' than yesterday 's `` professional '' . as a result , the boundary between producers and consumers is becoming increasingly blurred over time.second , in many parts of the-internet we see power-law-distributions with a heavy tail . one implication of heavy tail distributions is that the aggregate impact of `` small '' participants can be greater than that of the `` large '' participants.third , with the-internet comes entirely new means for authoring new and derivative works : aggregations , mashups , tagging , remixing , etc. . the greater emphasis on collaboration and sharing yields direct and indirect network-effects . network-effects , can produce entirely new utility , making online activities potentially more efficient or valuable than the offline equivalent.fourth , on the internet , advances are effectively decoupled from the physical constraints of the offline world : startups costs are smaller ; customer , collaborator , and audience pools are dramatically larger ; and improvements happen in more of a continuous rather than discreet manner . as a result the effective `` clock cycle '' of progress is potentially much faster online.putting these four pieces together reveals a compelling pattern : more people contribute to the collective pool ; the collective pool contains entirely new value that is derived from its data ; and the new value from the data increases individual and aggregate capabilities . in combination , these components mutually reinforce one another , forming something of a virtuous cycle . this is the-internet singularity.conceptually , if we consider engineering to be the ability to create artifacts , mathematical-analysis to be the ability to analyze numerical properties , and science to be the pursuit of knowledge , then each of these activities -- when focused on digital-objects as they exist on the internet -- can be amplified in a manner consistent with the-internet singularity.the implications for the-internet singularity are profound as they suggest nothing less than the evolution of the scientific-method itself . moreover , these trends also imply that now may be the best possible moment in the history of the universe to be a computer scientist .