exploiting temporal-contexts in text-classification due to the increasing amount of information being stored and accessible through the-web , automatic document classification (adc) has become an important research-topic . adc usually employs a supervised-learning strategy , where we first build a classification-model using pre-classified documents and then use it to classify unseen documents . one major challenge in building classifiers is dealing with the temporal-evolution of the characteristics of the documents and the classes to which they belong . however , most of the current techniques for adc do not consider this evolution while building and using the models . previous results show that the performance of classifiers may be affected by three different temporal-effects (class-distribution , term-distribution and class similarity) . further , it is shown that using just portions of the pre-classified documents , which we call contexts , for building the classifiers , result in better performance , as a consequence of the minimization of the aforementioned effects . in this paper we define the concept of temporal-contexts as being the portions of documents that minimize those effects . we then propose a general algorithm for determining such contexts , discuss its implementation-related issues , and propose a heuristic that is able to determine temporal-contexts efficiently . in order to demonstrate the effectiveness of our strategy , we evaluated it using two distinct collections : acm-dl and medline . we initially evaluated the reduction in terms of both the effort to build a classifier and the entropy associated with each context . further , we evaluated whether these observed reductions translate into better classification-performance by employing a very simple classifier , majority-voting . the results show that we achieved precision gains of up to 30 \ % compared to a version that is not temporally contextualized , and the same accuracy of a state-of-the-art classifier (svm) , while presenting an execution-time up to hundreds of times faster .