semi-supervised-learning of semantic-classes for query understanding : from the-web and for the-web understanding intents from search queries can improve a user 's search experience and boost a site 's advertising profits . query tagging via statistical sequential labeling models has been shown to perform well , but annotating the training-set for supervised-learning requires substantial human effort . domain-specific-knowledge , such as semantic-class lexicons , reduces the amount of needed manual annotations , but much human effort is still required to maintain these as search topics evolve over time . this paper investigates semi-supervised-learning algorithms that leverage structured-data (html-lists) from the-web to automatically generate semantic-class lexicons , which are used to improve query tagging-performance - even with far less training-data . we focus our study on understanding the correct objectives for the semi-supervised lexicon-learning algorithms that are crucial for the success of query tagging . prior work on lexicon-acquisition has largely focused on the precision of the lexicons , but we show that precision is not important if the lexicons are used for query tagging . a more adequate criterion should emphasize a trade-off between maximizing the recall of semantic-class instances in the data , and minimizing the confusability . this ensures that the similar levels of precision-and-recall are observed on both training and test set , hence prevents over-fitting the lexicon features . experimental-results on retail product queries show that enhancing a query tagger with lexicons learned with this objective reduces word-level tagging errors by up to 25 \ % compared to the baseline tagger that does not use any lexicon features . in contrast , lexicons obtained through a precision-centric learning-algorithm even degrade the performance of a tagger compared to the baseline . furthermore , the proposed method outperforms one in which semantic-class lexicons have been extracted from a database .