entity-ranking using wikipedia as a pivot in this paper we investigate the task of entity-ranking on the web . searchers looking for entities are arguably better served by presenting a ranked list of entities directly , rather than a list of web-pages with relevant but also potentially redundant-information about these entities . since entities are represented by their web homepages , a naive approach to entity-ranking is to use standard text-retrieval . our experimental-results clearly demonstrate that text-retrieval is effective at finding relevant pages , but performs poorly at finding entities . our proposal is to use wikipedia as a pivot for finding entities on the web , allowing us to reduce the hard web-entity-ranking problem to easier problem of wikipedia entity-ranking . wikipedia allows us to properly identify entities and some of their characteristics , and wikipedia 's elaborate category-structure allows us to get a handle on the entity 's type . our main findings are the following . our first finding is that , in principle , the problem of web-entity-ranking can be reduced to wikipedia entity-ranking . we found that the majority of entity-ranking topics in our test-collections can be answered using wikipedia , and that with high precision relevant-web entities corresponding to the wikipedia entities can be found using wikipedia 's ` external-links ' . our second finding is that we can exploit the structure of wikipedia to improve entity-ranking effectiveness . entity-types are valuable retrieval cues in wikipedia . automatically assigned entity-types are effective , and almost as good as manually assigned types . our third finding is that web entity retrieval can be significantly improved by using wikipedia as a pivot . both wikipedia 's external-links and the enriched wikipedia entities with additional links to homepages are significantly better at finding primary web homepages than anchor-text retrieval , which in turn significantly improved over standard text-retrieval .