hierarchical service analytics for improving productivity in an enterprise service center modern day service-centers are the building-blocks for highly efficient and productive business-systems in a knowledge-economy . in these service-systems , accurate and timely delivery of pertinent information to service representatives becomes the cornerstone for delivering efficient customer-service . there are two main steps in achieving this objective . the first step concerns efficient text-mining to extract critical and pertinent information from the very long service-request (sr) documents in the historical database . the second step concerns matching new-service requests with previously stored service-requests . both lead to efficiencies by minimizing time spent by service personnel in extracting intellectual-capital (ic) . in this paper we present our text-analytics system , the service-request analyzer and recommender (srar) , which is designed to improve the productivity in an enterprise service center for computer-network diagnostics and support . srar unifies a text preprocessor , a hierarchical-classifier , and a service-request recommender , to deliver critical , pertinent , and categorized knowledge for improved service efficiency . the novel feature we report here is identifying the components of the diagnostic process underlying the creation of the original text-documents . this identification is crucial in the successful design and prototyping of srar and its hierarchical-classifier element . equally , the use of domain-knowledge and human expertise to generate features are indispensable synergistic elements in improving the accuracy of the text-analysis toward identifying the components of the diagnostic process . the evaluation and comparison of srar with other benchmark approaches in the literature demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework-and-algorithms . this framework can be generalized to be applicable in many service industries and business functions that mine textual data to achieve increased efficiency in their service-delivery . we observe significant service-time responsiveness improvements during the first step of ic extraction in network-service center context at cisco .