predicting product-adoption in large-scale social-networks online-social-networks offer opportunities to analyze user-behavior and social connectivity and leverage resulting insights for effective online-advertising . we study the adoption of a paid product by members of a large and well-connected instant-messenger (im) network . this product is important to the business and poses unique challenges to advertising due to its low baseline adoption-rate . we find that adoption by highly connected individuals is correlated with their social connections (friends) adopting after them . however , there is little evidence of social-influence by these high degree individuals . further , the spread of adoption remains mostly local to first-adopters and their immediate friends . we observe strong evidence of peer pressure wherein future adoption by an individual is more likely if the product has been widely adopted by the individual 's friends . social neighborhoods rich in adoptions also continue to add more new adoptions compared to those neighborhoods that are poor in adoption . using these insights we build predictive-models to identify individuals most suited for two types of marketing-campaigns - direct-marketing where individuals with highest propensity for future adoption are targeted with suitable ads and social neighborhood marketing which involves messaging to members of the social-network who are most effective in using the power of their network to convince their friends to adopt . we identify the most desirable features for predicting future adoption of the pc to phone product which can in turn be leveraged to effectively promote its adoption . offline analysis shows that building predictive-models for direct-marketing and social neighborhood marketing outperforms several widely accepted marketing heuristics . further , these models are able to effectively combine user features and social-features to predict adoption better than using either user features or social-features in isolation .