discriminative factored prior models for personalized content-based-recommendation most existing content-based-filtering approaches including rocchio , language-models , svm , logistic-regression , neural-networks , etc. learn user-profiles independently without capturing the similarity among users . the bayesian-hierarchical-models learn user-profiles jointly and have the advantage of being able to borrow information from other users through a bayesian prior . the standard bayesian-hierarchical-model assumes all user-profiles are generated from the same prior . however , considering the diversity of user-interests , this assumption might not be optimal . besides , most existing content-based-filtering approaches implicitly assume that each user-profile corresponds to exactly one user-interest and fail to capture a user 's multiple interests (information-needs) . in this paper , we present a flexible bayesian hierarchical modeling approach to model both commonality and diversity among users as well as individual users ' multiple interests . we propose two models each with different assumptions , and the proposed models are called discriminative factored prior models (dfpm) . in our models , each user-profile is modeled as a discriminative-classifier with a factored model as its prior , and different factors contribute in different levels to each user-profile . compared with existing content-based-filtering models , dfpm are interesting because they can 1) borrow discriminative criteria of other users while learning a particular user-profile through the factored prior ; 2) trade-off well between diversity and commonality among users ; and 3) handle the challenging classification situation where each class contains multiple concepts . the experimental-results on a dataset collected from real-users on digg.com show that our models significantly outperform the baseline models of l-2 regularized logistic-regression and the standard bayesian-hierarchical-model with logistic-regression