finding relevant-information of certain types from enterprise-data search over enterprise-data is essential to every aspect of an enterprise because it helps users fulfill their information-needs . similar to web-search , most queries in enterprise-search are keyword-queries . however , enterprise-search is a unique research problem because , compared with the data in traditional ir applications (e.g. , text-data) , enterprise-data includes information stored in different formats . in particular , enterprise-data include both unstructured and structured-information , and all the data-center around a particular enterprise . as a result , the relevant-information from these two data sources could be complementary to each other . intuitively , such integrated data could be exploited to improve the enterprise search-quality . despite its importance , this problem has received little attention so far . in this paper , we demonstrate the feasibility of leveraging the integrated information in enterprise-data to improve search-quality through a case-study , i.e. , finding relevant-information of certain types from enterprise-data . enterprise-search users often look for different types of relevant-information other than documents , e.g. , the contact-information of per - sons working on a product . when formulating a keyword-query , search users may specify both content requirements , i.e. , what kind of information is relevant , and type-requirements , i.e. , what type of information is relevant . thus , the goal is to find information relevant to both requirements specified in the query . specifically , we formulate the problem as keyword-search over structured or semistructured-data , and then propose to leverage the complementary unstructured-information in the enterprise-data to solve the problem . experiment results over real-world enterprise-data and simulated data show that the proposed methods can effectively exploit the unstructured-information to find relevant-information of certain types from structured and semistructured-information in enterprise-data .