topic sentiment-analysis in twitter : a graph-based hashtag sentiment-classification approach twitter is one of the biggest platforms where massive instant-messages (i.e. tweets) are published every day . users tend to express their real feelings freely in twitter , which makes it an ideal source for capturing the opinions towards various interesting topics , such as brands , products or celebrities , etc. . naturally , people may anticipate an approach to receiving the common sentiment tendency towards these topics directly rather than through reading the huge amount of tweets about them . on the other side , hashtags , starting with a symbol '' # '' ahead of keywords or phrases , are widely used in tweets as coarse-grained topics . in this paper , instead of presenting the sentiment polarity of each tweet relevant to the topic , we focus our study on hashtag-level sentiment-classification . this task aims to automatically generate the overall sentiment polarity for a given hashtag in a certain time period , which markedly differs from the conventional sentence-level and document-level-sentiment analysis . our investigation illustrates that three types of information is useful to address the task , including (1) sentiment polarity of tweets containing the hashtag ; (2) hashtags co-occurrence relationship and (3) the literal meaning of hashtags . consequently , in order to incorporate the first two types of information into a classification framework where hashtags can be classified collectively , we propose a novel graph-model and investigate three approximate collective-classification algorithms for inference . going one step further , we show that the performance can be remarkably improved using an enhanced boosting classification setting in which we employ the literal meaning of hashtags as semi-supervised information . experimental-results on a real-life data-set consisting of 29,195 tweets and 2,181 hashtags show the effectiveness of the proposed model and algorithms .