a pairwise-ranking_based approach to learning-with-positive-and-unlabeled-examples a large fraction of binary-classification problems arising in web-applications are of the type where the positive class is well defined and compact while the negative class comprises everything else in the distribution for which the classifier is developed ; it is hard to represent and sample from such a broad negative class . classifiers based only on positive and unlabeled examples reduce human-annotation effort significantly by removing the burden of choosing a representative set of negative-examples . various methods have been proposed in the literature for building such classifiers . of these , the-state-of-the-art methods are biased svm and elkan & noto 's methods . while these methods often work well in practice , they are computationally expensive since hyperparameter tuning is very important , particularly when the size of labeled positive examples set is small and class-imbalance is high . in this paper we propose a pairwise-ranking_based approach to learn from positive and unlabeled examples (lpu) and we give a theoretical justification for it . we present a pairwise ranksvm (rsvm) based method for our approach . the method is simple , efficient , and its hyperparameters are easy to tune . a detailed experimental-study using several benchmark datasets shows that the proposed method gives competitive classification-performance compared to the mentioned state-of-the-art methods , while training 3-10 times faster . we also propose an efficient auc_based feature-selection technique in the lpu setting and demonstrate its usefulness on the datasets . to get an idea of the goodness of the lpu methods we compare them against supervised-learning (sl) methods that also make use of negative-examples in training . sl methods give a slightly better performance than lpu methods when there is a rich set of negative-examples ; however , they are inferior when the number of negative training-examples is not large enough .