fast metadata-driven multiresolution tensor-decomposition tensors (multi-dimensional-arrays) are widely used for representing high-order dimensional data , in applications ranging from social-networks , sensor-data , and internet-traffic . multi-way-data analysis-techniques , in particular tensor-decompositions , allow extraction of hidden correlations among multi-way-data and thus are key components of many data-analysis frameworks . intuitively , these algorithms can be thought of as multi-way-clustering schemes , which consider multiple facets of the data in identifying clusters , their weights , and contributions of each data element . unfortunately , algorithms for fitting multi-way models are , in general , iterative and very time consuming . in this paper , we observe that , in many applications , there is a priori background-knowledge (or metadata) about one or more domain dimensions . this metadata is often in the form of a hierarchy that clusters the elements of a given data facet (or mode) . in this paper , we investigate whether such single-mode data hierarchies can be used to boost the efficiency of tensor-decomposition process , without significant impact on the final decomposition quality . we consider each domain hierarchy as a guide to help provide higher - or lower-resolution views of the data in the tensor on-demand and we rely on these metadata-induced multi-resolution tensor representations to develop a multiresolution approach to tensor-decomposition . in this paper , we focus on an alternating-least-squares (als) based implementation of the parallel factors (parafac) decomposition (which decomposes a tensor into a diagonal tensor and a set of factor matrices) . experiment results show that , when the available metadata is used as a rough guide , the proposed multiresolution-method helps fit parafac models with consistent (for both dense and sparse tensor representations , under different parameters settings) savings in execution-time and memory-consumption , while preserving the quality of the decomposition .