cp-index : on the efficient indexing of large-graphs graph-search , i.e. , finding all graphs in a database d that contain the query-graph q , is a classical primitive prevalent in various graph-database applications . in the past , there has been an abundance of studies devoting to this topic ; however , with the recent emergence of large information networks , it places new challenges to the research-community . most of the traditional graph-search schemes utilize the strategy of graph feature_based indexing , whereas the index-construction step that often involves frequent-subgraph-mining becomes a bottleneck for large-graphs due to the high computational-complexity . although there have been several methods proposed to solve this mining bottleneck such as summarization of database graphs , the frequent-subgraphs thus generated as indexing features are still unsatisfactory because the feature-set is in general not only inadequate or deficient for the large-graph scenario , but also with many redundant features . furthermore , the large size of the graphs makes it too easy for a small feature to be contained in many of them , severely impacting its selectivity and pruning-power . motivated by all the above issues we identify , in this paper we propose a novel cp-index (contact preservation) for efficient indexing of large-graphs . to overcome the low selectivity issue , we reap further pruning opportunities by leveraging each feature 's location-information in the database graphs . specifically , we look at how features are touching upon each other in the query , and check whether this contact pattern is preserved in the target graphs . then , to tackle the deficiency and redundancy problems associated with features , new feature-generation and selection-methods such as dual feature-generation and size-increasing bootstrapping feature-selection are introduced to complete our design . experiment results show that cp-index is much more effective in indexing large-graphs .