object-ranking object-ranking is an emerging discipline within information-retrieval that is concerned with the ranking of objects , e.g. named-entities and their attributes , in context of given a user-query , or application . in this tutorial we will address the different aspects involved when building an object-ranking system . we will present the state-of-the-art research in object-ranking , as well as going into detail about our hands-on experiences when designing and developing the system for object-ranking as it is in production at yahoo! today . this allows for a unique mixture of research-and-development that will give the participants in-depth insights into the problem of object-ranking . the focus of current web search-engines is to retrieve relevant documents on the web , and more precisely documents that match with the query-intent of the user . some users are looking for specific information , while other just want to access rich-media content (images , videos , etc.) or explore a topic . in the latter scenario , users do not have a fixed or pre-determined information-need , but are using the search-engine to discover information related to a particular object of interest . in this scenario one can say that the user is in a exploratory mode . to support users in their exploratory-search the search-engines are offering semantic-search suggestions . in this tutorial , we will present a generic-framework for ranking related objects . this framework ranks related entities according to two dimensions : a lateral dimension and a faceted dimension . in the lateral dimension , related entities are of the same nature as the entity queried (e.g. barcelona and madrid , or angelina jolie and jessica alba) . in the faceted dimension , related entities are usually not of the same type as the queried entity , and refer to a specific aspect of the queried entity (e.g. jennifer aniston and the tvshow friends) . in this tutorial we will describe the process of building a web-scale object-ranking system . in particular we will address the construction of a knowledge-base that forms the basis for the object-ranking , and the generation of ranking-features using external-sources such as search-engine query logs , photo-annotations in flickr , and tweets on twitter . next , we will discuss machine learned ranking-models using an ensemble of pair-wise preference-models , and address various aspects of object-ranking , including multi-media extensions , vertical solutions , attribute-aware ranking , and the importance of freshness . last but not least , we will address the evaluation-methodologies involved to tune the performance of web-scale object-ranking strategies .