social and collaborative-information-seeking : panel in recent years , information-retrieval and information-seeking have moved beyond their single-user roots and are becoming multi-user endeavors . however , there are multiple visions for how best to design multi-user interactions : social-search versus collaborative-search . the terms `` social '' and `` collaborative '' are overloaded with meaning , having been used to describe a wide variety of systems , user-needs and goals , interaction-styles , and algorithms . in this panel we adopt the following primary definitions : information-seeking-tasks in which there are two or more people who lack the same information (share the same information-need) and explicitly set out together to satisfy that need are known as collaborative . a collaborative-information-retrieval system provides mechanisms -- interfaces and mediation algorithms -- that allow the team to work together to find information that neither individual would have found when working alone . there is an inherent division-of-labor in collaborative-work . on the other hand , information-seeking-tasks in which only a single individual lacks information , but is willing or able to let an larger group assist in the satisfaction of that need , is known as social-search . the larger group may be an community of like-minded individuals , or it might be a social-network of friends and associates . but either way , the assumption is that someone in that community or network already possesses the information that the initial individual seeks . the goal of the system is therefore to correctly propagate or diffuse that existing knowledge throughout the network , to amplify and repeat information that has already been discovered by at least one person . despite these fundamental differences between collaborative (team-oriented , jointly-held information-need) and social (network - and community-augmented , though ultimately solitary need) , there are similarities in process . this panel will explore both these similarities and differences , and provide insight about whether one type of multi-user information-seeking vision will ultimately eclipse the other , or whether each will remain separate but complementary .