leveraging read rates of passive-rfid tags for real-time indoor-location-tracking rfid (radio-frequency-identification) technology has been widely used for object-tracking in many real-life applications , such as inventory monitoring and product flow tracking . these applications usually rely on passive-rfid technologies rather than active ones , since passive-rfid tags are more attractive than active ones in many aspects , such as lower tag cost and simpler maintenance . rfid-technology is also important for indoor-location-tracking systems that require high degree of accuracy . however , most existing systems estimate object locations by using active-rfid tags , which usually incur localization-error of more than one meter . although recent studies begin to investigate the application of passive-tags for indoor-location-tracking , these methods are far from deployable and research of this application is still in its infancy . in this paper , we propose a new indoor-location-tracking system , named passtrack , which relies on the read rates of passive-rfid tags for location-estimation . passtrack is designed to tolerate noise arising from external environmental factors , by probabilistically modeling the relationship between tag read rate and tag-reader distance , and updating the model-parameters based on the current readings of reference tags . besides tolerance of noise , passtrack is also outstanding in terms of localization accuracy and efficiency . several new approaches for location inference are supported by passtrack , and the best one incurs an average error of around 30 cm , and is able to carry out over 7500 location estimations per second on an ordinary machine . furthermore , as a result of using passive-rfid tags , passtrack also enjoys the many other benefits of passive-rfid tags mentioned before . we have conducted extensive experiments on both real and synthetic datasets , which demonstrate that our passtrack system outperforms the previous localization approaches in localization accuracy , tracking efficiency and space applicability .