incorporating occupancy into frequent-pattern-mining for high quality pattern-recommendation mining interesting patterns from transaction databases has attracted a lot of research interest for more than a decade . most of those studies use frequency , the number of times a pattern appears in a transaction-database , as the key measure for pattern interestingness . in this paper , we introduce a new measure of pattern interestingness , occupancy . the measure of occupancy is motivated by some real-world pattern-recommendation applications which require that any interesting pattern x should occupy a large portion of the transactions it appears in . namely , for any supporting transaction t of pattern x , the number of items in x should be close to the total number of items in t . in these pattern-recommendation applications , patterns with higher occupancy may lead to higher recall while patterns with higher frequency lead to higher precision . with the definition of occupancy we call a pattern dominant if its occupancy is above a user-specified threshold . then , our task is to identify the qualified patterns which are both frequent and dominant . additionally , we also formulate the problem of mining top-k qualified patterns : finding the qualified patterns with the top-k values of any function (e.g. weighted sum of both occupancy and support) . the challenge to these tasks is that the monotone or anti-monotone property does not hold on occupancy . in other words , the value of occupancy does not increase or decrease monotonically when we add more items to a given itemset . thus , we propose an algorithm called dofia (dominant and frequent-itemset-mining algorithm) , which explores the upper-bound properties on occupancy to reduce the search-process . the tradeoff between bound tightness and computational-complexity is also systematically addressed . finally , we show the effectiveness of dofia in a real-world-application on print-area recommendation for web-pages , and also demonstrate the efficiency of dofia on several large synthetic-data sets .