one seed to find them all : mining opinion features via association feature-based opinion-analysis has attracted extensive attention recently . identifying features associated with opinions expressed in reviews is essential for fine-grained-opinion mining . one approach is to exploit the dependency-relations that occur naturally between features and opinion-words , and among features (or opinion-words) themselves . in this paper , we propose a generalized approach to opinion feature-extraction by incorporating robust statistical association-analysis in a bootstrapping framework . the new approach starts with a small set of feature seeds , on which it iteratively enlarges by mining feature-opinion , feature-feature , and opinion-opinion dependency-relations . two association model types , namely likelihood-ratio tests (lrt) and latent-semantic-analysis (lsa) , are proposed for computing the pair-wise associations between terms (features or opinions) . we accordingly propose two robust bootstrapping approaches , lrtboot and lsaboot , both of which need just a handful of initial feature seeds to bootstrap opinion feature-extraction . we benchmarked lrtboot and lsaboot against existing approaches on a large number of real-life reviews crawled from the cellphone and hotel domains . experimental-results using varying number of feature seeds show that the proposed association-based bootstrapping-approach significantly outperforms the competitors . in fact , one seed feature is all that is needed for lrtboot to significantly outperform the other methods . this seed feature can simply be the domain feature , e.g. , `` cellphone '' or `` hotel '' . the consequence of our discovery is far reaching : starting with just one feature seed , typically just the domain concept word , lrtboot can automatically extract a large set of high-quality opinion features from the corpus without any supervision or labeled-features . this means that the automatic creation of a set of domain features is no longer a pipe dream !