influence-propagation in adversarial setting : how to defeat competition with least amount of investment it has been observed that individuals ' decisions to adopt a product or innovation are often influenced by the recommendations of their friends and acquaintances . motivated by this observation , the last few years have seen a number of studies on influence-maximization in social-networks . the primary goal of these studies is identification of k most influential nodes in a network . a major limitation of these studies is that they focus on a non-adversarial environment , where only one player is engaged in influencing the nodes . however , in a realistic scenario multiple players attempt to influence the nodes in a competitive fashion . the proposed model considers a competitive environment where a node that has not yet adopted an innovation , can adopt only one of the several competing innovations and once it adopts an innovation , it does not switch . the paper studies the scenario where the first player has already chosen a set of k nodes and the second player , with the knowledge of the choice of the first , attempts to identify a smallest set of nodes (excluding the ones already chosen by the first) so that when the influence propagation process ends , the number of nodes influenced by the second player is larger than the number of nodes influenced by the first . the paper studies two propagation-models and shows that in both the models , the identification of the smallest set of nodes to defeat the adversary is np-hard . it provides an approximation-algorithm and proves that the performance-bound is tight . it also presents the results of extensive experimentation using the collaboration-network data . experimental-results show that the second player can easily defeat the first with this algorithm , if the first utilizes the node-degree or closeness-centrality_based algorithms for the selection of influential nodes . the proposed algorithm also provides better performance if the second player utilizes it instead of the greedy-algorithm to maximize its influence .