correlating medical-dependent query-features with image-retrieval models using association-rules the increasing quantities of available medical resources have motivated the development of effective search-tools and medical-decision-support systems . medical-image search-tools help physicians in searching medical-image datasets for diagnosing a disease or monitoring the stage of a disease given previous patient 's image screenings . image-retrieval models are classified into three categories : content-based (visual) , textual and combined models . in most of previous work , a unique image-retrieval model is applied for any user formulated query independently of what retrieval-model best suits the information-need behind the query . the main challenge in medical-image-retrieval is to cope the semantic gap between user-information-needs and retrieval-models . in this paper , we propose a novel approach for finding correlations between medical-query features and retrieval-models based on association-rule-mining . we define new medical-dependent query-features such as image-modality and presence of specific medical-image terminology and make use of existing generic query-features such as query-specificity , ambiguity and cohesiveness . the proposed query-features are then exploited into association-rule-mining for discovering rules which correlate query-features to visual , textual or combined image-retrieval models . based on the discovered rules , we propose to use an associative-classifier that finds the best suitable rule with a maximum feature coverage for a new query . experiments are performed on image clef queries from 2008 to 2012 where we evaluate the impact of our proposed query-features on the classification-performance . results show that combining our proposed specific and generic query-features is effective for classifying queries . a comparative-study between our classifier , cba , na &#239; ve-bayes , bayes net and decision-trees showed that our best coverage associative-classifier outperforms existing classifiers where it achieves an improvement of 30 % .