all roads lead to rome : optimistic-recovery for distributed iterative data-processing executing data-parallel iterative-algorithms on large-datasets is crucial for many advanced analytical applications in the fields of data-mining and machine-learning . current systems for executing iterative tasks in large clusters typically achieve fault-tolerance through rollback-recovery . the principle behind this pessimistic approach is to periodically checkpoint the algorithm state . upon failure , the system restores a consistent state from a previously written checkpoint and resumes execution from that point . we propose an optimistic-recovery mechanism using algorithmic compensations . our method leverages the robust , self-correcting nature of a large class of fixpoint algorithms used in data-mining and machine-learning , which converge to the correct solution from various intermediate consistent states . in the case of a failure , we apply a user-defined compensate function that algorithmically creates such a consistent state , instead of rolling back to a previous checkpointed state . our optimistic-recovery does not checkpoint any state and hence achieves optimal failure-free performance with respect to the overhead necessary for guaranteeing fault-tolerance . we illustrate the applicability of this approach for three wide classes of problems . furthermore , we show how to implement the proposed optimistic-recovery mechanism in a data-flow system . similar to the combine operator in mapreduce , our proposed functionality is optional and can be applied to increase performance without changing the semantics-of-programs . in an experimental-evaluation on large-datasets , we show that our proposed approach provides optimal failure-free performance . in the absence of failures our optimistic scheme is able to outperform a pessimistic approach by a factor of two to five . in presence of failures , our approach provides fast-recovery and outperforms pessimistic approaches in the majority of cases .