finding similar images quicky using object shapes retrieving images from a large image collection has been an active area of research . most of the existing works have focused on content-representation . in this paper , we address the issue of identifying relevant images quickly . this is important in order to meet the users ' performance-requirements . we propose a framework for fast image retrieval based on object shapes extracted from objects within images . the framework builds a hierarchy of approximations on object shapes such that shape-representation at a higher level is a coarser representation of a shape at the lower level . in other words , multiple shapes at a lower level can be mapped into a single shape at a higher level . in this way , the hierarchy serves to partition the database at various granularities . given a query shape , by searching only the relevant paths in the hierarchy , a large portion of the database can thus be pruned away . we propose the angle mapping (am) method to transform a shape from one level to another (higher) level . am essentially replaces some edges of a shape by a smaller number of edges based on the angles between the edges , thus reducing the complexity of the original shape . based on the framework , we also propose two hierarchical-structures to facilitate speedy retrieval . the first , called hierarchical-partitioning on shape-representation (hpsr) , uses the shape-representation as the indexing key . the second , called hierarchical-partitioning on angle vector (hpav) , captures the angle information from the shape-representation . we conducted an extensive study on both methods to see their quality and efficiency . our experiments on sets of images , each of which has objects around from 1 to 30 , showed that the framework can provide speedy image-retrieval without sacrificing on the quality . both proposed schemes can improve the efficiency by as much as hundreds of times to sequential-scanning . the improvement grows as image-database size , objects per image or object dimension increase .