future-directions in data-mining : streams , networks , self-similarity and power laws how to spot abnormalities in a stream of temperature data from a sensor ? or from a network of sensors ? how does the-internet look like ? are there ` abnormal ' sub-graphs in a given social-network , possibly indicating , e.g. , money-laundering rings?we present some recent work and list many remaining challenges for these two fascinating issues in data-mining , namely , streams and networks . streams appear in numerous settings , in the form of , e.g. , temperature readings , road-traffic data , series of video frames for surveillance , patient physiological-data . in all these settings , we want to equip the sensors with nimble , but powerful enough algorithms to look for patterns and abnormalities , <ol> (a) on a semi-infinite stream , (b) using finite memory , and (c) without human-intervention . < / ol.for networks , the applications are also numerous : social-networks recording who knows/calls/emails whom ; the-internet itself , as well as the-web , with routers and links , or pages and hyper-links ; the genes and how they are related ; customers and products they buy . in fact , any `` many-to-many '' database relationship eventually leads to a graph/network . in all these settings we want to find patterns and ` abnormalities ' ; the most central/important nodes ; we also want to predict how the network will evolve ; and we want to tackle huge graphs , with millions or billions of nodes and edges.as a promising direction towards these problems , we present some surprising tools from the theory of fractals , self-similarity and power laws . we show how the ` intrinsic ' or ` fractal ' dimension can help us find patterns , when traditional tools and assumptions fail . we show that self-similarity and power laws models work well in an impressive variety of settings , including real , bursty disk and web-traffic ; skewed distributions of click-streams ; and multiple , real internet graphs .