knowledge and information-management : is it possible to do interesting and important research , get funded , be useful and appreciated ? the survey of the cikm call-for-papers for the period 1998 - 2002 demonstrates that the cikm organizers very accurately `` identify challenging problems facing the development of future knowledge and information-systems [in] applied and theoretical research '' [1998] and also play an important role fostering `` bridging traditionally separated areas such as databases-and-information-retrieval , or those that apply techniques from one area to another '' [2001 , 2002] . the presented cikm papers also indicate that researchers work on interesting problems . this talk will discuss some additional research topics for future consideration by the cikm community.in most cases , to achieve important results , research needs to be well supported . if you are not getting the funding you need , this talk may provide some pointers where you can look for finding . if you are well supported , i will try to convince you that you can be instrumental in improving the funding scenario for everybody , by mentoring the junior members of the cikm community , by forming collaborative (international , interdisciplinary) teams and by letting the funders know what you find conducive to your research and what you consider a hindrance . regardless if you are well funded or not , it is most helpful if you are active in identifying new research-directions and also assist in evaluating the priorities.the most frequent problem for inadequate funding is lack of funds . however , researchers can help ! this can be achieved in many different ways : thinking about long-term applications of fundamental research to societal needs ; working with communities that can directly benefit from research ; sharing the research results not only with the research colleagues , but also wider constituencies - at their appropriate levels ; and informing your funders about your spectacular achievements , i.e. , providing good reasons for increasing the research funding.cikm strives to bring together research-communities that traditionally do not work together . providing a forum for interdisciplinary-research is laudable and very important , as very often interdisciplinary or international-research is not `` appreciated '' . this talk will discuss how we could gradually change the discipline - and country-based `` appraisal '' cultures . we will also attempt to answer the question : `` what is the ultimate appreciation ? '' (nobel-prize ? ... successful . com ? ... ???) .