online duplicate-document-detection : signature reliability in a dynamic retrieval environment as online document collections continue to expand , both on the web and in proprietary environments , the need for duplicate-detection becomes more critical . few users wish to retrieve search-results consisting of sets of duplicate-documents , whether identical duplicates or close matches . our goal in this work is to investigate the phenomenon and determine one or more approaches that minimize its impact on search-results . recent work has focused on using some form of signature to characterize a document in order to reduce the complexity of document comparisons . a representative technique constructs a ` fingerprint ' of the rarest or richest features in a document using collection statistics as criteria for feature-selection . one of the challenges of this approach , however , arises from the fact that in production environments , collections of documents are always changing , with new documents , or new versions of documents , arriving frequently , and other documents periodically removed . when an enterprise proceeds to freeze a training collection in order to stabilize the underlying repository of such features and its associated collection statistics , issues of coverage and completeness arise . we show that even with very-large training collections possessing extremely high feature correlations before and after updates , underlying fingerprints remain sensitive to subtle changes . we explore alternative solutions that benefit from the development of massive meta-collections made up of sizable components from multiple domains . this technique appears to offer a practical foundation for fingerprint stability . we also consider mechanisms for updating training collections while mitigating signature instability . our research is divided into three parts . we begin with a study of the distribution of duplicate types in two broad-ranging news collections consisting of approximately 50 million documents . we then examine the utility of document-signatures in addressing identical or nearly identical duplicate-documents and their sensitivity to collection updates . finally , we investigate a flexible method of characterizing and comparing documents in order to permit the identification of non-identical duplicates . this method has produced promising results following an extensive evaluation using a production-based test-collection created by domain-experts .