book1_ch11	 ||  || Systems of Equations Systems of Equations A collection of two linear equations in two variables is called a system of linear equations in two variables, or more briefly, a system of equations. The pair of equations is a system of equations. The brace { is used to denote that the two equations occur together (simultaneously).  || Solution to A System of Equations Solution to a System We know that one of the infinitely many solutions to one linear equation in two variables is an ordered pair. An ordered pair that is a solution to both of the equations in a system is called a solution to the system of equations. For example, the ordered pair ( 3, 5 ) is a solution to the system since ( 3, 5 ) is a solution to both equations.  || Graphs of Systems of Equations One method of solving a system of equations is by graphing. We know that the graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line. The graph of a system will consist of two straight lines. When two straight lines are graphed, one of three possibilities may result. Example 11.1.  The lines intersect at the point ( a, b ) . The point ( a, b ) is the solution to the corresponding system. Example 11.2.  The lines are parallel. They do not intersect. The system has no solution. Example 11.3.  The lines are coincident (one on the other). They intersect at infinitely many points. The system has infinitely many solutions.  || Independent, Inconsistent, and Dependent Systems Independent Systems Systems in which the lines intersect at precisely one point are called independent systems. In applications, independent systems can arise when the collected data are accurate and complete. For example, The sum of two numbers is 10 and the product of the two numbers is 21. Find the numbers. In this application, the data are accurate and complete. The solution is 7 and 3. Inconsistent Systems Systems in which the lines are parallel are called inconsistent systems. In applications, inconsistent systems can arise when the collected data are contradictory. For example, The sum of two even numbers is 30 and the difference of the same two numbers is 0. Find the numbers. The data are contradictory. There is no solution to this application. Dependent Systems Systems in which the lines are coincident are called dependent systems. In applications, dependent systems can arise when the collected data are incomplete. For example. The difference of two numbers is 9 and twice one number is 18 more than twice the other. The data are incomplete. There are infinitely many solutions.  || The Method of Solving A System Graphically The Method of Solving a System Graphically To solve a system of equations graphically: Graph both equations. If the lines intersect, the solution is the ordered pair that corresponds to the point of intersection. The system is independent. If the lines are parallel, there is no solution. The system is inconsistent. If the lines are coincident, there are infinitely many solutions. The system is dependent.  ||  || When Substitution Works Best We know how to solve a linear equation in one variable. We shall now study a method for solving a system of two linear equations in two variables by transforming the two equations in two variables into one equation in one variable.To make this transformation, we need to eliminate one equation and one variable. We can make this elimination by substitution. When Substitution Works Best The substitution method works best when either of these conditions exists: One of the variables has a coefficient of 1,  or One of the variables can be made to have a coefficient of 1 without introducing fractions.  || The Substitution Method The Substitution Method To solve a system of two linear equations in two variables, Solve one of the equations for one of the variables. Substitute the expression for the variable chosen in step 1 into the other equation. Solve the resulting equation in one variable. Substitute the value obtained in step 3 into the equation obtained in step 1 and solve to obtain the value of the other variable. Check the solution in both equations. Write the solution as an ordered pair.  || Substitution And Parallel Lines The following rule alerts us to the fact that the two lines of a system are parallel. Substitution and Parallel Lines If computations eliminate all the variables and produce a contradiction, the two lines of a system are parallel, and the system is called inconsistent.  || Substitution And Coincident Lines The following rule alerts us to the fact that the two lines of a system are coincident. Substitution and Coincident Lines If computations eliminate all the variables and produce an identity, the two lines of a system are coincident and the system is called dependent.  ||  || The Properties Used in the Addition Method Another method of solving a system of two linear equations in two variables is called the method of elimination by addition. It is similar to the method of elimination by substitution in that the process eliminates one equation and one variable. The method of elimination by addition makes use of the following two properties. If A , B , and C are algebraic expressions such that a x + ( − a x ) = 0 Property 1 states that if we add the left sides of two equations together and the right sides of the same two equations together, the resulting sums will be equal. We call this adding equations. Property 2 states that the sum of two opposites is zero.  || The Addition Method To solve a system of two linear equations in two variables by addition, Write, if necessary, both equations in general form, a x + b y = c. If necessary, multiply one or both equations by factors that will produce opposite coefficients for one of the variables. Add the equations to eliminate one equation and one variable. Solve the equation obtained in step 3. Do one of the following: (a)  Substitute the value obtained in step 4 into either of the original equations and solve to obtain the value of the other variable, or (b)  Repeat steps 1-5 for the other variable. Check the solutions in both equations. Write the solution as an ordered pair. The addition method works well when the coefficient of one of the variables is 1 or a number other than 1.  || Addition And Parallel Or Coincident Lines When the lines of a system are parallel or coincident, the method of elimination produces results identical to that of the method of elimination by substitution. Addition and Parallel Lines If computations eliminate all variables and produce a contradiction, the two lines of the system are parallel and the system is called inconsistent. Addition and Coincident Lines If computations eliminate all variables and produce an identity, the two lines of the system are coincident and the system is called dependent.  ||  || The Five-Step Method When solving practical problems, it is often more convenient to introduce two variables rather than only one. Two variables should be introduced only when two relationships can be found within the problem. Each relationship will produce an equation, and a system of two equations in two variables will result.We will use the five-step method to solve these problems. Introduce two variables, one for each unknown quantity. Look for two relationships within the problem. Translate the verbal phrases into mathematical expressions to form two equations. Solve the resulting system of equations. Check the solution. Write a conclusion.  || 
book1_ch11_2	 || Systems of Equations Systems of Equations A collection of two linear equations in two variables is called a system of linear equations in two variables, or more briefly, a system of equations. The pair of equations is a system of equations. The brace { is used to denote that the two equations occur together (simultaneously).  || Solution to A System of Equations Solution to a System We know that one of the infinitely many solutions to one linear equation in two variables is an ordered pair. An ordered pair that is a solution to both of the equations in a system is called a solution to the system of equations. For example, the ordered pair ( 3, 5 ) is a solution to the system since ( 3, 5 ) is a solution to both equations.  || Graphs of Systems of Equations One method of solving a system of equations is by graphing. We know that the graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line. The graph of a system will consist of two straight lines. When two straight lines are graphed, one of three possibilities may result. Example 11.1.  The lines intersect at the point ( a, b ) . The point ( a, b ) is the solution to the corresponding system. Example 11.2.  The lines are parallel. They do not intersect. The system has no solution. Example 11.3.  The lines are coincident (one on the other). They intersect at infinitely many points. The system has infinitely many solutions.  || Independent, Inconsistent, and Dependent Systems Independent Systems Systems in which the lines intersect at precisely one point are called independent systems. In applications, independent systems can arise when the collected data are accurate and complete. For example, The sum of two numbers is 10 and the product of the two numbers is 21. Find the numbers. In this application, the data are accurate and complete. The solution is 7 and 3. Inconsistent Systems Systems in which the lines are parallel are called inconsistent systems. In applications, inconsistent systems can arise when the collected data are contradictory. For example, The sum of two even numbers is 30 and the difference of the same two numbers is 0. Find the numbers. The data are contradictory. There is no solution to this application. Dependent Systems Systems in which the lines are coincident are called dependent systems. In applications, dependent systems can arise when the collected data are incomplete. For example. The difference of two numbers is 9 and twice one number is 18 more than twice the other. The data are incomplete. There are infinitely many solutions.  || The Method of Solving A System Graphically The Method of Solving a System Graphically To solve a system of equations graphically: Graph both equations. If the lines intersect, the solution is the ordered pair that corresponds to the point of intersection. The system is independent. If the lines are parallel, there is no solution. The system is inconsistent. If the lines are coincident, there are infinitely many solutions. The system is dependent.  || 
book1_ch11_2_2	Systems of Equations Systems of Equations A collection of two linear equations in two variables is called a system of linear equations in two variables, or more briefly, a system of equations. The pair of equations is a system of equations. The brace { is used to denote that the two equations occur together (simultaneously). Systems of Equations Systems of Equations A collection of two linear equations in two variables is called a system of linear equations in two variables, or more briefly, a system of equations. The pair of equations is a system of equations. The brace { is used to denote that the two equations occur together (simultaneously).  || 
book1_ch11_2_3	Solution to A System of Equations Solution to a System We know that one of the infinitely many solutions to one linear equation in two variables is an ordered pair. An ordered pair that is a solution to both of the equations in a system is called a solution to the system of equations. For example, the ordered pair ( 3, 5 ) is a solution to the system since ( 3, 5 ) is a solution to both equations. Solution to A System of Equations Solution to a System We know that one of the infinitely many solutions to one linear equation in two variables is an ordered pair. An ordered pair that is a solution to both of the equations in a system is called a solution to the system of equations. For example, the ordered pair ( 3, 5 ) is a solution to the system since ( 3, 5 ) is a solution to both equations.  || 
book1_ch11_2_4	Graphs of Systems of Equations One method of solving a system of equations is by graphing. We know that the graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line. The graph of a system will consist of two straight lines. When two straight lines are graphed, one of three possibilities may result. Example 11.1.  The lines intersect at the point ( a, b ) . The point ( a, b ) is the solution to the corresponding system. Example 11.2.  The lines are parallel. They do not intersect. The system has no solution. Example 11.3.  The lines are coincident (one on the other). They intersect at infinitely many points. The system has infinitely many solutions. Graphs of Systems of Equations One method of solving a system of equations is by graphing. We know that the graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line. The graph of a system will consist of two straight lines. When two straight lines are graphed, one of three possibilities may result. Example 11.1.  The lines intersect at the point ( a, b ) . The point ( a, b ) is the solution to the corresponding system. Example 11.2.  The lines are parallel. They do not intersect. The system has no solution. Example 11.3.  The lines are coincident (one on the other). They intersect at infinitely many points. The system has infinitely many solutions.  || 
book1_ch11_2_5	Independent, Inconsistent, and Dependent Systems Independent Systems Systems in which the lines intersect at precisely one point are called independent systems. In applications, independent systems can arise when the collected data are accurate and complete. For example, The sum of two numbers is 10 and the product of the two numbers is 21. Find the numbers. In this application, the data are accurate and complete. The solution is 7 and 3. Inconsistent Systems Systems in which the lines are parallel are called inconsistent systems. In applications, inconsistent systems can arise when the collected data are contradictory. For example, The sum of two even numbers is 30 and the difference of the same two numbers is 0. Find the numbers. The data are contradictory. There is no solution to this application. Dependent Systems Systems in which the lines are coincident are called dependent systems. In applications, dependent systems can arise when the collected data are incomplete. For example. The difference of two numbers is 9 and twice one number is 18 more than twice the other. The data are incomplete. There are infinitely many solutions. Independent, Inconsistent, and Dependent Systems Independent Systems Systems in which the lines intersect at precisely one point are called independent systems. In applications, independent systems can arise when the collected data are accurate and complete. For example, The sum of two numbers is 10 and the product of the two numbers is 21. Find the numbers. In this application, the data are accurate and complete. The solution is 7 and 3. Inconsistent Systems Systems in which the lines are parallel are called inconsistent systems. In applications, inconsistent systems can arise when the collected data are contradictory. For example, The sum of two even numbers is 30 and the difference of the same two numbers is 0. Find the numbers. The data are contradictory. There is no solution to this application. Dependent Systems Systems in which the lines are coincident are called dependent systems. In applications, dependent systems can arise when the collected data are incomplete. For example. The difference of two numbers is 9 and twice one number is 18 more than twice the other. The data are incomplete. There are infinitely many solutions.  || 
book1_ch11_2_6	The Method of Solving A System Graphically The Method of Solving a System Graphically To solve a system of equations graphically: Graph both equations. If the lines intersect, the solution is the ordered pair that corresponds to the point of intersection. The system is independent. If the lines are parallel, there is no solution. The system is inconsistent. If the lines are coincident, there are infinitely many solutions. The system is dependent. The Method of Solving A System Graphically The Method of Solving a System Graphically To solve a system of equations graphically: Graph both equations. If the lines intersect, the solution is the ordered pair that corresponds to the point of intersection. The system is independent. If the lines are parallel, there is no solution. The system is inconsistent. If the lines are coincident, there are infinitely many solutions. The system is dependent.  || 
book1_ch11_3	 || When Substitution Works Best We know how to solve a linear equation in one variable. We shall now study a method for solving a system of two linear equations in two variables by transforming the two equations in two variables into one equation in one variable.To make this transformation, we need to eliminate one equation and one variable. We can make this elimination by substitution. When Substitution Works Best The substitution method works best when either of these conditions exists: One of the variables has a coefficient of 1,  or One of the variables can be made to have a coefficient of 1 without introducing fractions.  || The Substitution Method The Substitution Method To solve a system of two linear equations in two variables, Solve one of the equations for one of the variables. Substitute the expression for the variable chosen in step 1 into the other equation. Solve the resulting equation in one variable. Substitute the value obtained in step 3 into the equation obtained in step 1 and solve to obtain the value of the other variable. Check the solution in both equations. Write the solution as an ordered pair.  || Substitution And Parallel Lines The following rule alerts us to the fact that the two lines of a system are parallel. Substitution and Parallel Lines If computations eliminate all the variables and produce a contradiction, the two lines of a system are parallel, and the system is called inconsistent.  || Substitution And Coincident Lines The following rule alerts us to the fact that the two lines of a system are coincident. Substitution and Coincident Lines If computations eliminate all the variables and produce an identity, the two lines of a system are coincident and the system is called dependent.  || 
book1_ch11_3_2	When Substitution Works Best We know how to solve a linear equation in one variable. We shall now study a method for solving a system of two linear equations in two variables by transforming the two equations in two variables into one equation in one variable.To make this transformation, we need to eliminate one equation and one variable. We can make this elimination by substitution. When Substitution Works Best The substitution method works best when either of these conditions exists: One of the variables has a coefficient of 1,  or One of the variables can be made to have a coefficient of 1 without introducing fractions. When Substitution Works Best We know how to solve a linear equation in one variable. We shall now study a method for solving a system of two linear equations in two variables by transforming the two equations in two variables into one equation in one variable.To make this transformation, we need to eliminate one equation and one variable. We can make this elimination by substitution. When Substitution Works Best The substitution method works best when either of these conditions exists: One of the variables has a coefficient of 1,  or One of the variables can be made to have a coefficient of 1 without introducing fractions.  || 
book1_ch11_3_3	The Substitution Method The Substitution Method To solve a system of two linear equations in two variables, Solve one of the equations for one of the variables. Substitute the expression for the variable chosen in step 1 into the other equation. Solve the resulting equation in one variable. Substitute the value obtained in step 3 into the equation obtained in step 1 and solve to obtain the value of the other variable. Check the solution in both equations. Write the solution as an ordered pair. The Substitution Method The Substitution Method To solve a system of two linear equations in two variables, Solve one of the equations for one of the variables. Substitute the expression for the variable chosen in step 1 into the other equation. Solve the resulting equation in one variable. Substitute the value obtained in step 3 into the equation obtained in step 1 and solve to obtain the value of the other variable. Check the solution in both equations. Write the solution as an ordered pair.  || 
book1_ch11_3_6	Substitution And Parallel Lines The following rule alerts us to the fact that the two lines of a system are parallel. Substitution and Parallel Lines If computations eliminate all the variables and produce a contradiction, the two lines of a system are parallel, and the system is called inconsistent. Substitution And Parallel Lines The following rule alerts us to the fact that the two lines of a system are parallel. Substitution and Parallel Lines If computations eliminate all the variables and produce a contradiction, the two lines of a system are parallel, and the system is called inconsistent.  || 
book1_ch11_3_9	Substitution And Coincident Lines The following rule alerts us to the fact that the two lines of a system are coincident. Substitution and Coincident Lines If computations eliminate all the variables and produce an identity, the two lines of a system are coincident and the system is called dependent. Substitution And Coincident Lines The following rule alerts us to the fact that the two lines of a system are coincident. Substitution and Coincident Lines If computations eliminate all the variables and produce an identity, the two lines of a system are coincident and the system is called dependent.  || 
book1_ch11_4	 || The Properties Used in the Addition Method Another method of solving a system of two linear equations in two variables is called the method of elimination by addition. It is similar to the method of elimination by substitution in that the process eliminates one equation and one variable. The method of elimination by addition makes use of the following two properties. If A , B , and C are algebraic expressions such that a x + ( − a x ) = 0 Property 1 states that if we add the left sides of two equations together and the right sides of the same two equations together, the resulting sums will be equal. We call this adding equations. Property 2 states that the sum of two opposites is zero.  || The Addition Method To solve a system of two linear equations in two variables by addition, Write, if necessary, both equations in general form, a x + b y = c. If necessary, multiply one or both equations by factors that will produce opposite coefficients for one of the variables. Add the equations to eliminate one equation and one variable. Solve the equation obtained in step 3. Do one of the following: (a)  Substitute the value obtained in step 4 into either of the original equations and solve to obtain the value of the other variable, or (b)  Repeat steps 1-5 for the other variable. Check the solutions in both equations. Write the solution as an ordered pair. The addition method works well when the coefficient of one of the variables is 1 or a number other than 1.  || Addition And Parallel Or Coincident Lines When the lines of a system are parallel or coincident, the method of elimination produces results identical to that of the method of elimination by substitution. Addition and Parallel Lines If computations eliminate all variables and produce a contradiction, the two lines of the system are parallel and the system is called inconsistent. Addition and Coincident Lines If computations eliminate all variables and produce an identity, the two lines of the system are coincident and the system is called dependent.  || 
book1_ch11_4_2	The Properties Used in the Addition Method Another method of solving a system of two linear equations in two variables is called the method of elimination by addition. It is similar to the method of elimination by substitution in that the process eliminates one equation and one variable. The method of elimination by addition makes use of the following two properties. If A , B , and C are algebraic expressions such that a x + ( − a x ) = 0 Property 1 states that if we add the left sides of two equations together and the right sides of the same two equations together, the resulting sums will be equal. We call this adding equations. Property 2 states that the sum of two opposites is zero. The Properties Used in the Addition Method Another method of solving a system of two linear equations in two variables is called the method of elimination by addition. It is similar to the method of elimination by substitution in that the process eliminates one equation and one variable. The method of elimination by addition makes use of the following two properties. If A , B , and C are algebraic expressions such that a x + ( − a x ) = 0 Property 1 states that if we add the left sides of two equations together and the right sides of the same two equations together, the resulting sums will be equal. We call this adding equations. Property 2 states that the sum of two opposites is zero.  || 
book1_ch11_4_3	The Addition Method To solve a system of two linear equations in two variables by addition, Write, if necessary, both equations in general form, a x + b y = c. If necessary, multiply one or both equations by factors that will produce opposite coefficients for one of the variables. Add the equations to eliminate one equation and one variable. Solve the equation obtained in step 3. Do one of the following: (a)  Substitute the value obtained in step 4 into either of the original equations and solve to obtain the value of the other variable, or (b)  Repeat steps 1-5 for the other variable. Check the solutions in both equations. Write the solution as an ordered pair. The addition method works well when the coefficient of one of the variables is 1 or a number other than 1. The Addition Method To solve a system of two linear equations in two variables by addition, Write, if necessary, both equations in general form, a x + b y = c. If necessary, multiply one or both equations by factors that will produce opposite coefficients for one of the variables. Add the equations to eliminate one equation and one variable. Solve the equation obtained in step 3. Do one of the following: (a)  Substitute the value obtained in step 4 into either of the original equations and solve to obtain the value of the other variable, or (b)  Repeat steps 1-5 for the other variable. Check the solutions in both equations. Write the solution as an ordered pair. The addition method works well when the coefficient of one of the variables is 1 or a number other than 1.  || 
book1_ch11_4_8	Addition And Parallel Or Coincident Lines When the lines of a system are parallel or coincident, the method of elimination produces results identical to that of the method of elimination by substitution. Addition and Parallel Lines If computations eliminate all variables and produce a contradiction, the two lines of the system are parallel and the system is called inconsistent. Addition and Coincident Lines If computations eliminate all variables and produce an identity, the two lines of the system are coincident and the system is called dependent. Addition And Parallel Or Coincident Lines When the lines of a system are parallel or coincident, the method of elimination produces results identical to that of the method of elimination by substitution. Addition and Parallel Lines If computations eliminate all variables and produce a contradiction, the two lines of the system are parallel and the system is called inconsistent. Addition and Coincident Lines If computations eliminate all variables and produce an identity, the two lines of the system are coincident and the system is called dependent.  || 
book1_ch11_5	 || The Five-Step Method When solving practical problems, it is often more convenient to introduce two variables rather than only one. Two variables should be introduced only when two relationships can be found within the problem. Each relationship will produce an equation, and a system of two equations in two variables will result.We will use the five-step method to solve these problems. Introduce two variables, one for each unknown quantity. Look for two relationships within the problem. Translate the verbal phrases into mathematical expressions to form two equations. Solve the resulting system of equations. Check the solution. Write a conclusion.  || 
book1_ch11_5_2	The Five-Step Method When solving practical problems, it is often more convenient to introduce two variables rather than only one. Two variables should be introduced only when two relationships can be found within the problem. Each relationship will produce an equation, and a system of two equations in two variables will result.We will use the five-step method to solve these problems. Introduce two variables, one for each unknown quantity. Look for two relationships within the problem. Translate the verbal phrases into mathematical expressions to form two equations. Solve the resulting system of equations. Check the solution. Write a conclusion. The Five-Step Method When solving practical problems, it is often more convenient to introduce two variables rather than only one. Two variables should be introduced only when two relationships can be found within the problem. Each relationship will produce an equation, and a system of two equations in two variables will result.We will use the five-step method to solve these problems. Introduce two variables, one for each unknown quantity. Look for two relationships within the problem. Translate the verbal phrases into mathematical expressions to form two equations. Solve the resulting system of equations. Check the solution. Write a conclusion.  || 
book1_ch08	 ||  || Rational Expressions In arithmetic it is noted that a fraction is a quotient of two whole numbers. The expression , where a and b are any two whole numbers and b ≠ 0, is called a fraction. The top number, a , is called the numerator, and the bottom number, b , is called the denominator. Simple Algebraic Fraction We define a simple algebraic fraction in a similar manner. Rather than restrict­ing ourselves only to numbers, we use polynomials for the numerator and denomi­nator. Another term for a simple algebraic fraction is a rational expression. A rational expression is an expression of the form , where P and Q are both polyno­mials and Q never represents the zero polynomial. Rational Expression A rational expression is an algebraic expression that can be written as the quotient of two polynomials. Examples 1–4 are rational expressions: Example 8.1.  is a rational expression: P is x + 9 and Q is x – 7. Example 8.2.  is a rational expression: P is x 3 + 5x 2 – 12x + 1 and Q is x 4 – 10. Example 8.3.  is a rational expression: P is 3 and Q is 8. Example 8.4.  4x – 5 is a rational expression since 4x – 5 can be written as : P is 4x – 5 and Q is 1. Example 8.5.  is not a rational expression since is not a polynomial. In the rational expression , P is called the numerator and Q is called the denominator. Domain of a Rational Expression Since division by zero is not defined, we must be careful to note the values for which the rational expression is valid. The collection of values for which the rational expression is defined is called the domain of the rational expression. (Recall our study of the domain of an equation in Section Section 4.8.) Finding the Domain of a Rational Expression To find the domain of a rational expression we must ask, "What values, if any, of the variable will make the denominator zero?" To find these values, we set the denominator equal to zero and solve. If any zero-producing values are obtained, they are not included in the domain. All other real numbers are included in the domain (unless some have been excluded for particular situational reasons).  || Zero-Factor Property Sometimes to find the domain of a rational expression, it is necessary to factor the denominator and use the zero-factor property of real numbers. Zero-factor Property If two real numbers a and b are multiplied together and the resulting product is 0, then at least one of the factors must be zero, that is, either a = 0, b = 0, or both a = 0 and b = 0. The following examples illustrate the use of the zero-factor property. Example 8.6.  What value will produce zero in the expression 4x ? By the zero-factor property, if 4x = 0, then x = 0. Example 8.7.  What value will produce zero in the expression 8(x – 6)? By the zero-factor property, if 8(x – 6) = 0, then Thus, 8(x – 6) = 0 when x = 6. Example 8.8.  What value(s) will produce zero in the expression (x – 3)(x + 5)? By the zero-factor property, if (x – 3)(x + 5) = 0, then Thus, (x – 3)(x + 5) = 0 when x = 3 or x = – 5. Example 8.9.  What value(s) will produce zero in the expression x 2 + 6x + 8? We must factor x 2 + 6x + 8 to put it into the zero-factor property form. x 2 + 6x + 8 = (x + 2)(x + 4) Now, (x + 2)(x + 4) = 0 when Thus, x 2 + 6x + 8 = 0 when x = – 2 or x = – 4. Example 8.10.  What value(s) will produce zero in the expression 6x 2 – 19x – 7? We must factor 6x 2 – 19x – 7 to put it into the zero-factor property form. 6x 2 – 19x – 7 = (3x + 1)(2x – 7) Now, (3x + 1)(2x – 7) = 0 when Thus, 6x 2 – 19x – 7 = 0 when or .  || The Equality Property of Fractions From our experience with arithmetic we may recall the equality property of fractions. Let a , b , c , d be real numbers such that b ≠ 0 and d ≠ 0. Equality Property of Fractions If , then a d = b c . If a d = b c , then . Two fractions are equal when their cross-products are equal. We see this property in the following examples: Example 8.19.  , since 2 · 12 = 3 · 8. Example 8.20.  , since 5y · 6y = 2 · 15y 2 and 30y 2 = 30y 2 . Example 8.21.  Since 9a · 4 = 18a · 2, .  || The Negative Property of Fractions A useful property of fractions is the negative property of fractions. Negative Property of Fractions The negative sign of a fraction may be placed in front of the fraction, , in the numerator of the fraction, , in the denominator of the fraction, . All three fractions will have the same value, that is, The negative property of fractions is illustrated by the fractions To see this, consider . Is this correct?By the equality property of fractions, – (3 · 4) = – 12 and – 3 · 4 = – 12. Thus, . Convince yourself that the other two fractions are equal as well. This same property holds for rational expressions and negative signs. This property is often quite helpful in simplifying a rational expression (as we shall need to do in subsequent sections). If either the numerator or denominator of a fraction or a fraction itself is immediately preceded by a negative sign, it is usually most convenient to place the negative sign in the numerator for later operations.  ||  || The Logic Behind The Process When working with rational expressions, it is often best to write them in the simplest possible form. For example, the rational expression can be reduced to the simpler expression for all x except x = 2,4 . From our discussion of equality of fractions in Section Section 8.2, we know that when a d = b c . This fact allows us to deduce that, if since a k b = a b k (recall the commutative property of multiplication). But this fact means that if a factor (in this case, k ) is common to both the numerator and denominator of a fraction, we may remove it without changing the value of the fraction. Cancelling The process of removing common factors is commonly called cancelling. Example 8.27.  can be reduced to .   Process:Remove the three factors of 1; Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.28.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.29.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.30.  cannot be reduced since there are no factors common to the numerator and denominator. Problems 1, 2, and 3 shown above could all be reduced. The process in each reduction included the following steps: Both the numerator and denominator were factored. Factors that were common to both the numerator and denominator were noted and removed by dividing them out. We know that we can divide both sides of an equation by the same nonzero number, but why should we be able to divide both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same nonzero number? The reason is that any nonzero number divided by itself is 1, and that if a number is multiplied by 1, it is left unchanged. Consider the fraction . Multiply this fraction by 1. This is written . But 1 can be rewritten as . The answer, , is the reduced form. Notice that in there is no factor common to both the numerator and denominator. This reasoning provides justification for the following rule. Cancelling Multiplying or dividing the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number does not change the value of a fraction.  || Cancelling The process of removing common factors is commonly called cancelling. Example 8.27.  can be reduced to .   Process:Remove the three factors of 1; Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.28.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.29.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.30.  cannot be reduced since there are no factors common to the numerator and denominator. Problems 1, 2, and 3 shown above could all be reduced. The process in each reduction included the following steps: Both the numerator and denominator were factored. Factors that were common to both the numerator and denominator were noted and removed by dividing them out. We know that we can divide both sides of an equation by the same nonzero number, but why should we be able to divide both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same nonzero number? The reason is that any nonzero number divided by itself is 1, and that if a number is multiplied by 1, it is left unchanged. Consider the fraction . Multiply this fraction by 1. This is written . But 1 can be rewritten as . The answer, , is the reduced form. Notice that in there is no factor common to both the numerator and denominator. This reasoning provides justification for the following rule. Cancelling Multiplying or dividing the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number does not change the value of a fraction.  || The Process We can now state a process for reducing a rational expression. Reducing a Rational Expression Factor the numerator and denominator completely. Divide the numerator and denominator by all factors they have in common, that is, remove all factors of 1. Reduced to Lowest Terms A rational expression is said to be reduced to lowest terms when the numerator and denominator have no factors in common.  || Excercises For the following problems, reduce each rational expression to lowest terms. Exercise 8.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.9. Exercise 8.3.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.11. Exercise 8.3.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.13. Exercise 8.3.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.15. Exercise 8.3.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.17. Exercise 8.3.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.19. Exercise 8.3.20. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.21. Exercise 8.3.22. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.23. Exercise 8.3.24. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.25. Exercise 8.3.26. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.27. Exercise 8.3.28. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.29. Exercise 8.3.30. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.31. Exercise 8.3.32. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.33. Exercise 8.3.34. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.35. Exercise 8.3.36. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.37. Exercise 8.3.38. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.39. Exercise 8.3.40. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.41. Exercise 8.3.42. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.43. Exercise 8.3.44. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.45. Exercise 8.3.46. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.47. Exercise 8.3.48. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.49. For the following problems, reduce each rational expression if possible. If not possible, state the answer in lowest terms. Exercise 8.3.50. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.51. Exercise 8.3.52. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.53. Exercise 8.3.54. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.55. Exercise 8.3.56. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.57. Exercise 8.3.58. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.59. Exercise 8.3.60. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.61. Exercise 8.3.62. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.63. Exercise 8.3.64. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.65. Exercise 8.3.66. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.67. Exercise 8.3.68. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.69.  || Excercises For Review Exercise 8.3.70. (Go to Solution) (Section 3.7) Write so that only positive exponents appear. Exercise 8.3.71. (Section 6.6) Factor y 4 − 16 . Exercise 8.3.72. (Go to Solution) (Section 6.8) Factor 10x 2 − 17x + 3 . Exercise 8.3.73. (Section 7.4) Supply the missing word. An equation expressed in the form a x + b y = c is said to be expressed in __________ form. Exercise 8.3.74. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.2) Find the domain of the rational expression .  ||  || Multiplication Of Rational Expressions Rational expressions are multiplied together in much the same way that arithmetic fractions are multiplied together. To multiply rational numbers, we do the following: Definition: Method for Multiplying Rational Numbers Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Multiply the numerators together. Multiply the denominators together. Rational expressions are multiplied together using exactly the same three steps. Since rational expressions tend to be longer than arithmetic fractions, we can simplify the multiplication process by adding one more step. Definition: Method for Multiplying Rational Expressions Factor all numerators and denominators. Reduce to lowest terms first by dividing out all common factors. (It is perfectly legitimate to cancel the numerator of one fraction with the denominator of another.) Multiply numerators together. Multiply denominators. It is often convenient, but not necessary, to leave denominators in factored form.  || Division Of Rational Expressions To divide one rational expression by another, we first invert the divisor then multiply the two expressions. Symbolically, if we let P,Q,R, and S represent polynomials, we can write  || Excercises For the following problems, perform the multiplications and divisions. Exercise 8.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.10. Exercise 8.4.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.12. Exercise 8.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.14. Exercise 8.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.16. Exercise 8.4.17. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.18. Exercise 8.4.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.20. Exercise 8.4.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.22. Exercise 8.4.23. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.24. Exercise 8.4.25. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.26. Exercise 8.4.27. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.28. Exercise 8.4.29. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.30. Exercise 8.4.31. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.32. Exercise 8.4.33. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.34. Exercise 8.4.35. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.36. Exercise 8.4.37. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.38. Exercise 8.4.39. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.40. Exercise 8.4.41. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.42. Exercise 8.4.43. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.44. Exercise 8.4.45. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.46. Exercise 8.4.47. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.48. Exercise 8.4.49. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.50. Exercise 8.4.51. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.52. Exercise 8.4.53. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.54. Exercise 8.4.55. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.56. Exercise 8.4.57. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.58. Exercise 8.4.59. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.60. Exercise 8.4.61. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.62. Exercise 8.4.63. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.64. Exercise 8.4.65. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.66. Exercise 8.4.67. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.68. Exercise 8.4.69. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.70. Exercise 8.4.71. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.72. Exercise 8.4.73. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.74. Exercise 8.4.75. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.76. Exercise 8.4.77. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.78. Exercise 8.4.79. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.80. Exercise 8.4.81. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.82. Exercise 8.4.83. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.84. Exercise 8.4.85. (Go to Solution)  ||  || The Process Recall, from Section Section 8.2, the equality property of fractions. Equality Property Of Fractions If then a d = b c. Using the fact that , and that 1 is the multiplicative identity, it follows that if is a rational expression, then This equation asserts that a rational expression can be transformed into an equivalent rational expression by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number. Process of Building Rational Expressions This process is known as the process of building rational expressions and it is exactly the opposite of reducing rational expressions. The process is shown in these examples: Example 8.50.  can be built to since Example 8.51.  can be built to since Example 8.52.  can be built to since Example 8.53.  can be built to since Suppose we're given a rational expression and wish to build it into a rational expression with denominator Q b 2 , that is, Since we changed the denominator, we must certainly change the numerator in the same way. To determine how to change the numerator we need to know how the denominator was changed. Since one rational expression is built into another equivalent expression by multiplication by 1, the first denominator must have been multiplied by some quantity. Observation of tells us that Q was multiplied by b 2 . Hence, we must multiply the numerator P by b 2 . Thus, Quite often a simple comparison of the original denominator with the new denominator will tell us the factor being used. However, there will be times when the factor is unclear by simple observation. We need a method for finding the factor. Observe the following examples; then try to speculate on the method. Example 8.54.  The original denominator 4 was multiplied by 5 to yield 20. What arithmetic process will yield 5 using 4 and 20? Example 8.55.  The original denominator 10 was multiplied by y to yield 10y . Example 8.56.  The original denominator 2a 3 b was multiplied by 8a 2 b 2 to yield 16a 5 b 3 . Example 8.57.  The original denominator ( a + 1 ) 2 was multiplied by 4( a − 2 ) to yield 4 ( a + 1 ) 2 ( a − 2 ) . To determine the quantity that the original denominator was multiplied by to yield the new denominator, we ask, "What did I multiply the original denominator by to get the new denominator?" We find this factor by dividing the original denominator into the new denominator. It is precisely this quantity that we multiply the numerator by to build the rational expression.  || The Reason For Building Rational Expressions Building Rational Expressions Normally, when we write a rational expression, we write it in reduced form. The reason for building rational expressions is to make addition and subtraction of rational expressions convenient (simpler). To add or subtract two or more rational expressions they must have the same denominator. Building rational expressions allows us to transform fractions into fractions with the same denominators (which we can then add or subtract). The most convenient new denominator is the least common denominator (LCD) of the given fractions.  || The Least Common Denominator (LCD) In arithmetic, the least common denominator is the smallest (least) quantity that each of the given denominators will divide into without a remainder. For algebraic expressions, the LCD is the polynomial of least degree divisible by each denominator. Some examples are shown below. Example 8.65.  The LCD is 12 since 12 is the smallest number that 4, 6, and 12 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.66.  The LCD is 24 since 24 is the smallest number that 3, 6, 8, and 12 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.67.  The LCD is x 2 since x 2 is the smallest quantity that x and x 2 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.68.  The LCD is 24a 2 b 3 since 24a 2 b 3 is the smallest quantity that 6a 2 b and 8a b 3 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.69.  The LCD is ( y − 6 ) 3 ( y − 1 ) since ( y − 6 ) 3   ·  ( y − 1 ) is the smallest quantity that y − 6, ( y − 6 ) 3 and y − 1 will divide into without a remainder. We’ll now propose and demonstrate a method for obtaining the LCD. Method for Obtaining the LCD Factor each denominator. Use exponents for repeated factors. It is usually not necessary to factor numerical quantities. Write down each different factor that appears. If a factor appears more than once, use only the factor with the highest exponent. The LCD is the product of the factors written in step 2.  || Excercises For Review Exercise 8.5.97. (Section 6.4) Factor m 2 x 3 + m x 2 + m x. Exercise 8.5.98. (Go to Solution) (Section 6.7) Factor y 2 − 10y + 21. Exercise 8.5.99. (Section 7.7) Write the equation of the line that passes through the points ( 1, 1 ) and ( 4,  − 2 ) . Express the equation in slope-intercept form. Exercise 8.5.100. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.3) Reduce Exercise 8.5.101. (Section 8.4) Find the quotient:  ||  || Basic Rule We are now in a position to study the process of adding and subtracting rational expressions. There is a most basic rule to which we must strictly adhere if we wish to conveniently add or subtract rational expressions. To add or subtract rational expressions conveniently, they should have the same denominators. Thus, to add or subtract two or more rational expressions conveniently, we must ensure that they all have the same denominator. The denominator that is most convenient is the LCD.  || Fractions With The Same Denominator The Rule for Adding and Subtracting Rational Expressions To add (or subtract) two or more rational expressions with the same denominators, add (or subtract) the numerators and place the result over the LCD. Reduce if necessary. Symbolically, Note that we combine only the numerators.  || Fractions with Different Denominators  ||  || Rational Equations Rational Equations When one rational expression is set equal to another rational expression, a rational equation results.Some examples of rational equations are the following (except for number 5): Example 8.93.  Example 8.94.  Example 8.95.  Example 8.96.  Example 8.97.  is a rational expression, not a rational equation.  || Rational Equations When one rational expression is set equal to another rational expression, a rational equation results.Some examples of rational equations are the following (except for number 5): Example 8.93.  Example 8.94.  Example 8.95.  Example 8.96.  Example 8.97.  is a rational expression, not a rational equation.  || The Logic Behind The Process It seems most reasonable that an equation without any fractions would be easier to solve than an equation with fractions. Our goal, then, is to convert any rational equation to an equation that contains no fractions. This is easily done.To develop this method, let’s consider the rational equation The LCD is 12. We know that we can multiply both sides of an equation by the same nonzero quantity, so we’ll multiply both sides by the LCD, 12. Now distribute 12 to each term on the left side using the distributive property. Now divide to eliminate all denominators. Now there are no more fractions, and we can solve this equation using our previous techniques to obtain 5 as the solution.  || The Process We have cleared the equation of fractions by multiplying both sides by the LCD. This development generates the following rule. Clearing an Equation of Fractions To clear an equation of fractions, multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD. When multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD, we use the distributive property to distribute the LCD to each term. This means we can simplify the above rule. Clearing an Equation of Fractions To clear an equation of fractions, multiply every term on both sides of the equation by the LCD. The complete method for solving a rational equation is 1. Determine all the values that must be excluded from consideration by finding the values that will produce zero in the denominator (and thus, division by zero). These excluded values are not in the domain of the equation and are called nondomain values. 2. Clear the equation of fractions by multiplying every term by the LCD. 3. Solve this nonfractional equation for the variable. Check to see if any of these potential solutions are excluded values. 4. Check the solution by substitution.  || Extraneous Solutions Extraneous Solutions Potential solutions that have been excluded because they make an expression undefined (or produce a false statement for an equation) are called extraneous solutions. Extraneous solutions are discarded. If there are no other potential solutions, the equation has no solution.  ||  || The Five-Step Method We are now in a position to study some applications of rational equations. Some of these problems will have practical applications while others are intended as logic developers. We will apply the five-step method for solving word problems. Five-Step Method Represent all unknown quantities in terms of x or some other letter. Translate the verbal phrases to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Solve this equation. Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement of the problem. Write the conclusion. Remember, step 1 is very important: always Introduce a variable.  ||  || Simple And Complex Fractions Simple Fraction In Section Section 8.2 we saw that a simple fraction was a fraction of the form where P and Q are polynomials and Q ≠ 0 . Complex Fraction A complex fraction is a fraction in which the numerator or denominator, or both, is a fraction. The fractions are examples of complex fractions, or more generally, complex rational expressions. There are two methods for simplifying complex rational expressions: the combine-divide method and the LCD-multiply-divide method.  || The Combine-Divide Method If necessary, combine the terms of the numerator together. If necessary, combine the terms of the denominator together. Divide the numerator by the denominator.  || The LCD-Multiply-Divide Method Find the LCD of all the terms. Multiply the numerator and denominator by the LCD. Reduce if necessary.  ||  || Dividing A Polynomial By A Monomial The following examples illustrate how to divide a polynomial by a monomial. The division process is quite simple and is based on addition of rational expressions. Turning this equation around we get Now we simply divide c into a , and c into b . This should suggest a rule. Dividing a Polynomial By a Monomial To divide a polynomial by a monomial, divide every term of the polynomial by the monomial.  || The Process Of Division In Section Section 8.3 we studied the method of reducing rational expressions. For example, we observed how to reduce an expression such as Our method was to factor both the numerator and denominator, then divide out common factors. When the numerator and denominator have no factors in common, the division may still occur, but the process is a little more involved than merely factoring. The method of dividing one polynomial by another is much the same as that of dividing one number by another. First, we’ll review the steps in dividing numbers.  We are to divide 35 by 8.   We try 4, since 32 divided by 8 is 4. Multiply 4 and 8. Subtract 32 from 35. Since the remainder 3 is less than the divisor 8, we are done with the 32 division.   The quotient is expressed as a mixed number. The process was to divide, multiply, and subtract.  || Review Of Subtraction Of Polynomials A very important step in the process of dividing one polynomial by another is subtraction of polynomials. Let’s review the process of subtraction by observing a few examples. 1. Subtract x − 2 from x − 5; that is, find ( x − 5 ) − ( x − 2 ).  Since   x − 2 is preceded by a minus sign, remove the parentheses, change the sign of each term, then add. The result is − 3. 2. Subtract x 3 + 3x 2 from x 3 + 4x 2 + x − 1.  Since x 3 + 3x 2 is preceded by a minus sign, remove the parentheses, change the sign of each term, then add. The result is x2 + x − 1. 3. Subtract x 2 + 3x from x 2 + 1.  We can write x 2 + 1 as x 2 + 0x + 1.  || Dividing A Polynomial By A Polynomial Now we’ll observe some examples of dividing one polynomial by another. The process is the same as the process used with whole numbers: divide, multiply, subtract, divide, multiply, subtract,.... The division, multiplication, and subtraction take place one term at a time. The process is concluded when the polynomial remainder is of lesser degree than the polynomial divisor.  || 
book1_ch08_2	 || Rational Expressions In arithmetic it is noted that a fraction is a quotient of two whole numbers. The expression , where a and b are any two whole numbers and b ≠ 0, is called a fraction. The top number, a , is called the numerator, and the bottom number, b , is called the denominator. Simple Algebraic Fraction We define a simple algebraic fraction in a similar manner. Rather than restrict­ing ourselves only to numbers, we use polynomials for the numerator and denomi­nator. Another term for a simple algebraic fraction is a rational expression. A rational expression is an expression of the form , where P and Q are both polyno­mials and Q never represents the zero polynomial. Rational Expression A rational expression is an algebraic expression that can be written as the quotient of two polynomials. Examples 1–4 are rational expressions: Example 8.1.  is a rational expression: P is x + 9 and Q is x – 7. Example 8.2.  is a rational expression: P is x 3 + 5x 2 – 12x + 1 and Q is x 4 – 10. Example 8.3.  is a rational expression: P is 3 and Q is 8. Example 8.4.  4x – 5 is a rational expression since 4x – 5 can be written as : P is 4x – 5 and Q is 1. Example 8.5.  is not a rational expression since is not a polynomial. In the rational expression , P is called the numerator and Q is called the denominator. Domain of a Rational Expression Since division by zero is not defined, we must be careful to note the values for which the rational expression is valid. The collection of values for which the rational expression is defined is called the domain of the rational expression. (Recall our study of the domain of an equation in Section Section 4.8.) Finding the Domain of a Rational Expression To find the domain of a rational expression we must ask, "What values, if any, of the variable will make the denominator zero?" To find these values, we set the denominator equal to zero and solve. If any zero-producing values are obtained, they are not included in the domain. All other real numbers are included in the domain (unless some have been excluded for particular situational reasons).  || Zero-Factor Property Sometimes to find the domain of a rational expression, it is necessary to factor the denominator and use the zero-factor property of real numbers. Zero-factor Property If two real numbers a and b are multiplied together and the resulting product is 0, then at least one of the factors must be zero, that is, either a = 0, b = 0, or both a = 0 and b = 0. The following examples illustrate the use of the zero-factor property. Example 8.6.  What value will produce zero in the expression 4x ? By the zero-factor property, if 4x = 0, then x = 0. Example 8.7.  What value will produce zero in the expression 8(x – 6)? By the zero-factor property, if 8(x – 6) = 0, then Thus, 8(x – 6) = 0 when x = 6. Example 8.8.  What value(s) will produce zero in the expression (x – 3)(x + 5)? By the zero-factor property, if (x – 3)(x + 5) = 0, then Thus, (x – 3)(x + 5) = 0 when x = 3 or x = – 5. Example 8.9.  What value(s) will produce zero in the expression x 2 + 6x + 8? We must factor x 2 + 6x + 8 to put it into the zero-factor property form. x 2 + 6x + 8 = (x + 2)(x + 4) Now, (x + 2)(x + 4) = 0 when Thus, x 2 + 6x + 8 = 0 when x = – 2 or x = – 4. Example 8.10.  What value(s) will produce zero in the expression 6x 2 – 19x – 7? We must factor 6x 2 – 19x – 7 to put it into the zero-factor property form. 6x 2 – 19x – 7 = (3x + 1)(2x – 7) Now, (3x + 1)(2x – 7) = 0 when Thus, 6x 2 – 19x – 7 = 0 when or .  || The Equality Property of Fractions From our experience with arithmetic we may recall the equality property of fractions. Let a , b , c , d be real numbers such that b ≠ 0 and d ≠ 0. Equality Property of Fractions If , then a d = b c . If a d = b c , then . Two fractions are equal when their cross-products are equal. We see this property in the following examples: Example 8.19.  , since 2 · 12 = 3 · 8. Example 8.20.  , since 5y · 6y = 2 · 15y 2 and 30y 2 = 30y 2 . Example 8.21.  Since 9a · 4 = 18a · 2, .  || The Negative Property of Fractions A useful property of fractions is the negative property of fractions. Negative Property of Fractions The negative sign of a fraction may be placed in front of the fraction, , in the numerator of the fraction, , in the denominator of the fraction, . All three fractions will have the same value, that is, The negative property of fractions is illustrated by the fractions To see this, consider . Is this correct?By the equality property of fractions, – (3 · 4) = – 12 and – 3 · 4 = – 12. Thus, . Convince yourself that the other two fractions are equal as well. This same property holds for rational expressions and negative signs. This property is often quite helpful in simplifying a rational expression (as we shall need to do in subsequent sections). If either the numerator or denominator of a fraction or a fraction itself is immediately preceded by a negative sign, it is usually most convenient to place the negative sign in the numerator for later operations.  || 
book1_ch08_2_2	Rational Expressions In arithmetic it is noted that a fraction is a quotient of two whole numbers. The expression , where a and b are any two whole numbers and b ≠ 0, is called a fraction. The top number, a , is called the numerator, and the bottom number, b , is called the denominator. Simple Algebraic Fraction We define a simple algebraic fraction in a similar manner. Rather than restrict­ing ourselves only to numbers, we use polynomials for the numerator and denomi­nator. Another term for a simple algebraic fraction is a rational expression. A rational expression is an expression of the form , where P and Q are both polyno­mials and Q never represents the zero polynomial. Rational Expression A rational expression is an algebraic expression that can be written as the quotient of two polynomials. Examples 1–4 are rational expressions: Example 8.1.  is a rational expression: P is x + 9 and Q is x – 7. Example 8.2.  is a rational expression: P is x 3 + 5x 2 – 12x + 1 and Q is x 4 – 10. Example 8.3.  is a rational expression: P is 3 and Q is 8. Example 8.4.  4x – 5 is a rational expression since 4x – 5 can be written as : P is 4x – 5 and Q is 1. Example 8.5.  is not a rational expression since is not a polynomial. In the rational expression , P is called the numerator and Q is called the denominator. Domain of a Rational Expression Since division by zero is not defined, we must be careful to note the values for which the rational expression is valid. The collection of values for which the rational expression is defined is called the domain of the rational expression. (Recall our study of the domain of an equation in Section Section 4.8.) Finding the Domain of a Rational Expression To find the domain of a rational expression we must ask, "What values, if any, of the variable will make the denominator zero?" To find these values, we set the denominator equal to zero and solve. If any zero-producing values are obtained, they are not included in the domain. All other real numbers are included in the domain (unless some have been excluded for particular situational reasons). Rational Expressions In arithmetic it is noted that a fraction is a quotient of two whole numbers. The expression , where a and b are any two whole numbers and b ≠ 0, is called a fraction. The top number, a , is called the numerator, and the bottom number, b , is called the denominator. Simple Algebraic Fraction We define a simple algebraic fraction in a similar manner. Rather than restrict­ing ourselves only to numbers, we use polynomials for the numerator and denomi­nator. Another term for a simple algebraic fraction is a rational expression. A rational expression is an expression of the form , where P and Q are both polyno­mials and Q never represents the zero polynomial. Rational Expression A rational expression is an algebraic expression that can be written as the quotient of two polynomials. Examples 1–4 are rational expressions: Example 8.1.  is a rational expression: P is x + 9 and Q is x – 7. Example 8.2.  is a rational expression: P is x 3 + 5x 2 – 12x + 1 and Q is x 4 – 10. Example 8.3.  is a rational expression: P is 3 and Q is 8. Example 8.4.  4x – 5 is a rational expression since 4x – 5 can be written as : P is 4x – 5 and Q is 1. Example 8.5.  is not a rational expression since is not a polynomial. In the rational expression , P is called the numerator and Q is called the denominator. Domain of a Rational Expression Since division by zero is not defined, we must be careful to note the values for which the rational expression is valid. The collection of values for which the rational expression is defined is called the domain of the rational expression. (Recall our study of the domain of an equation in Section Section 4.8.) Finding the Domain of a Rational Expression To find the domain of a rational expression we must ask, "What values, if any, of the variable will make the denominator zero?" To find these values, we set the denominator equal to zero and solve. If any zero-producing values are obtained, they are not included in the domain. All other real numbers are included in the domain (unless some have been excluded for particular situational reasons).  || 
book1_ch08_2_3	Zero-Factor Property Sometimes to find the domain of a rational expression, it is necessary to factor the denominator and use the zero-factor property of real numbers. Zero-factor Property If two real numbers a and b are multiplied together and the resulting product is 0, then at least one of the factors must be zero, that is, either a = 0, b = 0, or both a = 0 and b = 0. The following examples illustrate the use of the zero-factor property. Example 8.6.  What value will produce zero in the expression 4x ? By the zero-factor property, if 4x = 0, then x = 0. Example 8.7.  What value will produce zero in the expression 8(x – 6)? By the zero-factor property, if 8(x – 6) = 0, then Thus, 8(x – 6) = 0 when x = 6. Example 8.8.  What value(s) will produce zero in the expression (x – 3)(x + 5)? By the zero-factor property, if (x – 3)(x + 5) = 0, then Thus, (x – 3)(x + 5) = 0 when x = 3 or x = – 5. Example 8.9.  What value(s) will produce zero in the expression x 2 + 6x + 8? We must factor x 2 + 6x + 8 to put it into the zero-factor property form. x 2 + 6x + 8 = (x + 2)(x + 4) Now, (x + 2)(x + 4) = 0 when Thus, x 2 + 6x + 8 = 0 when x = – 2 or x = – 4. Example 8.10.  What value(s) will produce zero in the expression 6x 2 – 19x – 7? We must factor 6x 2 – 19x – 7 to put it into the zero-factor property form. 6x 2 – 19x – 7 = (3x + 1)(2x – 7) Now, (3x + 1)(2x – 7) = 0 when Thus, 6x 2 – 19x – 7 = 0 when or . Zero-Factor Property Sometimes to find the domain of a rational expression, it is necessary to factor the denominator and use the zero-factor property of real numbers. Zero-factor Property If two real numbers a and b are multiplied together and the resulting product is 0, then at least one of the factors must be zero, that is, either a = 0, b = 0, or both a = 0 and b = 0. The following examples illustrate the use of the zero-factor property. Example 8.6.  What value will produce zero in the expression 4x ? By the zero-factor property, if 4x = 0, then x = 0. Example 8.7.  What value will produce zero in the expression 8(x – 6)? By the zero-factor property, if 8(x – 6) = 0, then Thus, 8(x – 6) = 0 when x = 6. Example 8.8.  What value(s) will produce zero in the expression (x – 3)(x + 5)? By the zero-factor property, if (x – 3)(x + 5) = 0, then Thus, (x – 3)(x + 5) = 0 when x = 3 or x = – 5. Example 8.9.  What value(s) will produce zero in the expression x 2 + 6x + 8? We must factor x 2 + 6x + 8 to put it into the zero-factor property form. x 2 + 6x + 8 = (x + 2)(x + 4) Now, (x + 2)(x + 4) = 0 when Thus, x 2 + 6x + 8 = 0 when x = – 2 or x = – 4. Example 8.10.  What value(s) will produce zero in the expression 6x 2 – 19x – 7? We must factor 6x 2 – 19x – 7 to put it into the zero-factor property form. 6x 2 – 19x – 7 = (3x + 1)(2x – 7) Now, (3x + 1)(2x – 7) = 0 when Thus, 6x 2 – 19x – 7 = 0 when or .  || 
book1_ch08_2_6	The Equality Property of Fractions From our experience with arithmetic we may recall the equality property of fractions. Let a , b , c , d be real numbers such that b ≠ 0 and d ≠ 0. Equality Property of Fractions If , then a d = b c . If a d = b c , then . Two fractions are equal when their cross-products are equal. We see this property in the following examples: Example 8.19.  , since 2 · 12 = 3 · 8. Example 8.20.  , since 5y · 6y = 2 · 15y 2 and 30y 2 = 30y 2 . Example 8.21.  Since 9a · 4 = 18a · 2, . The Equality Property of Fractions From our experience with arithmetic we may recall the equality property of fractions. Let a , b , c , d be real numbers such that b ≠ 0 and d ≠ 0. Equality Property of Fractions If , then a d = b c . If a d = b c , then . Two fractions are equal when their cross-products are equal. We see this property in the following examples: Example 8.19.  , since 2 · 12 = 3 · 8. Example 8.20.  , since 5y · 6y = 2 · 15y 2 and 30y 2 = 30y 2 . Example 8.21.  Since 9a · 4 = 18a · 2, .  || 
book1_ch08_2_7	The Negative Property of Fractions A useful property of fractions is the negative property of fractions. Negative Property of Fractions The negative sign of a fraction may be placed in front of the fraction, , in the numerator of the fraction, , in the denominator of the fraction, . All three fractions will have the same value, that is, The negative property of fractions is illustrated by the fractions To see this, consider . Is this correct?By the equality property of fractions, – (3 · 4) = – 12 and – 3 · 4 = – 12. Thus, . Convince yourself that the other two fractions are equal as well. This same property holds for rational expressions and negative signs. This property is often quite helpful in simplifying a rational expression (as we shall need to do in subsequent sections). If either the numerator or denominator of a fraction or a fraction itself is immediately preceded by a negative sign, it is usually most convenient to place the negative sign in the numerator for later operations. The Negative Property of Fractions A useful property of fractions is the negative property of fractions. Negative Property of Fractions The negative sign of a fraction may be placed in front of the fraction, , in the numerator of the fraction, , in the denominator of the fraction, . All three fractions will have the same value, that is, The negative property of fractions is illustrated by the fractions To see this, consider . Is this correct?By the equality property of fractions, – (3 · 4) = – 12 and – 3 · 4 = – 12. Thus, . Convince yourself that the other two fractions are equal as well. This same property holds for rational expressions and negative signs. This property is often quite helpful in simplifying a rational expression (as we shall need to do in subsequent sections). If either the numerator or denominator of a fraction or a fraction itself is immediately preceded by a negative sign, it is usually most convenient to place the negative sign in the numerator for later operations.  || 
book1_ch08_3	 || The Logic Behind The Process When working with rational expressions, it is often best to write them in the simplest possible form. For example, the rational expression can be reduced to the simpler expression for all x except x = 2,4 . From our discussion of equality of fractions in Section Section 8.2, we know that when a d = b c . This fact allows us to deduce that, if since a k b = a b k (recall the commutative property of multiplication). But this fact means that if a factor (in this case, k ) is common to both the numerator and denominator of a fraction, we may remove it without changing the value of the fraction. Cancelling The process of removing common factors is commonly called cancelling. Example 8.27.  can be reduced to .   Process:Remove the three factors of 1; Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.28.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.29.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.30.  cannot be reduced since there are no factors common to the numerator and denominator. Problems 1, 2, and 3 shown above could all be reduced. The process in each reduction included the following steps: Both the numerator and denominator were factored. Factors that were common to both the numerator and denominator were noted and removed by dividing them out. We know that we can divide both sides of an equation by the same nonzero number, but why should we be able to divide both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same nonzero number? The reason is that any nonzero number divided by itself is 1, and that if a number is multiplied by 1, it is left unchanged. Consider the fraction . Multiply this fraction by 1. This is written . But 1 can be rewritten as . The answer, , is the reduced form. Notice that in there is no factor common to both the numerator and denominator. This reasoning provides justification for the following rule. Cancelling Multiplying or dividing the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number does not change the value of a fraction.  || Cancelling The process of removing common factors is commonly called cancelling. Example 8.27.  can be reduced to .   Process:Remove the three factors of 1; Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.28.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.29.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.30.  cannot be reduced since there are no factors common to the numerator and denominator. Problems 1, 2, and 3 shown above could all be reduced. The process in each reduction included the following steps: Both the numerator and denominator were factored. Factors that were common to both the numerator and denominator were noted and removed by dividing them out. We know that we can divide both sides of an equation by the same nonzero number, but why should we be able to divide both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same nonzero number? The reason is that any nonzero number divided by itself is 1, and that if a number is multiplied by 1, it is left unchanged. Consider the fraction . Multiply this fraction by 1. This is written . But 1 can be rewritten as . The answer, , is the reduced form. Notice that in there is no factor common to both the numerator and denominator. This reasoning provides justification for the following rule. Cancelling Multiplying or dividing the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number does not change the value of a fraction.  || The Process We can now state a process for reducing a rational expression. Reducing a Rational Expression Factor the numerator and denominator completely. Divide the numerator and denominator by all factors they have in common, that is, remove all factors of 1. Reduced to Lowest Terms A rational expression is said to be reduced to lowest terms when the numerator and denominator have no factors in common.  || Excercises For the following problems, reduce each rational expression to lowest terms. Exercise 8.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.9. Exercise 8.3.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.11. Exercise 8.3.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.13. Exercise 8.3.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.15. Exercise 8.3.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.17. Exercise 8.3.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.19. Exercise 8.3.20. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.21. Exercise 8.3.22. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.23. Exercise 8.3.24. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.25. Exercise 8.3.26. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.27. Exercise 8.3.28. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.29. Exercise 8.3.30. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.31. Exercise 8.3.32. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.33. Exercise 8.3.34. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.35. Exercise 8.3.36. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.37. Exercise 8.3.38. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.39. Exercise 8.3.40. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.41. Exercise 8.3.42. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.43. Exercise 8.3.44. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.45. Exercise 8.3.46. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.47. Exercise 8.3.48. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.49. For the following problems, reduce each rational expression if possible. If not possible, state the answer in lowest terms. Exercise 8.3.50. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.51. Exercise 8.3.52. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.53. Exercise 8.3.54. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.55. Exercise 8.3.56. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.57. Exercise 8.3.58. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.59. Exercise 8.3.60. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.61. Exercise 8.3.62. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.63. Exercise 8.3.64. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.65. Exercise 8.3.66. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.67. Exercise 8.3.68. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.69.  || Excercises For Review Exercise 8.3.70. (Go to Solution) (Section 3.7) Write so that only positive exponents appear. Exercise 8.3.71. (Section 6.6) Factor y 4 − 16 . Exercise 8.3.72. (Go to Solution) (Section 6.8) Factor 10x 2 − 17x + 3 . Exercise 8.3.73. (Section 7.4) Supply the missing word. An equation expressed in the form a x + b y = c is said to be expressed in __________ form. Exercise 8.3.74. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.2) Find the domain of the rational expression .  || 
book1_ch08_3_2	The Logic Behind The Process When working with rational expressions, it is often best to write them in the simplest possible form. For example, the rational expression can be reduced to the simpler expression for all x except x = 2,4 . From our discussion of equality of fractions in Section Section 8.2, we know that when a d = b c . This fact allows us to deduce that, if since a k b = a b k (recall the commutative property of multiplication). But this fact means that if a factor (in this case, k ) is common to both the numerator and denominator of a fraction, we may remove it without changing the value of the fraction. Cancelling The process of removing common factors is commonly called cancelling. Example 8.27.  can be reduced to .   Process:Remove the three factors of 1; Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.28.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.29.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.30.  cannot be reduced since there are no factors common to the numerator and denominator. Problems 1, 2, and 3 shown above could all be reduced. The process in each reduction included the following steps: Both the numerator and denominator were factored. Factors that were common to both the numerator and denominator were noted and removed by dividing them out. We know that we can divide both sides of an equation by the same nonzero number, but why should we be able to divide both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same nonzero number? The reason is that any nonzero number divided by itself is 1, and that if a number is multiplied by 1, it is left unchanged. Consider the fraction . Multiply this fraction by 1. This is written . But 1 can be rewritten as . The answer, , is the reduced form. Notice that in there is no factor common to both the numerator and denominator. This reasoning provides justification for the following rule. Cancelling Multiplying or dividing the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number does not change the value of a fraction. The Logic Behind The Process When working with rational expressions, it is often best to write them in the simplest possible form. For example, the rational expression can be reduced to the simpler expression for all x except x = 2,4 . From our discussion of equality of fractions in Section Section 8.2, we know that when a d = b c . This fact allows us to deduce that, if since a k b = a b k (recall the commutative property of multiplication). But this fact means that if a factor (in this case, k ) is common to both the numerator and denominator of a fraction, we may remove it without changing the value of the fraction. Cancelling The process of removing common factors is commonly called cancelling. Example 8.27.  can be reduced to .   Process:Remove the three factors of 1; Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.28.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.29.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.30.  cannot be reduced since there are no factors common to the numerator and denominator. Problems 1, 2, and 3 shown above could all be reduced. The process in each reduction included the following steps: Both the numerator and denominator were factored. Factors that were common to both the numerator and denominator were noted and removed by dividing them out. We know that we can divide both sides of an equation by the same nonzero number, but why should we be able to divide both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same nonzero number? The reason is that any nonzero number divided by itself is 1, and that if a number is multiplied by 1, it is left unchanged. Consider the fraction . Multiply this fraction by 1. This is written . But 1 can be rewritten as . The answer, , is the reduced form. Notice that in there is no factor common to both the numerator and denominator. This reasoning provides justification for the following rule. Cancelling Multiplying or dividing the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number does not change the value of a fraction.  || 
book1_ch08_3_3	Cancelling The process of removing common factors is commonly called cancelling. Example 8.27.  can be reduced to .   Process:Remove the three factors of 1; Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.28.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.29.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.30.  cannot be reduced since there are no factors common to the numerator and denominator. Problems 1, 2, and 3 shown above could all be reduced. The process in each reduction included the following steps: Both the numerator and denominator were factored. Factors that were common to both the numerator and denominator were noted and removed by dividing them out. We know that we can divide both sides of an equation by the same nonzero number, but why should we be able to divide both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same nonzero number? The reason is that any nonzero number divided by itself is 1, and that if a number is multiplied by 1, it is left unchanged. Consider the fraction . Multiply this fraction by 1. This is written . But 1 can be rewritten as . The answer, , is the reduced form. Notice that in there is no factor common to both the numerator and denominator. This reasoning provides justification for the following rule. Cancelling Multiplying or dividing the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number does not change the value of a fraction. Cancelling The process of removing common factors is commonly called cancelling. Example 8.27.  can be reduced to .   Process:Remove the three factors of 1; Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.28.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in , there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.29.  can be reduced to .   Process: Remove the factor of 1;. Notice that in there is no factor common to the numerator and denominator. Example 8.30.  cannot be reduced since there are no factors common to the numerator and denominator. Problems 1, 2, and 3 shown above could all be reduced. The process in each reduction included the following steps: Both the numerator and denominator were factored. Factors that were common to both the numerator and denominator were noted and removed by dividing them out. We know that we can divide both sides of an equation by the same nonzero number, but why should we be able to divide both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same nonzero number? The reason is that any nonzero number divided by itself is 1, and that if a number is multiplied by 1, it is left unchanged. Consider the fraction . Multiply this fraction by 1. This is written . But 1 can be rewritten as . The answer, , is the reduced form. Notice that in there is no factor common to both the numerator and denominator. This reasoning provides justification for the following rule. Cancelling Multiplying or dividing the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number does not change the value of a fraction.  || 
book1_ch08_3_4	The Process We can now state a process for reducing a rational expression. Reducing a Rational Expression Factor the numerator and denominator completely. Divide the numerator and denominator by all factors they have in common, that is, remove all factors of 1. Reduced to Lowest Terms A rational expression is said to be reduced to lowest terms when the numerator and denominator have no factors in common. The Process We can now state a process for reducing a rational expression. Reducing a Rational Expression Factor the numerator and denominator completely. Divide the numerator and denominator by all factors they have in common, that is, remove all factors of 1. Reduced to Lowest Terms A rational expression is said to be reduced to lowest terms when the numerator and denominator have no factors in common.  || 
book1_ch08_3_7	Excercises For the following problems, reduce each rational expression to lowest terms. Exercise 8.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.9. Exercise 8.3.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.11. Exercise 8.3.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.13. Exercise 8.3.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.15. Exercise 8.3.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.17. Exercise 8.3.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.19. Exercise 8.3.20. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.21. Exercise 8.3.22. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.23. Exercise 8.3.24. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.25. Exercise 8.3.26. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.27. Exercise 8.3.28. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.29. Exercise 8.3.30. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.31. Exercise 8.3.32. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.33. Exercise 8.3.34. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.35. Exercise 8.3.36. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.37. Exercise 8.3.38. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.39. Exercise 8.3.40. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.41. Exercise 8.3.42. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.43. Exercise 8.3.44. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.45. Exercise 8.3.46. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.47. Exercise 8.3.48. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.49. For the following problems, reduce each rational expression if possible. If not possible, state the answer in lowest terms. Exercise 8.3.50. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.51. Exercise 8.3.52. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.53. Exercise 8.3.54. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.55. Exercise 8.3.56. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.57. Exercise 8.3.58. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.59. Exercise 8.3.60. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.61. Exercise 8.3.62. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.63. Exercise 8.3.64. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.65. Exercise 8.3.66. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.67. Exercise 8.3.68. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.69. Excercises For the following problems, reduce each rational expression to lowest terms. Exercise 8.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.9. Exercise 8.3.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.11. Exercise 8.3.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.13. Exercise 8.3.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.15. Exercise 8.3.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.17. Exercise 8.3.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.19. Exercise 8.3.20. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.21. Exercise 8.3.22. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.23. Exercise 8.3.24. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.25. Exercise 8.3.26. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.27. Exercise 8.3.28. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.29. Exercise 8.3.30. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.31. Exercise 8.3.32. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.33. Exercise 8.3.34. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.35. Exercise 8.3.36. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.37. Exercise 8.3.38. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.39. Exercise 8.3.40. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.41. Exercise 8.3.42. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.43. Exercise 8.3.44. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.45. Exercise 8.3.46. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.47. Exercise 8.3.48. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.49. For the following problems, reduce each rational expression if possible. If not possible, state the answer in lowest terms. Exercise 8.3.50. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.51. Exercise 8.3.52. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.53. Exercise 8.3.54. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.55. Exercise 8.3.56. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.57. Exercise 8.3.58. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.59. Exercise 8.3.60. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.61. Exercise 8.3.62. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.63. Exercise 8.3.64. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.65. Exercise 8.3.66. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.67. Exercise 8.3.68. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.3.69.  || 
book1_ch08_3_8	Excercises For Review Exercise 8.3.70. (Go to Solution) (Section 3.7) Write so that only positive exponents appear. Exercise 8.3.71. (Section 6.6) Factor y 4 − 16 . Exercise 8.3.72. (Go to Solution) (Section 6.8) Factor 10x 2 − 17x + 3 . Exercise 8.3.73. (Section 7.4) Supply the missing word. An equation expressed in the form a x + b y = c is said to be expressed in __________ form. Exercise 8.3.74. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.2) Find the domain of the rational expression . Excercises For Review Exercise 8.3.70. (Go to Solution) (Section 3.7) Write so that only positive exponents appear. Exercise 8.3.71. (Section 6.6) Factor y 4 − 16 . Exercise 8.3.72. (Go to Solution) (Section 6.8) Factor 10x 2 − 17x + 3 . Exercise 8.3.73. (Section 7.4) Supply the missing word. An equation expressed in the form a x + b y = c is said to be expressed in __________ form. Exercise 8.3.74. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.2) Find the domain of the rational expression .  || 
book1_ch08_4	 || Multiplication Of Rational Expressions Rational expressions are multiplied together in much the same way that arithmetic fractions are multiplied together. To multiply rational numbers, we do the following: Definition: Method for Multiplying Rational Numbers Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Multiply the numerators together. Multiply the denominators together. Rational expressions are multiplied together using exactly the same three steps. Since rational expressions tend to be longer than arithmetic fractions, we can simplify the multiplication process by adding one more step. Definition: Method for Multiplying Rational Expressions Factor all numerators and denominators. Reduce to lowest terms first by dividing out all common factors. (It is perfectly legitimate to cancel the numerator of one fraction with the denominator of another.) Multiply numerators together. Multiply denominators. It is often convenient, but not necessary, to leave denominators in factored form.  || Division Of Rational Expressions To divide one rational expression by another, we first invert the divisor then multiply the two expressions. Symbolically, if we let P,Q,R, and S represent polynomials, we can write  || Excercises For the following problems, perform the multiplications and divisions. Exercise 8.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.10. Exercise 8.4.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.12. Exercise 8.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.14. Exercise 8.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.16. Exercise 8.4.17. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.18. Exercise 8.4.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.20. Exercise 8.4.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.22. Exercise 8.4.23. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.24. Exercise 8.4.25. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.26. Exercise 8.4.27. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.28. Exercise 8.4.29. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.30. Exercise 8.4.31. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.32. Exercise 8.4.33. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.34. Exercise 8.4.35. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.36. Exercise 8.4.37. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.38. Exercise 8.4.39. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.40. Exercise 8.4.41. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.42. Exercise 8.4.43. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.44. Exercise 8.4.45. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.46. Exercise 8.4.47. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.48. Exercise 8.4.49. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.50. Exercise 8.4.51. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.52. Exercise 8.4.53. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.54. Exercise 8.4.55. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.56. Exercise 8.4.57. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.58. Exercise 8.4.59. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.60. Exercise 8.4.61. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.62. Exercise 8.4.63. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.64. Exercise 8.4.65. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.66. Exercise 8.4.67. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.68. Exercise 8.4.69. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.70. Exercise 8.4.71. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.72. Exercise 8.4.73. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.74. Exercise 8.4.75. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.76. Exercise 8.4.77. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.78. Exercise 8.4.79. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.80. Exercise 8.4.81. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.82. Exercise 8.4.83. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.84. Exercise 8.4.85. (Go to Solution)  || 
book1_ch08_4_2	Multiplication Of Rational Expressions Rational expressions are multiplied together in much the same way that arithmetic fractions are multiplied together. To multiply rational numbers, we do the following: Definition: Method for Multiplying Rational Numbers Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Multiply the numerators together. Multiply the denominators together. Rational expressions are multiplied together using exactly the same three steps. Since rational expressions tend to be longer than arithmetic fractions, we can simplify the multiplication process by adding one more step. Definition: Method for Multiplying Rational Expressions Factor all numerators and denominators. Reduce to lowest terms first by dividing out all common factors. (It is perfectly legitimate to cancel the numerator of one fraction with the denominator of another.) Multiply numerators together. Multiply denominators. It is often convenient, but not necessary, to leave denominators in factored form. Multiplication Of Rational Expressions Rational expressions are multiplied together in much the same way that arithmetic fractions are multiplied together. To multiply rational numbers, we do the following: Definition: Method for Multiplying Rational Numbers Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Multiply the numerators together. Multiply the denominators together. Rational expressions are multiplied together using exactly the same three steps. Since rational expressions tend to be longer than arithmetic fractions, we can simplify the multiplication process by adding one more step. Definition: Method for Multiplying Rational Expressions Factor all numerators and denominators. Reduce to lowest terms first by dividing out all common factors. (It is perfectly legitimate to cancel the numerator of one fraction with the denominator of another.) Multiply numerators together. Multiply denominators. It is often convenient, but not necessary, to leave denominators in factored form.  || 
book1_ch08_4_5	Division Of Rational Expressions To divide one rational expression by another, we first invert the divisor then multiply the two expressions. Symbolically, if we let P,Q,R, and S represent polynomials, we can write Division Of Rational Expressions To divide one rational expression by another, we first invert the divisor then multiply the two expressions. Symbolically, if we let P,Q,R, and S represent polynomials, we can write  || 
book1_ch08_4_8	Excercises For the following problems, perform the multiplications and divisions. Exercise 8.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.10. Exercise 8.4.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.12. Exercise 8.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.14. Exercise 8.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.16. Exercise 8.4.17. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.18. Exercise 8.4.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.20. Exercise 8.4.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.22. Exercise 8.4.23. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.24. Exercise 8.4.25. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.26. Exercise 8.4.27. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.28. Exercise 8.4.29. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.30. Exercise 8.4.31. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.32. Exercise 8.4.33. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.34. Exercise 8.4.35. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.36. Exercise 8.4.37. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.38. Exercise 8.4.39. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.40. Exercise 8.4.41. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.42. Exercise 8.4.43. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.44. Exercise 8.4.45. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.46. Exercise 8.4.47. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.48. Exercise 8.4.49. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.50. Exercise 8.4.51. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.52. Exercise 8.4.53. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.54. Exercise 8.4.55. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.56. Exercise 8.4.57. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.58. Exercise 8.4.59. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.60. Exercise 8.4.61. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.62. Exercise 8.4.63. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.64. Exercise 8.4.65. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.66. Exercise 8.4.67. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.68. Exercise 8.4.69. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.70. Exercise 8.4.71. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.72. Exercise 8.4.73. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.74. Exercise 8.4.75. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.76. Exercise 8.4.77. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.78. Exercise 8.4.79. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.80. Exercise 8.4.81. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.82. Exercise 8.4.83. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.84. Exercise 8.4.85. (Go to Solution) Excercises For the following problems, perform the multiplications and divisions. Exercise 8.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.10. Exercise 8.4.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.12. Exercise 8.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.14. Exercise 8.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.16. Exercise 8.4.17. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.18. Exercise 8.4.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.20. Exercise 8.4.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.22. Exercise 8.4.23. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.24. Exercise 8.4.25. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.26. Exercise 8.4.27. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.28. Exercise 8.4.29. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.30. Exercise 8.4.31. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.32. Exercise 8.4.33. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.34. Exercise 8.4.35. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.36. Exercise 8.4.37. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.38. Exercise 8.4.39. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.40. Exercise 8.4.41. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.42. Exercise 8.4.43. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.44. Exercise 8.4.45. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.46. Exercise 8.4.47. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.48. Exercise 8.4.49. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.50. Exercise 8.4.51. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.52. Exercise 8.4.53. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.54. Exercise 8.4.55. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.56. Exercise 8.4.57. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.58. Exercise 8.4.59. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.60. Exercise 8.4.61. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.62. Exercise 8.4.63. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.64. Exercise 8.4.65. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.66. Exercise 8.4.67. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.68. Exercise 8.4.69. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.70. Exercise 8.4.71. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.72. Exercise 8.4.73. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.74. Exercise 8.4.75. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.76. Exercise 8.4.77. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.78. Exercise 8.4.79. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.80. Exercise 8.4.81. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.82. Exercise 8.4.83. (Go to Solution) Exercise 8.4.84. Exercise 8.4.85. (Go to Solution)  || 
book1_ch08_5	 || The Process Recall, from Section Section 8.2, the equality property of fractions. Equality Property Of Fractions If then a d = b c. Using the fact that , and that 1 is the multiplicative identity, it follows that if is a rational expression, then This equation asserts that a rational expression can be transformed into an equivalent rational expression by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number. Process of Building Rational Expressions This process is known as the process of building rational expressions and it is exactly the opposite of reducing rational expressions. The process is shown in these examples: Example 8.50.  can be built to since Example 8.51.  can be built to since Example 8.52.  can be built to since Example 8.53.  can be built to since Suppose we're given a rational expression and wish to build it into a rational expression with denominator Q b 2 , that is, Since we changed the denominator, we must certainly change the numerator in the same way. To determine how to change the numerator we need to know how the denominator was changed. Since one rational expression is built into another equivalent expression by multiplication by 1, the first denominator must have been multiplied by some quantity. Observation of tells us that Q was multiplied by b 2 . Hence, we must multiply the numerator P by b 2 . Thus, Quite often a simple comparison of the original denominator with the new denominator will tell us the factor being used. However, there will be times when the factor is unclear by simple observation. We need a method for finding the factor. Observe the following examples; then try to speculate on the method. Example 8.54.  The original denominator 4 was multiplied by 5 to yield 20. What arithmetic process will yield 5 using 4 and 20? Example 8.55.  The original denominator 10 was multiplied by y to yield 10y . Example 8.56.  The original denominator 2a 3 b was multiplied by 8a 2 b 2 to yield 16a 5 b 3 . Example 8.57.  The original denominator ( a + 1 ) 2 was multiplied by 4( a − 2 ) to yield 4 ( a + 1 ) 2 ( a − 2 ) . To determine the quantity that the original denominator was multiplied by to yield the new denominator, we ask, "What did I multiply the original denominator by to get the new denominator?" We find this factor by dividing the original denominator into the new denominator. It is precisely this quantity that we multiply the numerator by to build the rational expression.  || The Reason For Building Rational Expressions Building Rational Expressions Normally, when we write a rational expression, we write it in reduced form. The reason for building rational expressions is to make addition and subtraction of rational expressions convenient (simpler). To add or subtract two or more rational expressions they must have the same denominator. Building rational expressions allows us to transform fractions into fractions with the same denominators (which we can then add or subtract). The most convenient new denominator is the least common denominator (LCD) of the given fractions.  || The Least Common Denominator (LCD) In arithmetic, the least common denominator is the smallest (least) quantity that each of the given denominators will divide into without a remainder. For algebraic expressions, the LCD is the polynomial of least degree divisible by each denominator. Some examples are shown below. Example 8.65.  The LCD is 12 since 12 is the smallest number that 4, 6, and 12 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.66.  The LCD is 24 since 24 is the smallest number that 3, 6, 8, and 12 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.67.  The LCD is x 2 since x 2 is the smallest quantity that x and x 2 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.68.  The LCD is 24a 2 b 3 since 24a 2 b 3 is the smallest quantity that 6a 2 b and 8a b 3 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.69.  The LCD is ( y − 6 ) 3 ( y − 1 ) since ( y − 6 ) 3   ·  ( y − 1 ) is the smallest quantity that y − 6, ( y − 6 ) 3 and y − 1 will divide into without a remainder. We’ll now propose and demonstrate a method for obtaining the LCD. Method for Obtaining the LCD Factor each denominator. Use exponents for repeated factors. It is usually not necessary to factor numerical quantities. Write down each different factor that appears. If a factor appears more than once, use only the factor with the highest exponent. The LCD is the product of the factors written in step 2.  || Excercises For Review Exercise 8.5.97. (Section 6.4) Factor m 2 x 3 + m x 2 + m x. Exercise 8.5.98. (Go to Solution) (Section 6.7) Factor y 2 − 10y + 21. Exercise 8.5.99. (Section 7.7) Write the equation of the line that passes through the points ( 1, 1 ) and ( 4,  − 2 ) . Express the equation in slope-intercept form. Exercise 8.5.100. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.3) Reduce Exercise 8.5.101. (Section 8.4) Find the quotient:  || 
book1_ch08_5_2	The Process Recall, from Section Section 8.2, the equality property of fractions. Equality Property Of Fractions If then a d = b c. Using the fact that , and that 1 is the multiplicative identity, it follows that if is a rational expression, then This equation asserts that a rational expression can be transformed into an equivalent rational expression by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number. Process of Building Rational Expressions This process is known as the process of building rational expressions and it is exactly the opposite of reducing rational expressions. The process is shown in these examples: Example 8.50.  can be built to since Example 8.51.  can be built to since Example 8.52.  can be built to since Example 8.53.  can be built to since Suppose we're given a rational expression and wish to build it into a rational expression with denominator Q b 2 , that is, Since we changed the denominator, we must certainly change the numerator in the same way. To determine how to change the numerator we need to know how the denominator was changed. Since one rational expression is built into another equivalent expression by multiplication by 1, the first denominator must have been multiplied by some quantity. Observation of tells us that Q was multiplied by b 2 . Hence, we must multiply the numerator P by b 2 . Thus, Quite often a simple comparison of the original denominator with the new denominator will tell us the factor being used. However, there will be times when the factor is unclear by simple observation. We need a method for finding the factor. Observe the following examples; then try to speculate on the method. Example 8.54.  The original denominator 4 was multiplied by 5 to yield 20. What arithmetic process will yield 5 using 4 and 20? Example 8.55.  The original denominator 10 was multiplied by y to yield 10y . Example 8.56.  The original denominator 2a 3 b was multiplied by 8a 2 b 2 to yield 16a 5 b 3 . Example 8.57.  The original denominator ( a + 1 ) 2 was multiplied by 4( a − 2 ) to yield 4 ( a + 1 ) 2 ( a − 2 ) . To determine the quantity that the original denominator was multiplied by to yield the new denominator, we ask, "What did I multiply the original denominator by to get the new denominator?" We find this factor by dividing the original denominator into the new denominator. It is precisely this quantity that we multiply the numerator by to build the rational expression. The Process Recall, from Section Section 8.2, the equality property of fractions. Equality Property Of Fractions If then a d = b c. Using the fact that , and that 1 is the multiplicative identity, it follows that if is a rational expression, then This equation asserts that a rational expression can be transformed into an equivalent rational expression by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number. Process of Building Rational Expressions This process is known as the process of building rational expressions and it is exactly the opposite of reducing rational expressions. The process is shown in these examples: Example 8.50.  can be built to since Example 8.51.  can be built to since Example 8.52.  can be built to since Example 8.53.  can be built to since Suppose we're given a rational expression and wish to build it into a rational expression with denominator Q b 2 , that is, Since we changed the denominator, we must certainly change the numerator in the same way. To determine how to change the numerator we need to know how the denominator was changed. Since one rational expression is built into another equivalent expression by multiplication by 1, the first denominator must have been multiplied by some quantity. Observation of tells us that Q was multiplied by b 2 . Hence, we must multiply the numerator P by b 2 . Thus, Quite often a simple comparison of the original denominator with the new denominator will tell us the factor being used. However, there will be times when the factor is unclear by simple observation. We need a method for finding the factor. Observe the following examples; then try to speculate on the method. Example 8.54.  The original denominator 4 was multiplied by 5 to yield 20. What arithmetic process will yield 5 using 4 and 20? Example 8.55.  The original denominator 10 was multiplied by y to yield 10y . Example 8.56.  The original denominator 2a 3 b was multiplied by 8a 2 b 2 to yield 16a 5 b 3 . Example 8.57.  The original denominator ( a + 1 ) 2 was multiplied by 4( a − 2 ) to yield 4 ( a + 1 ) 2 ( a − 2 ) . To determine the quantity that the original denominator was multiplied by to yield the new denominator, we ask, "What did I multiply the original denominator by to get the new denominator?" We find this factor by dividing the original denominator into the new denominator. It is precisely this quantity that we multiply the numerator by to build the rational expression.  || 
book1_ch08_5_5	The Reason For Building Rational Expressions Building Rational Expressions Normally, when we write a rational expression, we write it in reduced form. The reason for building rational expressions is to make addition and subtraction of rational expressions convenient (simpler). To add or subtract two or more rational expressions they must have the same denominator. Building rational expressions allows us to transform fractions into fractions with the same denominators (which we can then add or subtract). The most convenient new denominator is the least common denominator (LCD) of the given fractions. The Reason For Building Rational Expressions Building Rational Expressions Normally, when we write a rational expression, we write it in reduced form. The reason for building rational expressions is to make addition and subtraction of rational expressions convenient (simpler). To add or subtract two or more rational expressions they must have the same denominator. Building rational expressions allows us to transform fractions into fractions with the same denominators (which we can then add or subtract). The most convenient new denominator is the least common denominator (LCD) of the given fractions.  || 
book1_ch08_5_6	The Least Common Denominator (LCD) In arithmetic, the least common denominator is the smallest (least) quantity that each of the given denominators will divide into without a remainder. For algebraic expressions, the LCD is the polynomial of least degree divisible by each denominator. Some examples are shown below. Example 8.65.  The LCD is 12 since 12 is the smallest number that 4, 6, and 12 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.66.  The LCD is 24 since 24 is the smallest number that 3, 6, 8, and 12 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.67.  The LCD is x 2 since x 2 is the smallest quantity that x and x 2 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.68.  The LCD is 24a 2 b 3 since 24a 2 b 3 is the smallest quantity that 6a 2 b and 8a b 3 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.69.  The LCD is ( y − 6 ) 3 ( y − 1 ) since ( y − 6 ) 3   ·  ( y − 1 ) is the smallest quantity that y − 6, ( y − 6 ) 3 and y − 1 will divide into without a remainder. We’ll now propose and demonstrate a method for obtaining the LCD. Method for Obtaining the LCD Factor each denominator. Use exponents for repeated factors. It is usually not necessary to factor numerical quantities. Write down each different factor that appears. If a factor appears more than once, use only the factor with the highest exponent. The LCD is the product of the factors written in step 2. The Least Common Denominator (LCD) In arithmetic, the least common denominator is the smallest (least) quantity that each of the given denominators will divide into without a remainder. For algebraic expressions, the LCD is the polynomial of least degree divisible by each denominator. Some examples are shown below. Example 8.65.  The LCD is 12 since 12 is the smallest number that 4, 6, and 12 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.66.  The LCD is 24 since 24 is the smallest number that 3, 6, 8, and 12 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.67.  The LCD is x 2 since x 2 is the smallest quantity that x and x 2 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.68.  The LCD is 24a 2 b 3 since 24a 2 b 3 is the smallest quantity that 6a 2 b and 8a b 3 will divide into without a remainder. Example 8.69.  The LCD is ( y − 6 ) 3 ( y − 1 ) since ( y − 6 ) 3   ·  ( y − 1 ) is the smallest quantity that y − 6, ( y − 6 ) 3 and y − 1 will divide into without a remainder. We’ll now propose and demonstrate a method for obtaining the LCD. Method for Obtaining the LCD Factor each denominator. Use exponents for repeated factors. It is usually not necessary to factor numerical quantities. Write down each different factor that appears. If a factor appears more than once, use only the factor with the highest exponent. The LCD is the product of the factors written in step 2.  || 
book1_ch08_5_12	Excercises For Review Exercise 8.5.97. (Section 6.4) Factor m 2 x 3 + m x 2 + m x. Exercise 8.5.98. (Go to Solution) (Section 6.7) Factor y 2 − 10y + 21. Exercise 8.5.99. (Section 7.7) Write the equation of the line that passes through the points ( 1, 1 ) and ( 4,  − 2 ) . Express the equation in slope-intercept form. Exercise 8.5.100. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.3) Reduce Exercise 8.5.101. (Section 8.4) Find the quotient: Excercises For Review Exercise 8.5.97. (Section 6.4) Factor m 2 x 3 + m x 2 + m x. Exercise 8.5.98. (Go to Solution) (Section 6.7) Factor y 2 − 10y + 21. Exercise 8.5.99. (Section 7.7) Write the equation of the line that passes through the points ( 1, 1 ) and ( 4,  − 2 ) . Express the equation in slope-intercept form. Exercise 8.5.100. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.3) Reduce Exercise 8.5.101. (Section 8.4) Find the quotient:  || 
book1_ch08_6	 || Basic Rule We are now in a position to study the process of adding and subtracting rational expressions. There is a most basic rule to which we must strictly adhere if we wish to conveniently add or subtract rational expressions. To add or subtract rational expressions conveniently, they should have the same denominators. Thus, to add or subtract two or more rational expressions conveniently, we must ensure that they all have the same denominator. The denominator that is most convenient is the LCD.  || Fractions With The Same Denominator The Rule for Adding and Subtracting Rational Expressions To add (or subtract) two or more rational expressions with the same denominators, add (or subtract) the numerators and place the result over the LCD. Reduce if necessary. Symbolically, Note that we combine only the numerators.  || Fractions with Different Denominators  || 
book1_ch08_6_2	Basic Rule We are now in a position to study the process of adding and subtracting rational expressions. There is a most basic rule to which we must strictly adhere if we wish to conveniently add or subtract rational expressions. To add or subtract rational expressions conveniently, they should have the same denominators. Thus, to add or subtract two or more rational expressions conveniently, we must ensure that they all have the same denominator. The denominator that is most convenient is the LCD. Basic Rule We are now in a position to study the process of adding and subtracting rational expressions. There is a most basic rule to which we must strictly adhere if we wish to conveniently add or subtract rational expressions. To add or subtract rational expressions conveniently, they should have the same denominators. Thus, to add or subtract two or more rational expressions conveniently, we must ensure that they all have the same denominator. The denominator that is most convenient is the LCD.  || 
book1_ch08_6_3	Fractions With The Same Denominator The Rule for Adding and Subtracting Rational Expressions To add (or subtract) two or more rational expressions with the same denominators, add (or subtract) the numerators and place the result over the LCD. Reduce if necessary. Symbolically, Note that we combine only the numerators. Fractions With The Same Denominator The Rule for Adding and Subtracting Rational Expressions To add (or subtract) two or more rational expressions with the same denominators, add (or subtract) the numerators and place the result over the LCD. Reduce if necessary. Symbolically, Note that we combine only the numerators.  || 
book1_ch08_6_6	Fractions with Different Denominators Fractions with Different Denominators  || 
book1_ch08_7	 || Rational Equations Rational Equations When one rational expression is set equal to another rational expression, a rational equation results.Some examples of rational equations are the following (except for number 5): Example 8.93.  Example 8.94.  Example 8.95.  Example 8.96.  Example 8.97.  is a rational expression, not a rational equation.  || Rational Equations When one rational expression is set equal to another rational expression, a rational equation results.Some examples of rational equations are the following (except for number 5): Example 8.93.  Example 8.94.  Example 8.95.  Example 8.96.  Example 8.97.  is a rational expression, not a rational equation.  || The Logic Behind The Process It seems most reasonable that an equation without any fractions would be easier to solve than an equation with fractions. Our goal, then, is to convert any rational equation to an equation that contains no fractions. This is easily done.To develop this method, let’s consider the rational equation The LCD is 12. We know that we can multiply both sides of an equation by the same nonzero quantity, so we’ll multiply both sides by the LCD, 12. Now distribute 12 to each term on the left side using the distributive property. Now divide to eliminate all denominators. Now there are no more fractions, and we can solve this equation using our previous techniques to obtain 5 as the solution.  || The Process We have cleared the equation of fractions by multiplying both sides by the LCD. This development generates the following rule. Clearing an Equation of Fractions To clear an equation of fractions, multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD. When multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD, we use the distributive property to distribute the LCD to each term. This means we can simplify the above rule. Clearing an Equation of Fractions To clear an equation of fractions, multiply every term on both sides of the equation by the LCD. The complete method for solving a rational equation is 1. Determine all the values that must be excluded from consideration by finding the values that will produce zero in the denominator (and thus, division by zero). These excluded values are not in the domain of the equation and are called nondomain values. 2. Clear the equation of fractions by multiplying every term by the LCD. 3. Solve this nonfractional equation for the variable. Check to see if any of these potential solutions are excluded values. 4. Check the solution by substitution.  || Extraneous Solutions Extraneous Solutions Potential solutions that have been excluded because they make an expression undefined (or produce a false statement for an equation) are called extraneous solutions. Extraneous solutions are discarded. If there are no other potential solutions, the equation has no solution.  || 
book1_ch08_7_2	Rational Equations Rational Equations When one rational expression is set equal to another rational expression, a rational equation results.Some examples of rational equations are the following (except for number 5): Example 8.93.  Example 8.94.  Example 8.95.  Example 8.96.  Example 8.97.  is a rational expression, not a rational equation. Rational Equations Rational Equations When one rational expression is set equal to another rational expression, a rational equation results.Some examples of rational equations are the following (except for number 5): Example 8.93.  Example 8.94.  Example 8.95.  Example 8.96.  Example 8.97.  is a rational expression, not a rational equation.  || 
book1_ch08_7_3	Rational Equations When one rational expression is set equal to another rational expression, a rational equation results.Some examples of rational equations are the following (except for number 5): Example 8.93.  Example 8.94.  Example 8.95.  Example 8.96.  Example 8.97.  is a rational expression, not a rational equation. Rational Equations When one rational expression is set equal to another rational expression, a rational equation results.Some examples of rational equations are the following (except for number 5): Example 8.93.  Example 8.94.  Example 8.95.  Example 8.96.  Example 8.97.  is a rational expression, not a rational equation.  || 
book1_ch08_7_4	The Logic Behind The Process It seems most reasonable that an equation without any fractions would be easier to solve than an equation with fractions. Our goal, then, is to convert any rational equation to an equation that contains no fractions. This is easily done.To develop this method, let’s consider the rational equation The LCD is 12. We know that we can multiply both sides of an equation by the same nonzero quantity, so we’ll multiply both sides by the LCD, 12. Now distribute 12 to each term on the left side using the distributive property. Now divide to eliminate all denominators. Now there are no more fractions, and we can solve this equation using our previous techniques to obtain 5 as the solution. The Logic Behind The Process It seems most reasonable that an equation without any fractions would be easier to solve than an equation with fractions. Our goal, then, is to convert any rational equation to an equation that contains no fractions. This is easily done.To develop this method, let’s consider the rational equation The LCD is 12. We know that we can multiply both sides of an equation by the same nonzero quantity, so we’ll multiply both sides by the LCD, 12. Now distribute 12 to each term on the left side using the distributive property. Now divide to eliminate all denominators. Now there are no more fractions, and we can solve this equation using our previous techniques to obtain 5 as the solution.  || 
book1_ch08_7_5	The Process We have cleared the equation of fractions by multiplying both sides by the LCD. This development generates the following rule. Clearing an Equation of Fractions To clear an equation of fractions, multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD. When multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD, we use the distributive property to distribute the LCD to each term. This means we can simplify the above rule. Clearing an Equation of Fractions To clear an equation of fractions, multiply every term on both sides of the equation by the LCD. The complete method for solving a rational equation is 1. Determine all the values that must be excluded from consideration by finding the values that will produce zero in the denominator (and thus, division by zero). These excluded values are not in the domain of the equation and are called nondomain values. 2. Clear the equation of fractions by multiplying every term by the LCD. 3. Solve this nonfractional equation for the variable. Check to see if any of these potential solutions are excluded values. 4. Check the solution by substitution. The Process We have cleared the equation of fractions by multiplying both sides by the LCD. This development generates the following rule. Clearing an Equation of Fractions To clear an equation of fractions, multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD. When multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD, we use the distributive property to distribute the LCD to each term. This means we can simplify the above rule. Clearing an Equation of Fractions To clear an equation of fractions, multiply every term on both sides of the equation by the LCD. The complete method for solving a rational equation is 1. Determine all the values that must be excluded from consideration by finding the values that will produce zero in the denominator (and thus, division by zero). These excluded values are not in the domain of the equation and are called nondomain values. 2. Clear the equation of fractions by multiplying every term by the LCD. 3. Solve this nonfractional equation for the variable. Check to see if any of these potential solutions are excluded values. 4. Check the solution by substitution.  || 
book1_ch08_7_6	Extraneous Solutions Extraneous Solutions Potential solutions that have been excluded because they make an expression undefined (or produce a false statement for an equation) are called extraneous solutions. Extraneous solutions are discarded. If there are no other potential solutions, the equation has no solution. Extraneous Solutions Extraneous Solutions Potential solutions that have been excluded because they make an expression undefined (or produce a false statement for an equation) are called extraneous solutions. Extraneous solutions are discarded. If there are no other potential solutions, the equation has no solution.  || 
book1_ch08_8	 || The Five-Step Method We are now in a position to study some applications of rational equations. Some of these problems will have practical applications while others are intended as logic developers. We will apply the five-step method for solving word problems. Five-Step Method Represent all unknown quantities in terms of x or some other letter. Translate the verbal phrases to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Solve this equation. Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement of the problem. Write the conclusion. Remember, step 1 is very important: always Introduce a variable.  || 
book1_ch08_8_2	The Five-Step Method We are now in a position to study some applications of rational equations. Some of these problems will have practical applications while others are intended as logic developers. We will apply the five-step method for solving word problems. Five-Step Method Represent all unknown quantities in terms of x or some other letter. Translate the verbal phrases to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Solve this equation. Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement of the problem. Write the conclusion. Remember, step 1 is very important: always Introduce a variable. The Five-Step Method We are now in a position to study some applications of rational equations. Some of these problems will have practical applications while others are intended as logic developers. We will apply the five-step method for solving word problems. Five-Step Method Represent all unknown quantities in terms of x or some other letter. Translate the verbal phrases to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Solve this equation. Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement of the problem. Write the conclusion. Remember, step 1 is very important: always Introduce a variable.  || 
book1_ch08_9	 || Simple And Complex Fractions Simple Fraction In Section Section 8.2 we saw that a simple fraction was a fraction of the form where P and Q are polynomials and Q ≠ 0 . Complex Fraction A complex fraction is a fraction in which the numerator or denominator, or both, is a fraction. The fractions are examples of complex fractions, or more generally, complex rational expressions. There are two methods for simplifying complex rational expressions: the combine-divide method and the LCD-multiply-divide method.  || The Combine-Divide Method If necessary, combine the terms of the numerator together. If necessary, combine the terms of the denominator together. Divide the numerator by the denominator.  || The LCD-Multiply-Divide Method Find the LCD of all the terms. Multiply the numerator and denominator by the LCD. Reduce if necessary.  || 
book1_ch08_9_2	Simple And Complex Fractions Simple Fraction In Section Section 8.2 we saw that a simple fraction was a fraction of the form where P and Q are polynomials and Q ≠ 0 . Complex Fraction A complex fraction is a fraction in which the numerator or denominator, or both, is a fraction. The fractions are examples of complex fractions, or more generally, complex rational expressions. There are two methods for simplifying complex rational expressions: the combine-divide method and the LCD-multiply-divide method. Simple And Complex Fractions Simple Fraction In Section Section 8.2 we saw that a simple fraction was a fraction of the form where P and Q are polynomials and Q ≠ 0 . Complex Fraction A complex fraction is a fraction in which the numerator or denominator, or both, is a fraction. The fractions are examples of complex fractions, or more generally, complex rational expressions. There are two methods for simplifying complex rational expressions: the combine-divide method and the LCD-multiply-divide method.  || 
book1_ch08_9_3	The Combine-Divide Method If necessary, combine the terms of the numerator together. If necessary, combine the terms of the denominator together. Divide the numerator by the denominator. The Combine-Divide Method If necessary, combine the terms of the numerator together. If necessary, combine the terms of the denominator together. Divide the numerator by the denominator.  || 
book1_ch08_9_6	The LCD-Multiply-Divide Method Find the LCD of all the terms. Multiply the numerator and denominator by the LCD. Reduce if necessary. The LCD-Multiply-Divide Method Find the LCD of all the terms. Multiply the numerator and denominator by the LCD. Reduce if necessary.  || 
book1_ch08_10	 || Dividing A Polynomial By A Monomial The following examples illustrate how to divide a polynomial by a monomial. The division process is quite simple and is based on addition of rational expressions. Turning this equation around we get Now we simply divide c into a , and c into b . This should suggest a rule. Dividing a Polynomial By a Monomial To divide a polynomial by a monomial, divide every term of the polynomial by the monomial.  || The Process Of Division In Section Section 8.3 we studied the method of reducing rational expressions. For example, we observed how to reduce an expression such as Our method was to factor both the numerator and denominator, then divide out common factors. When the numerator and denominator have no factors in common, the division may still occur, but the process is a little more involved than merely factoring. The method of dividing one polynomial by another is much the same as that of dividing one number by another. First, we’ll review the steps in dividing numbers.  We are to divide 35 by 8.   We try 4, since 32 divided by 8 is 4. Multiply 4 and 8. Subtract 32 from 35. Since the remainder 3 is less than the divisor 8, we are done with the 32 division.   The quotient is expressed as a mixed number. The process was to divide, multiply, and subtract.  || Review Of Subtraction Of Polynomials A very important step in the process of dividing one polynomial by another is subtraction of polynomials. Let’s review the process of subtraction by observing a few examples. 1. Subtract x − 2 from x − 5; that is, find ( x − 5 ) − ( x − 2 ).  Since   x − 2 is preceded by a minus sign, remove the parentheses, change the sign of each term, then add. The result is − 3. 2. Subtract x 3 + 3x 2 from x 3 + 4x 2 + x − 1.  Since x 3 + 3x 2 is preceded by a minus sign, remove the parentheses, change the sign of each term, then add. The result is x2 + x − 1. 3. Subtract x 2 + 3x from x 2 + 1.  We can write x 2 + 1 as x 2 + 0x + 1.  || Dividing A Polynomial By A Polynomial Now we’ll observe some examples of dividing one polynomial by another. The process is the same as the process used with whole numbers: divide, multiply, subtract, divide, multiply, subtract,.... The division, multiplication, and subtraction take place one term at a time. The process is concluded when the polynomial remainder is of lesser degree than the polynomial divisor.  || 
book1_ch08_10_2	Dividing A Polynomial By A Monomial The following examples illustrate how to divide a polynomial by a monomial. The division process is quite simple and is based on addition of rational expressions. Turning this equation around we get Now we simply divide c into a , and c into b . This should suggest a rule. Dividing a Polynomial By a Monomial To divide a polynomial by a monomial, divide every term of the polynomial by the monomial. Dividing A Polynomial By A Monomial The following examples illustrate how to divide a polynomial by a monomial. The division process is quite simple and is based on addition of rational expressions. Turning this equation around we get Now we simply divide c into a , and c into b . This should suggest a rule. Dividing a Polynomial By a Monomial To divide a polynomial by a monomial, divide every term of the polynomial by the monomial.  || 
book1_ch08_10_5	The Process Of Division In Section Section 8.3 we studied the method of reducing rational expressions. For example, we observed how to reduce an expression such as Our method was to factor both the numerator and denominator, then divide out common factors. When the numerator and denominator have no factors in common, the division may still occur, but the process is a little more involved than merely factoring. The method of dividing one polynomial by another is much the same as that of dividing one number by another. First, we’ll review the steps in dividing numbers.  We are to divide 35 by 8.   We try 4, since 32 divided by 8 is 4. Multiply 4 and 8. Subtract 32 from 35. Since the remainder 3 is less than the divisor 8, we are done with the 32 division.   The quotient is expressed as a mixed number. The process was to divide, multiply, and subtract. The Process Of Division In Section Section 8.3 we studied the method of reducing rational expressions. For example, we observed how to reduce an expression such as Our method was to factor both the numerator and denominator, then divide out common factors. When the numerator and denominator have no factors in common, the division may still occur, but the process is a little more involved than merely factoring. The method of dividing one polynomial by another is much the same as that of dividing one number by another. First, we’ll review the steps in dividing numbers.  We are to divide 35 by 8.   We try 4, since 32 divided by 8 is 4. Multiply 4 and 8. Subtract 32 from 35. Since the remainder 3 is less than the divisor 8, we are done with the 32 division.   The quotient is expressed as a mixed number. The process was to divide, multiply, and subtract.  || 
book1_ch08_10_6	Review Of Subtraction Of Polynomials A very important step in the process of dividing one polynomial by another is subtraction of polynomials. Let’s review the process of subtraction by observing a few examples. 1. Subtract x − 2 from x − 5; that is, find ( x − 5 ) − ( x − 2 ).  Since   x − 2 is preceded by a minus sign, remove the parentheses, change the sign of each term, then add. The result is − 3. 2. Subtract x 3 + 3x 2 from x 3 + 4x 2 + x − 1.  Since x 3 + 3x 2 is preceded by a minus sign, remove the parentheses, change the sign of each term, then add. The result is x2 + x − 1. 3. Subtract x 2 + 3x from x 2 + 1.  We can write x 2 + 1 as x 2 + 0x + 1. Review Of Subtraction Of Polynomials A very important step in the process of dividing one polynomial by another is subtraction of polynomials. Let’s review the process of subtraction by observing a few examples. 1. Subtract x − 2 from x − 5; that is, find ( x − 5 ) − ( x − 2 ).  Since   x − 2 is preceded by a minus sign, remove the parentheses, change the sign of each term, then add. The result is − 3. 2. Subtract x 3 + 3x 2 from x 3 + 4x 2 + x − 1.  Since x 3 + 3x 2 is preceded by a minus sign, remove the parentheses, change the sign of each term, then add. The result is x2 + x − 1. 3. Subtract x 2 + 3x from x 2 + 1.  We can write x 2 + 1 as x 2 + 0x + 1.  || 
book1_ch08_10_7	Dividing A Polynomial By A Polynomial Now we’ll observe some examples of dividing one polynomial by another. The process is the same as the process used with whole numbers: divide, multiply, subtract, divide, multiply, subtract,.... The division, multiplication, and subtraction take place one term at a time. The process is concluded when the polynomial remainder is of lesser degree than the polynomial divisor. Dividing A Polynomial By A Polynomial Now we’ll observe some examples of dividing one polynomial by another. The process is the same as the process used with whole numbers: divide, multiply, subtract, divide, multiply, subtract,.... The division, multiplication, and subtraction take place one term at a time. The process is concluded when the polynomial remainder is of lesser degree than the polynomial divisor.  || 
book1_ch10	 ||  || Standard Form of A Quadratic Equation In Chapter (Section 5.1) we studied linear equations in one and two variables and methods for solving them. We observed that a linear equation in one variable was any equation that could be written in the form a x + b = 0, a ≠ 0, and a linear equation in two variables was any equation that could be written in the form a x + b y = c, where a and b are not both 0. We now wish to study quadratic equations in one variable. Quadratic Equation A quadratic equation is an equation of the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0, a ≠ 0. The standard form of the quadratic equation is a x 2 + b x + c = 0, a ≠ 0. For a quadratic equation in standard form a x 2 + b x + c = 0, a is the coefficient of x 2 . b is the coefficient of x. c is the constant term.  || Zero-Factor Property Our goal is to solve quadratic equations. The method for solving quadratic equations is based on the zero-factor property of real numbers. We were introduced to the zero-factor property in Section Section 8.2. We state it again. Zero-Factor Property If two numbers a and b are multiplied together and the resulting product is 0, then at least one of the numbers must be 0. Algebraically, if a  ·  b = 0, then a = 0 or b = 0, or both a = 0 and b = 0.  ||  || Factoring Method To solve quadratic equations by factoring, we must make use of the zero-factor property. Set the equation equal to zero, that is, get all the nonzero terms on one side of the equal sign and 0 on the other. a x 2 + b x + c = 0 Factor the quadratic expression. ( )( ) = 0 By the zero-factor property, at least one of the factors must be zero, so, set each of the factors equal to 0 and solve for the variable.  || Solving Mentally After Factoring Let’s consider problems 4 and 5 of Sample Set A in more detail. Let’s look particularly at the factorizations ( 2x − 3 )( x + 5 ) = 0 and ( 9x + 2 )( 7x − 3 ) = 0. The next step is to set each factor equal to zero and solve. We can solve mentally if we understand how to solve linear equations: we transpose the constant from the variable term and then divide by the coefficient of the variable.  ||  || The Method Of Extraction Of Roots Extraction of Roots Quadratic equations of the form x 2 − K = 0 can be solved by the method of extraction of roots by rewriting it in the form x 2 = K. To solve x 2 = K, we are required to find some number, x, that when squared produces K. This number, x, must be a square root of K. If K is greater than zero, we know that it possesses two square roots, and We also know thatWe now have two replacements for x that produce true statements when substituted into the equation. Thus, and are both solutions to x 2 = K. We use the notation to denote both the principal and the secondary square roots.  || The Nature of Solutions Solutions of x 2 = K For quadratic equations of the form x 2 = K, If K is greater than or equal to zero, the solutions are If K is negative, no real number solutions exist. If K is zero, the only solution is 0.  ||  Calculator Problems For the following problems, round each result to the nearest hundredth. Exercise 10.4.63. (Go to Solution) 8a 2 − 168 = 0 Exercise 10.4.64. 6m 2 − 5 = 0 Exercise 10.4.65. (Go to Solution) 0.03y 2 = 1.6 Exercise 10.4.66. 0.048x 2 = 2.01 Exercise 10.4.67. (Go to Solution) 1.001x 2 − 0.999 = 0  ||  || The Logic Behind The Method Suppose we wish to solve the quadratic equation x 2 − 3x − 1 = 0. Since the equation is not of the form x 2 = K, we cannot use extraction of roots. Next, we try factoring, but after a few trials we see that x 2 − 3x − 1 is not factorable. We need another method for solving quadratic equations.The method we shall study is based on perfect square trinomials and extraction of roots. The method is called solving quadratic equations by completing the square. Consider the equation x 2 + 6x + 5 = 0. This quadratic equation could be solved by factoring, but we’ll use the method of completing the square. We will explain the method in detail after we look at this example. First we’ll rewrite the equation as x 2 + 6x = − 5 Then, we’ll add 9 to each side. We get x 2 + 6x + 9 = − 5 + 9 The left side factors as a perfect square trinomial. ( x + 3 ) 2 = 4 We can solve this by extraction of roots. Notice that when the roots are rational numbers, the equation is factorable.The big question is, “How did we know to add 9 to each side of the equation?” We can convert any quadratic trinomial appearing in an equation into a perfect square trinomial if we know what number to add to both sides. We can determine that particular number by observing the following situation: Consider the square of the binomial and the resulting perfect square trinomial ( x + p ) 2 = x 2 + 2p x + p 2 Notice that the constant term (the number we are looking for) can be obtained from the linear term 2p x. If we take one half the coefficient of and square it, we get the constant term p 2 . This is true for every perfect square trinomial with leading coefficient 1. In a perfect square trinomial with leading coefficient 1, the constant term is the square of one half the coefficient of the linear term. Study these examples to see what constant term will make the given binomial into a perfect square trinomial. Example 10.26.  x 2 + 6x.   The constant must be the square of one half the coefficient of x. Since the coefficient of x is 6, we haveThe constant is 9. x 2 + 6x + 9 = ( x + 3 ) 2 This is a perfect square trinomial. Example 10.27.  a 2 + 10a.   The constant must be the square of one half the coefficient of a. Since the coefficient of a is 10, we haveThe constant is 25. a 2 + 10a + 25 = ( a + 5 ) 2 Example 10.28.  y 2 + 3y.   The constant must be the square of one half the coefficient of y. Since the coefficient of y is 3, we haveThe constant is  || The Method Of Completing The Square Now, with these observations, we can describe the method of completing the square. The Method of Completing the Square Write the equation so that the constant term appears on the right side of equation. If the leading coefficient is different from 1, divide each term of the equation by that coefficient. Take one half of the coefficient of the linear term, square it, then add it to both sides of the equation. The trinomial on the left is now a perfect square trinomial and can be factored as ( ) 2 . The first term in the parentheses is the square root of the quadratic term. The last term in the parentheses is one-half the coefficient of the linear term. Solve this equation by extraction of roots.  ||  Calculator Problems For the following problems, round each solution to the nearest hundredth. Exercise 10.5.35. 5m 2 − 2m − 6 = 0 Exercise 10.5.36. (Go to Solution) 3y 2 + 5y = 7 Exercise 10.5.37. 1.8x 2 + 2.3x − 4.1 = 0 Exercise 10.5.38. (Go to Solution) 0.04a 2 − 0.03a + 0.02 = 0  ||  || Standard Form Of A Quadratic Equation We have observed that a quadratic equation is an equation of the formwhere a is the coefficient of the quadratic term, b is the coefficient of the linear term, and c is the constant term. Standard Form The equation a x 2 + b x + c = 0 is the standard form of a quadratic equation.  || The Quadratic Formula When a quadratic equation is written in standard form so that the values a, b, and c are readily determined, the equation can be solved using the quadratic formula. The values that satisfy the equation are found by substituting the values a, b, and c into the formula Quadratic Formula Keep in mind that the plus or minus symbol, ± , is just a shorthand way of denoting the two possibilities:The quadratic formula can be derived by using the method of completing the square.  || Derivation Of The Quadratic Formula Solve a x 2 + b x + c = 0 for x by completing the square. Example 10.39.  Subtract c from both sides. a x 2 + b x = − c Example 10.40.  Divide both sides by a, the coefficient of x 2 . Example 10.41.  Now we have the proper form to complete the square. Take one half the coefficient of x, square it, and add the result to both sides of the equation found in step 2.(a) is one half the coefficient of x. (b) is the square of one half the coefficient of x. Example 10.42.  The left side of the equation is now a perfect square trinomial and can be factored. This gives us Example 10.43.  Add the two fractions on the right side of the equation. The LCD = 4a 2 . Example 10.44.  Solve for x using the method of extraction of roots.  ||  || The Five-Step Method We are now in a position to study some applications of quadratic equations. Quadratic equations can arise from a variety of physical (applied) and mathematical (logical) problems. We will, again, apply the five-step method for solving word problems. Five-Step Method of Solving Word Problems Step 1:   Let x (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Step 2:   Translate the verbal expression to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Step 3:   Solve this equation. Step 4:   Check the solution by substituting the result into the equation found in step 2. Step 5:   Write a conclusion. Remember, step 1 is very important. ALWAYS START BY INTRODUCING A VARIABLE. Once the quadratic equation is developed (step 2), try to solve it by factoring. If factoring doesn’t work, use the quadratic formula. A calculator may help to make some of the calculations a little less tedious.  || Astrophysical Problem Exercise 10.7.33. A very interesting application of quadratic equations is determining the length of a solar eclipse (the moon passing between the earth and sun). The length of a solar eclipse is found by solving the quadratic equation ( a + b t ) 2 + ( c + d t ) 2 = ( e + f t ) 2 for t . The letters a,b,c,d,e, and f are constants that pertain to a particular eclipse. The equation is a quadratic equation in t and can be solved by the quadratic formula (and definitely a calculator). Two values of t will result. The length of the eclipse is just the difference of these t -values. The following constants are from a solar eclipse that occurred on August 3, 431 B.C.Determine the length of this particular solar eclipse.  ||  || Parabolas We will now study the graphs of quadratic equations in two variables with general form Parabola All such graphs have a similar shape. The graph of a quadratic equation of this type Parabola is called a parabola and it will assume one of the following shapes. Vertex The high point or low point of a parabola is called the vertex of the parabola.  || Constructing Graphs of Parabolas We will construct the graph of a parabola by choosing several x -values, computing to find the corresponding y -values, plotting these ordered pairs, then drawing a smooth curve through them.  || 
book1_ch10_2	 || Standard Form of A Quadratic Equation In Chapter (Section 5.1) we studied linear equations in one and two variables and methods for solving them. We observed that a linear equation in one variable was any equation that could be written in the form a x + b = 0, a ≠ 0, and a linear equation in two variables was any equation that could be written in the form a x + b y = c, where a and b are not both 0. We now wish to study quadratic equations in one variable. Quadratic Equation A quadratic equation is an equation of the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0, a ≠ 0. The standard form of the quadratic equation is a x 2 + b x + c = 0, a ≠ 0. For a quadratic equation in standard form a x 2 + b x + c = 0, a is the coefficient of x 2 . b is the coefficient of x. c is the constant term.  || Zero-Factor Property Our goal is to solve quadratic equations. The method for solving quadratic equations is based on the zero-factor property of real numbers. We were introduced to the zero-factor property in Section Section 8.2. We state it again. Zero-Factor Property If two numbers a and b are multiplied together and the resulting product is 0, then at least one of the numbers must be 0. Algebraically, if a  ·  b = 0, then a = 0 or b = 0, or both a = 0 and b = 0.  || 
book1_ch10_2_2	Standard Form of A Quadratic Equation In Chapter (Section 5.1) we studied linear equations in one and two variables and methods for solving them. We observed that a linear equation in one variable was any equation that could be written in the form a x + b = 0, a ≠ 0, and a linear equation in two variables was any equation that could be written in the form a x + b y = c, where a and b are not both 0. We now wish to study quadratic equations in one variable. Quadratic Equation A quadratic equation is an equation of the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0, a ≠ 0. The standard form of the quadratic equation is a x 2 + b x + c = 0, a ≠ 0. For a quadratic equation in standard form a x 2 + b x + c = 0, a is the coefficient of x 2 . b is the coefficient of x. c is the constant term. Standard Form of A Quadratic Equation In Chapter (Section 5.1) we studied linear equations in one and two variables and methods for solving them. We observed that a linear equation in one variable was any equation that could be written in the form a x + b = 0, a ≠ 0, and a linear equation in two variables was any equation that could be written in the form a x + b y = c, where a and b are not both 0. We now wish to study quadratic equations in one variable. Quadratic Equation A quadratic equation is an equation of the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0, a ≠ 0. The standard form of the quadratic equation is a x 2 + b x + c = 0, a ≠ 0. For a quadratic equation in standard form a x 2 + b x + c = 0, a is the coefficient of x 2 . b is the coefficient of x. c is the constant term.  || 
book1_ch10_2_5	Zero-Factor Property Our goal is to solve quadratic equations. The method for solving quadratic equations is based on the zero-factor property of real numbers. We were introduced to the zero-factor property in Section Section 8.2. We state it again. Zero-Factor Property If two numbers a and b are multiplied together and the resulting product is 0, then at least one of the numbers must be 0. Algebraically, if a  ·  b = 0, then a = 0 or b = 0, or both a = 0 and b = 0. Zero-Factor Property Our goal is to solve quadratic equations. The method for solving quadratic equations is based on the zero-factor property of real numbers. We were introduced to the zero-factor property in Section Section 8.2. We state it again. Zero-Factor Property If two numbers a and b are multiplied together and the resulting product is 0, then at least one of the numbers must be 0. Algebraically, if a  ·  b = 0, then a = 0 or b = 0, or both a = 0 and b = 0.  || 
book1_ch10_3	 || Factoring Method To solve quadratic equations by factoring, we must make use of the zero-factor property. Set the equation equal to zero, that is, get all the nonzero terms on one side of the equal sign and 0 on the other. a x 2 + b x + c = 0 Factor the quadratic expression. ( )( ) = 0 By the zero-factor property, at least one of the factors must be zero, so, set each of the factors equal to 0 and solve for the variable.  || Solving Mentally After Factoring Let’s consider problems 4 and 5 of Sample Set A in more detail. Let’s look particularly at the factorizations ( 2x − 3 )( x + 5 ) = 0 and ( 9x + 2 )( 7x − 3 ) = 0. The next step is to set each factor equal to zero and solve. We can solve mentally if we understand how to solve linear equations: we transpose the constant from the variable term and then divide by the coefficient of the variable.  || 
book1_ch10_3_2	Factoring Method To solve quadratic equations by factoring, we must make use of the zero-factor property. Set the equation equal to zero, that is, get all the nonzero terms on one side of the equal sign and 0 on the other. a x 2 + b x + c = 0 Factor the quadratic expression. ( )( ) = 0 By the zero-factor property, at least one of the factors must be zero, so, set each of the factors equal to 0 and solve for the variable. Factoring Method To solve quadratic equations by factoring, we must make use of the zero-factor property. Set the equation equal to zero, that is, get all the nonzero terms on one side of the equal sign and 0 on the other. a x 2 + b x + c = 0 Factor the quadratic expression. ( )( ) = 0 By the zero-factor property, at least one of the factors must be zero, so, set each of the factors equal to 0 and solve for the variable.  || 
book1_ch10_3_5	Solving Mentally After Factoring Let’s consider problems 4 and 5 of Sample Set A in more detail. Let’s look particularly at the factorizations ( 2x − 3 )( x + 5 ) = 0 and ( 9x + 2 )( 7x − 3 ) = 0. The next step is to set each factor equal to zero and solve. We can solve mentally if we understand how to solve linear equations: we transpose the constant from the variable term and then divide by the coefficient of the variable. Solving Mentally After Factoring Let’s consider problems 4 and 5 of Sample Set A in more detail. Let’s look particularly at the factorizations ( 2x − 3 )( x + 5 ) = 0 and ( 9x + 2 )( 7x − 3 ) = 0. The next step is to set each factor equal to zero and solve. We can solve mentally if we understand how to solve linear equations: we transpose the constant from the variable term and then divide by the coefficient of the variable.  || 
book1_ch10_4	 || The Method Of Extraction Of Roots Extraction of Roots Quadratic equations of the form x 2 − K = 0 can be solved by the method of extraction of roots by rewriting it in the form x 2 = K. To solve x 2 = K, we are required to find some number, x, that when squared produces K. This number, x, must be a square root of K. If K is greater than zero, we know that it possesses two square roots, and We also know thatWe now have two replacements for x that produce true statements when substituted into the equation. Thus, and are both solutions to x 2 = K. We use the notation to denote both the principal and the secondary square roots.  || The Nature of Solutions Solutions of x 2 = K For quadratic equations of the form x 2 = K, If K is greater than or equal to zero, the solutions are If K is negative, no real number solutions exist. If K is zero, the only solution is 0.  ||  Calculator Problems For the following problems, round each result to the nearest hundredth. Exercise 10.4.63. (Go to Solution) 8a 2 − 168 = 0 Exercise 10.4.64. 6m 2 − 5 = 0 Exercise 10.4.65. (Go to Solution) 0.03y 2 = 1.6 Exercise 10.4.66. 0.048x 2 = 2.01 Exercise 10.4.67. (Go to Solution) 1.001x 2 − 0.999 = 0  || 
book1_ch10_4_2	The Method Of Extraction Of Roots Extraction of Roots Quadratic equations of the form x 2 − K = 0 can be solved by the method of extraction of roots by rewriting it in the form x 2 = K. To solve x 2 = K, we are required to find some number, x, that when squared produces K. This number, x, must be a square root of K. If K is greater than zero, we know that it possesses two square roots, and We also know thatWe now have two replacements for x that produce true statements when substituted into the equation. Thus, and are both solutions to x 2 = K. We use the notation to denote both the principal and the secondary square roots. The Method Of Extraction Of Roots Extraction of Roots Quadratic equations of the form x 2 − K = 0 can be solved by the method of extraction of roots by rewriting it in the form x 2 = K. To solve x 2 = K, we are required to find some number, x, that when squared produces K. This number, x, must be a square root of K. If K is greater than zero, we know that it possesses two square roots, and We also know thatWe now have two replacements for x that produce true statements when substituted into the equation. Thus, and are both solutions to x 2 = K. We use the notation to denote both the principal and the secondary square roots.  || 
book1_ch10_4_3	The Nature of Solutions Solutions of x 2 = K For quadratic equations of the form x 2 = K, If K is greater than or equal to zero, the solutions are If K is negative, no real number solutions exist. If K is zero, the only solution is 0. The Nature of Solutions Solutions of x 2 = K For quadratic equations of the form x 2 = K, If K is greater than or equal to zero, the solutions are If K is negative, no real number solutions exist. If K is zero, the only solution is 0.  || 
book1_ch10_4_9	 Calculator Problems For the following problems, round each result to the nearest hundredth. Exercise 10.4.63. (Go to Solution) 8a 2 − 168 = 0 Exercise 10.4.64. 6m 2 − 5 = 0 Exercise 10.4.65. (Go to Solution) 0.03y 2 = 1.6 Exercise 10.4.66. 0.048x 2 = 2.01 Exercise 10.4.67. (Go to Solution) 1.001x 2 − 0.999 = 0  Calculator Problems For the following problems, round each result to the nearest hundredth. Exercise 10.4.63. (Go to Solution) 8a 2 − 168 = 0 Exercise 10.4.64. 6m 2 − 5 = 0 Exercise 10.4.65. (Go to Solution) 0.03y 2 = 1.6 Exercise 10.4.66. 0.048x 2 = 2.01 Exercise 10.4.67. (Go to Solution) 1.001x 2 − 0.999 = 0  || 
book1_ch10_5	 || The Logic Behind The Method Suppose we wish to solve the quadratic equation x 2 − 3x − 1 = 0. Since the equation is not of the form x 2 = K, we cannot use extraction of roots. Next, we try factoring, but after a few trials we see that x 2 − 3x − 1 is not factorable. We need another method for solving quadratic equations.The method we shall study is based on perfect square trinomials and extraction of roots. The method is called solving quadratic equations by completing the square. Consider the equation x 2 + 6x + 5 = 0. This quadratic equation could be solved by factoring, but we’ll use the method of completing the square. We will explain the method in detail after we look at this example. First we’ll rewrite the equation as x 2 + 6x = − 5 Then, we’ll add 9 to each side. We get x 2 + 6x + 9 = − 5 + 9 The left side factors as a perfect square trinomial. ( x + 3 ) 2 = 4 We can solve this by extraction of roots. Notice that when the roots are rational numbers, the equation is factorable.The big question is, “How did we know to add 9 to each side of the equation?” We can convert any quadratic trinomial appearing in an equation into a perfect square trinomial if we know what number to add to both sides. We can determine that particular number by observing the following situation: Consider the square of the binomial and the resulting perfect square trinomial ( x + p ) 2 = x 2 + 2p x + p 2 Notice that the constant term (the number we are looking for) can be obtained from the linear term 2p x. If we take one half the coefficient of and square it, we get the constant term p 2 . This is true for every perfect square trinomial with leading coefficient 1. In a perfect square trinomial with leading coefficient 1, the constant term is the square of one half the coefficient of the linear term. Study these examples to see what constant term will make the given binomial into a perfect square trinomial. Example 10.26.  x 2 + 6x.   The constant must be the square of one half the coefficient of x. Since the coefficient of x is 6, we haveThe constant is 9. x 2 + 6x + 9 = ( x + 3 ) 2 This is a perfect square trinomial. Example 10.27.  a 2 + 10a.   The constant must be the square of one half the coefficient of a. Since the coefficient of a is 10, we haveThe constant is 25. a 2 + 10a + 25 = ( a + 5 ) 2 Example 10.28.  y 2 + 3y.   The constant must be the square of one half the coefficient of y. Since the coefficient of y is 3, we haveThe constant is  || The Method Of Completing The Square Now, with these observations, we can describe the method of completing the square. The Method of Completing the Square Write the equation so that the constant term appears on the right side of equation. If the leading coefficient is different from 1, divide each term of the equation by that coefficient. Take one half of the coefficient of the linear term, square it, then add it to both sides of the equation. The trinomial on the left is now a perfect square trinomial and can be factored as ( ) 2 . The first term in the parentheses is the square root of the quadratic term. The last term in the parentheses is one-half the coefficient of the linear term. Solve this equation by extraction of roots.  ||  Calculator Problems For the following problems, round each solution to the nearest hundredth. Exercise 10.5.35. 5m 2 − 2m − 6 = 0 Exercise 10.5.36. (Go to Solution) 3y 2 + 5y = 7 Exercise 10.5.37. 1.8x 2 + 2.3x − 4.1 = 0 Exercise 10.5.38. (Go to Solution) 0.04a 2 − 0.03a + 0.02 = 0  || 
book1_ch10_5_2	The Logic Behind The Method Suppose we wish to solve the quadratic equation x 2 − 3x − 1 = 0. Since the equation is not of the form x 2 = K, we cannot use extraction of roots. Next, we try factoring, but after a few trials we see that x 2 − 3x − 1 is not factorable. We need another method for solving quadratic equations.The method we shall study is based on perfect square trinomials and extraction of roots. The method is called solving quadratic equations by completing the square. Consider the equation x 2 + 6x + 5 = 0. This quadratic equation could be solved by factoring, but we’ll use the method of completing the square. We will explain the method in detail after we look at this example. First we’ll rewrite the equation as x 2 + 6x = − 5 Then, we’ll add 9 to each side. We get x 2 + 6x + 9 = − 5 + 9 The left side factors as a perfect square trinomial. ( x + 3 ) 2 = 4 We can solve this by extraction of roots. Notice that when the roots are rational numbers, the equation is factorable.The big question is, “How did we know to add 9 to each side of the equation?” We can convert any quadratic trinomial appearing in an equation into a perfect square trinomial if we know what number to add to both sides. We can determine that particular number by observing the following situation: Consider the square of the binomial and the resulting perfect square trinomial ( x + p ) 2 = x 2 + 2p x + p 2 Notice that the constant term (the number we are looking for) can be obtained from the linear term 2p x. If we take one half the coefficient of and square it, we get the constant term p 2 . This is true for every perfect square trinomial with leading coefficient 1. In a perfect square trinomial with leading coefficient 1, the constant term is the square of one half the coefficient of the linear term. Study these examples to see what constant term will make the given binomial into a perfect square trinomial. Example 10.26.  x 2 + 6x.   The constant must be the square of one half the coefficient of x. Since the coefficient of x is 6, we haveThe constant is 9. x 2 + 6x + 9 = ( x + 3 ) 2 This is a perfect square trinomial. Example 10.27.  a 2 + 10a.   The constant must be the square of one half the coefficient of a. Since the coefficient of a is 10, we haveThe constant is 25. a 2 + 10a + 25 = ( a + 5 ) 2 Example 10.28.  y 2 + 3y.   The constant must be the square of one half the coefficient of y. Since the coefficient of y is 3, we haveThe constant is The Logic Behind The Method Suppose we wish to solve the quadratic equation x 2 − 3x − 1 = 0. Since the equation is not of the form x 2 = K, we cannot use extraction of roots. Next, we try factoring, but after a few trials we see that x 2 − 3x − 1 is not factorable. We need another method for solving quadratic equations.The method we shall study is based on perfect square trinomials and extraction of roots. The method is called solving quadratic equations by completing the square. Consider the equation x 2 + 6x + 5 = 0. This quadratic equation could be solved by factoring, but we’ll use the method of completing the square. We will explain the method in detail after we look at this example. First we’ll rewrite the equation as x 2 + 6x = − 5 Then, we’ll add 9 to each side. We get x 2 + 6x + 9 = − 5 + 9 The left side factors as a perfect square trinomial. ( x + 3 ) 2 = 4 We can solve this by extraction of roots. Notice that when the roots are rational numbers, the equation is factorable.The big question is, “How did we know to add 9 to each side of the equation?” We can convert any quadratic trinomial appearing in an equation into a perfect square trinomial if we know what number to add to both sides. We can determine that particular number by observing the following situation: Consider the square of the binomial and the resulting perfect square trinomial ( x + p ) 2 = x 2 + 2p x + p 2 Notice that the constant term (the number we are looking for) can be obtained from the linear term 2p x. If we take one half the coefficient of and square it, we get the constant term p 2 . This is true for every perfect square trinomial with leading coefficient 1. In a perfect square trinomial with leading coefficient 1, the constant term is the square of one half the coefficient of the linear term. Study these examples to see what constant term will make the given binomial into a perfect square trinomial. Example 10.26.  x 2 + 6x.   The constant must be the square of one half the coefficient of x. Since the coefficient of x is 6, we haveThe constant is 9. x 2 + 6x + 9 = ( x + 3 ) 2 This is a perfect square trinomial. Example 10.27.  a 2 + 10a.   The constant must be the square of one half the coefficient of a. Since the coefficient of a is 10, we haveThe constant is 25. a 2 + 10a + 25 = ( a + 5 ) 2 Example 10.28.  y 2 + 3y.   The constant must be the square of one half the coefficient of y. Since the coefficient of y is 3, we haveThe constant is  || 
book1_ch10_5_3	The Method Of Completing The Square Now, with these observations, we can describe the method of completing the square. The Method of Completing the Square Write the equation so that the constant term appears on the right side of equation. If the leading coefficient is different from 1, divide each term of the equation by that coefficient. Take one half of the coefficient of the linear term, square it, then add it to both sides of the equation. The trinomial on the left is now a perfect square trinomial and can be factored as ( ) 2 . The first term in the parentheses is the square root of the quadratic term. The last term in the parentheses is one-half the coefficient of the linear term. Solve this equation by extraction of roots. The Method Of Completing The Square Now, with these observations, we can describe the method of completing the square. The Method of Completing the Square Write the equation so that the constant term appears on the right side of equation. If the leading coefficient is different from 1, divide each term of the equation by that coefficient. Take one half of the coefficient of the linear term, square it, then add it to both sides of the equation. The trinomial on the left is now a perfect square trinomial and can be factored as ( ) 2 . The first term in the parentheses is the square root of the quadratic term. The last term in the parentheses is one-half the coefficient of the linear term. Solve this equation by extraction of roots.  || 
book1_ch10_5_7	 Calculator Problems For the following problems, round each solution to the nearest hundredth. Exercise 10.5.35. 5m 2 − 2m − 6 = 0 Exercise 10.5.36. (Go to Solution) 3y 2 + 5y = 7 Exercise 10.5.37. 1.8x 2 + 2.3x − 4.1 = 0 Exercise 10.5.38. (Go to Solution) 0.04a 2 − 0.03a + 0.02 = 0  Calculator Problems For the following problems, round each solution to the nearest hundredth. Exercise 10.5.35. 5m 2 − 2m − 6 = 0 Exercise 10.5.36. (Go to Solution) 3y 2 + 5y = 7 Exercise 10.5.37. 1.8x 2 + 2.3x − 4.1 = 0 Exercise 10.5.38. (Go to Solution) 0.04a 2 − 0.03a + 0.02 = 0  || 
book1_ch10_6	 || Standard Form Of A Quadratic Equation We have observed that a quadratic equation is an equation of the formwhere a is the coefficient of the quadratic term, b is the coefficient of the linear term, and c is the constant term. Standard Form The equation a x 2 + b x + c = 0 is the standard form of a quadratic equation.  || The Quadratic Formula When a quadratic equation is written in standard form so that the values a, b, and c are readily determined, the equation can be solved using the quadratic formula. The values that satisfy the equation are found by substituting the values a, b, and c into the formula Quadratic Formula Keep in mind that the plus or minus symbol, ± , is just a shorthand way of denoting the two possibilities:The quadratic formula can be derived by using the method of completing the square.  || Derivation Of The Quadratic Formula Solve a x 2 + b x + c = 0 for x by completing the square. Example 10.39.  Subtract c from both sides. a x 2 + b x = − c Example 10.40.  Divide both sides by a, the coefficient of x 2 . Example 10.41.  Now we have the proper form to complete the square. Take one half the coefficient of x, square it, and add the result to both sides of the equation found in step 2.(a) is one half the coefficient of x. (b) is the square of one half the coefficient of x. Example 10.42.  The left side of the equation is now a perfect square trinomial and can be factored. This gives us Example 10.43.  Add the two fractions on the right side of the equation. The LCD = 4a 2 . Example 10.44.  Solve for x using the method of extraction of roots.  || 
book1_ch10_6_2	Standard Form Of A Quadratic Equation We have observed that a quadratic equation is an equation of the formwhere a is the coefficient of the quadratic term, b is the coefficient of the linear term, and c is the constant term. Standard Form The equation a x 2 + b x + c = 0 is the standard form of a quadratic equation. Standard Form Of A Quadratic Equation We have observed that a quadratic equation is an equation of the formwhere a is the coefficient of the quadratic term, b is the coefficient of the linear term, and c is the constant term. Standard Form The equation a x 2 + b x + c = 0 is the standard form of a quadratic equation.  || 
book1_ch10_6_5	The Quadratic Formula When a quadratic equation is written in standard form so that the values a, b, and c are readily determined, the equation can be solved using the quadratic formula. The values that satisfy the equation are found by substituting the values a, b, and c into the formula Quadratic Formula Keep in mind that the plus or minus symbol, ± , is just a shorthand way of denoting the two possibilities:The quadratic formula can be derived by using the method of completing the square. The Quadratic Formula When a quadratic equation is written in standard form so that the values a, b, and c are readily determined, the equation can be solved using the quadratic formula. The values that satisfy the equation are found by substituting the values a, b, and c into the formula Quadratic Formula Keep in mind that the plus or minus symbol, ± , is just a shorthand way of denoting the two possibilities:The quadratic formula can be derived by using the method of completing the square.  || 
book1_ch10_6_6	Derivation Of The Quadratic Formula Solve a x 2 + b x + c = 0 for x by completing the square. Example 10.39.  Subtract c from both sides. a x 2 + b x = − c Example 10.40.  Divide both sides by a, the coefficient of x 2 . Example 10.41.  Now we have the proper form to complete the square. Take one half the coefficient of x, square it, and add the result to both sides of the equation found in step 2.(a) is one half the coefficient of x. (b) is the square of one half the coefficient of x. Example 10.42.  The left side of the equation is now a perfect square trinomial and can be factored. This gives us Example 10.43.  Add the two fractions on the right side of the equation. The LCD = 4a 2 . Example 10.44.  Solve for x using the method of extraction of roots. Derivation Of The Quadratic Formula Solve a x 2 + b x + c = 0 for x by completing the square. Example 10.39.  Subtract c from both sides. a x 2 + b x = − c Example 10.40.  Divide both sides by a, the coefficient of x 2 . Example 10.41.  Now we have the proper form to complete the square. Take one half the coefficient of x, square it, and add the result to both sides of the equation found in step 2.(a) is one half the coefficient of x. (b) is the square of one half the coefficient of x. Example 10.42.  The left side of the equation is now a perfect square trinomial and can be factored. This gives us Example 10.43.  Add the two fractions on the right side of the equation. The LCD = 4a 2 . Example 10.44.  Solve for x using the method of extraction of roots.  || 
book1_ch10_7	 || The Five-Step Method We are now in a position to study some applications of quadratic equations. Quadratic equations can arise from a variety of physical (applied) and mathematical (logical) problems. We will, again, apply the five-step method for solving word problems. Five-Step Method of Solving Word Problems Step 1:   Let x (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Step 2:   Translate the verbal expression to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Step 3:   Solve this equation. Step 4:   Check the solution by substituting the result into the equation found in step 2. Step 5:   Write a conclusion. Remember, step 1 is very important. ALWAYS START BY INTRODUCING A VARIABLE. Once the quadratic equation is developed (step 2), try to solve it by factoring. If factoring doesn’t work, use the quadratic formula. A calculator may help to make some of the calculations a little less tedious.  || Astrophysical Problem Exercise 10.7.33. A very interesting application of quadratic equations is determining the length of a solar eclipse (the moon passing between the earth and sun). The length of a solar eclipse is found by solving the quadratic equation ( a + b t ) 2 + ( c + d t ) 2 = ( e + f t ) 2 for t . The letters a,b,c,d,e, and f are constants that pertain to a particular eclipse. The equation is a quadratic equation in t and can be solved by the quadratic formula (and definitely a calculator). Two values of t will result. The length of the eclipse is just the difference of these t -values. The following constants are from a solar eclipse that occurred on August 3, 431 B.C.Determine the length of this particular solar eclipse.  || 
book1_ch10_7_2	The Five-Step Method We are now in a position to study some applications of quadratic equations. Quadratic equations can arise from a variety of physical (applied) and mathematical (logical) problems. We will, again, apply the five-step method for solving word problems. Five-Step Method of Solving Word Problems Step 1:   Let x (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Step 2:   Translate the verbal expression to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Step 3:   Solve this equation. Step 4:   Check the solution by substituting the result into the equation found in step 2. Step 5:   Write a conclusion. Remember, step 1 is very important. ALWAYS START BY INTRODUCING A VARIABLE. Once the quadratic equation is developed (step 2), try to solve it by factoring. If factoring doesn’t work, use the quadratic formula. A calculator may help to make some of the calculations a little less tedious. The Five-Step Method We are now in a position to study some applications of quadratic equations. Quadratic equations can arise from a variety of physical (applied) and mathematical (logical) problems. We will, again, apply the five-step method for solving word problems. Five-Step Method of Solving Word Problems Step 1:   Let x (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Step 2:   Translate the verbal expression to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Step 3:   Solve this equation. Step 4:   Check the solution by substituting the result into the equation found in step 2. Step 5:   Write a conclusion. Remember, step 1 is very important. ALWAYS START BY INTRODUCING A VARIABLE. Once the quadratic equation is developed (step 2), try to solve it by factoring. If factoring doesn’t work, use the quadratic formula. A calculator may help to make some of the calculations a little less tedious.  || 
book1_ch10_7_22	Astrophysical Problem Exercise 10.7.33. A very interesting application of quadratic equations is determining the length of a solar eclipse (the moon passing between the earth and sun). The length of a solar eclipse is found by solving the quadratic equation ( a + b t ) 2 + ( c + d t ) 2 = ( e + f t ) 2 for t . The letters a,b,c,d,e, and f are constants that pertain to a particular eclipse. The equation is a quadratic equation in t and can be solved by the quadratic formula (and definitely a calculator). Two values of t will result. The length of the eclipse is just the difference of these t -values. The following constants are from a solar eclipse that occurred on August 3, 431 B.C.Determine the length of this particular solar eclipse. Astrophysical Problem Exercise 10.7.33. A very interesting application of quadratic equations is determining the length of a solar eclipse (the moon passing between the earth and sun). The length of a solar eclipse is found by solving the quadratic equation ( a + b t ) 2 + ( c + d t ) 2 = ( e + f t ) 2 for t . The letters a,b,c,d,e, and f are constants that pertain to a particular eclipse. The equation is a quadratic equation in t and can be solved by the quadratic formula (and definitely a calculator). Two values of t will result. The length of the eclipse is just the difference of these t -values. The following constants are from a solar eclipse that occurred on August 3, 431 B.C.Determine the length of this particular solar eclipse.  || 
book1_ch10_8	 || Parabolas We will now study the graphs of quadratic equations in two variables with general form Parabola All such graphs have a similar shape. The graph of a quadratic equation of this type Parabola is called a parabola and it will assume one of the following shapes. Vertex The high point or low point of a parabola is called the vertex of the parabola.  || Constructing Graphs of Parabolas We will construct the graph of a parabola by choosing several x -values, computing to find the corresponding y -values, plotting these ordered pairs, then drawing a smooth curve through them.  || 
book1_ch10_8_2	Parabolas We will now study the graphs of quadratic equations in two variables with general form Parabola All such graphs have a similar shape. The graph of a quadratic equation of this type Parabola is called a parabola and it will assume one of the following shapes. Vertex The high point or low point of a parabola is called the vertex of the parabola. Parabolas We will now study the graphs of quadratic equations in two variables with general form Parabola All such graphs have a similar shape. The graph of a quadratic equation of this type Parabola is called a parabola and it will assume one of the following shapes. Vertex The high point or low point of a parabola is called the vertex of the parabola.  || 
book1_ch10_8_3	Constructing Graphs of Parabolas We will construct the graph of a parabola by choosing several x -values, computing to find the corresponding y -values, plotting these ordered pairs, then drawing a smooth curve through them. Constructing Graphs of Parabolas We will construct the graph of a parabola by choosing several x -values, computing to find the corresponding y -values, plotting these ordered pairs, then drawing a smooth curve through them.  || 
book1_ch04	 ||  || Algebraic Expressions Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression is a number, a letter, or a collection of numbers and letters along with meaningful signs of operation. Expressions Algebraic expressions are often referred to simply as expressions, as in the following examples: Example 4.1.  x + 4 is an expression. Example 4.2.  7y is an expression. Example 4.3.  is an expression. Example 4.4.  The number 8 is an expression. 8 can be written with explicit signs of operation by writing it as 8 + 0 or 8⋅1 . 3x 2 + 6 = 4x − 1 is not an expression, it is an equation. We will study equations in the next section.  || Terms and Factors Terms In an algebraic expression, the quantities joined by " + " signs are called terms. In some expressions it will appear that terms are joined by " − " signs. We must keep in mind that subtraction is addition of the negative, that is, a − b = a + ( − b) . An important concept that all students of algebra must be aware of is the difference between terms and factors. Factors Any numbers or symbols that are multiplied together are factors of their product. Terms are parts of sums and are therefore joined by addition (or subtraction) signs.Factors are parts of products and are therefore joined by multiplication signs.  || Common Factors Common Factors Sometimes, when we observe an expression carefully, we will notice that some particular factor appears in every term. When we observe this, we say we are observing common factors. We use the phrase common factors since the particular factor we observe is common to all the terms in the expression. The factor appears in each and every term in the expression.  || Coefficients Coefficient In algebra, as we now know, a letter is often used to represent some quantity. Suppose we represent some quantity by the letter x . The notation 5x means x + x + x + x + x . We can now see that we have five of these quantities. In the expression 5x , the number 5 is called the numerical coefficient of the quantity x . Often, the numerical coefficient is just called the coefficient. The coefficient of a quantity records how many of that quantity there are.  ||  || Equations Equation An equation is a statement that two algebraic expressions are equal. An equation is composed of three parts. Each of the boxes represents an algebraic expression. An equation consists of two expressions separated by an equal sign. The equal sign makes the statement that the two expressions are equivalent, that is, they represent the same value. For example: Example 4.32.  f = 32a .The equation expresses the relationship between the variables f and a . It states that the value of f is always 32 times that of a . Example 4.33.  y = 6x + 8 .The equation expresses the relationship between the variables x and y . It states that the value of y is always 8 more than 6 times the value of x .  || Numerical Evaluation Numerical evaluation Numerical evaluation is the process of determining a value by substituting numbers for letters. Formulas In various areas (business, statistics, physics, chemistry, astronomy, sociology, psychology, etc.), particular equations occur quite frequently. Such equations are called formulas. Numerical evaluation is used frequently with formulas.  ||  || Polynomials Polynomials Let us consider the collection of all algebraic expressions that do not contain variables in the denominators of fractions and where all exponents on the variable quantities are whole numbers. Expressions in this collection are called polynomials. Some expressions that are polynomials are Example 4.38.  3x 4 Example 4.39.  .A fraction occurs, but no variable appears in the denominator. Example 4.40.  5x 3 + 3x 2 − 2x + 1 Some expressions that are not polynomials are Example 4.41.  .A variable appears in the denominator. Example 4.42.  4x 2 − 5x + x − 3 .A negative exponent appears on a variable.  || Classification of Polynomials Polynomials can be classified using two criteria: the number of terms and degree of the polynomial. Table 4.1. Number of Terms Name Example Comment One Monomial 4x 2 mono means “one” in Greek. Two Binomial 4x 2 − 7x bi means “two” in Latin. Three Trinomial 4x 2 − 7x + 3 tri means “three” in Greek. Four or more Polynomial 4x 3 − 7x 2 + 3x − 1 poly means “many” in Greek. Degree of a Term Containing One Variable The degree of a term containing only one variable is the value of the exponent of the variable. Exponents appearing on numbers do not affect the degree of the term. We consider only the exponent of the variable. For example: Example 4.43.  5x 3 is a monomial of degree 3. Example 4.44.  60a 5 is a monomial of degree 5. Example 4.45.  21b 2 is a monomial of degree 2. Example 4.46.  8 is a monomial of degree 0. We say that a nonzero number is a term of 0 degree since it could be written as 8x 0 . Since x 0 = 1(x ≠ 0) , 8x 0 = 8 . The exponent on the variable is 0 so it must be of degree 0. (By convention, the number 0 has no degree.) Example 4.47.  4x is a monomial of the first degree. 4x could be written as 4x 1 . The exponent on the variable is 1 so it must be of the first degree. Degree of a Term Containing Several Variables The degree of a term containing more than one variable is the sum of the exponents of the variables, as shown below. Example 4.48.  4x 2 y 5 is a monomial of degree 2 + 5 = 7 . This is a 7th degree monomial. Example 4.49.  37a b 2 c 6 d 3 is a monomial of degree 1 + 2 + 6 + 3 = 12 . This is a 12th degree monomial. Example 4.50.  5x y is a monomial of degree 1 + 1 = 2 . This is a 2nd degree monomial. Degree of a Polynomial The degree of a polynomial is the degree of the term of highest degree; for example: Example 4.51.  2x 3 + 6x − 1 is a trinomial of degree 3. The first term, 2x 3 , is the term of the highest degree. Therefore, its degree is the degree of the polynomial. Example 4.52.  7y − 10y 4 is a binomial of degree 4. Example 4.53.  a − 4 + 5a 2 is a trinomial of degree 2. Example 4.54.  2x 6 + 9x 4 − x 7 − 8x 3 + x − 9 is a polynomial of degree 7. Example 4.55.  4x 3 y 5 − 2x y 3 is a binomial of degree 8. The degree of the first term is 8. Example 4.56.  3x + 10 is a binomial of degree 1. Linear Quadratic Cubic Polynomials of the first degree are called linear polynomials.Polynomials of the second degree are called quadratic polynomials.Polynomials of the third degree are called cubic polynomials.Polynomials of the fourth degree are called fourth degree polynomials.Polynomials of the n th degree are called n th degree polynomials. Nonzero constants are polynomials of the 0th degree. Some examples of these polynomials follow: Example 4.57.  4x − 9 is a linear polynomial. Example 4.58.  3x 2 + 5x − 7 is a quadratic polynomial. Example 4.59.  8y − 2x 3 is a cubic polynomial. Example 4.60.  16a 2 − 32a 5 − 64 is a 5th degree polynomial. Example 4.61.  x 12 − y 12 is a 12th degree polynomial. Example 4.62.  7x 5 y 7 z 3 − 2x 4 y 7 z + x 3 y 7 is a 15th degree polynomial. The first term is of degree 5 + 7 + 3 = 15 . Example 4.63.  43 is a 0th degree polynomial.  || Classification of Polynomial Equations As we know, an equation is composed of two algebraic expressions separated by an equal sign. If the two expressions happen to be polynomial expressions, then we can classify the equation according to its degree. Classification of equations by degree is useful since equations of the same degree have the same type of graph. (We will study graphs of equations in Chapter 6.) The degree of an equation is the degree of the highest degree expression.  ||  || Like Terms Like Terms Terms whose variable parts, including the exponents, are identical are called like terms. Like terms is an appropriate name since terms with identical variable parts and different numerical coefficients represent different amounts of the same quantity. As long as we are dealing with quantities of the same type we can combine them using addition and subtraction. Simplifying an Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression can be simplified by combining like terms.  || Combining Like Terms Since like terms represent amounts of the same quantity, they may be combined, that is, like terms may be added together.  || Simplifying Expressions Containing Parentheses Simplifying Expressions Containing Parentheses When parentheses occur in expressions, they must be removed before the expression can be simplified. Parentheses can be removed using the distributive property. Distributive Property  ||  || Multiplying a Polynomial by a Monomial Multiplying a polynomial by a monomial is a direct application of the distributive property. Distributive Property The distributive property suggests the following rule. Multiplying a Polynomial by a Monomial To multiply a polynomial by a monomial, multiply every term of the polynomial by the monomial and then add the resulting products together.  || Simplifying + (a + b) and – (a + b) + (a + b) and – (a + b)  Oftentimes, we will encounter multiplications of the form + 1(a + b) or – 1(a + b) These terms will actually appear as + (a + b) and – (a + b) Using the distributive property, we can remove the parentheses. The parentheses have been removed and the sign of each term has remained the same. The parentheses have been removed and the sign of each term has been changed to its opposite. To remove a set of parentheses preceded by a " + " sign, simply remove the parentheses and leave the sign of each term the same. To remove a set of parentheses preceded by a “ − ” sign, remove the parentheses and change the sign of each term to its opposite sign.  || Multiplying a Polynomial by a Polynomial Since we can consider an expression enclosed within parentheses as a single quantity, we have, by the distributive property, For convenience we will use the commutative property of addition to write this expression so that the first two terms contain a and the second two contain b . (a + b)(c + d) = a c + a d + b c + b d This method is commonly called the FOIL method. FFirst terms OOuter terms IInner terms LLast terms Rearranging, Combining like terms, = 5a + 5b This use of the distributive property suggests the following rule. Multiplying a Polynomial by a Polynomial To multiply two polynomials together, multiply every term of one polynomial by every term of the other polynomial.  ||  || Expanding (a + b)2 and (a − b)2 Squaring a Binomial To square a binomial: * Square the first term. Take the product of the two terms and double it. Square the last term. Add the three results together.  || Expanding (a + b)(a − b) Sum and Difference of Two Terms To expand the sum and difference of two terms: † Square the first term and square the second term. Subtract the square of the second term from the square of the first term. ( a + b )( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 __________ * See problems 56 and 57 at the end of this section. † See problem 58.  ||  || Independent and Dependent Variables Independent and Dependent Variables In an equation, any variable whose value can be freely assigned is said to be an independent variable. Any variable whose value is determined once the other values have been assigned is said to be a dependent variable. Two examples will help illustrate these concepts. Consider the equation y = 2x − 7 . If we are free to choose values for x , then x would be considered the independent variable. Since the value of y depends on the value of x , y would be the dependent variable. Consider the equation m = − 4g k 2 . If we are free to choose values for both g and k , then g and k would be considered independent variables. Since the value of m depends on the values chosen for g and k , m would be the dependent variable.  || The Domain of an Equation Domain The process of replacing letters with numbers is called numerical evaluation. The collection of numbers that can replace the independent variable in an equation and yield a meaningful result is called the domain of the equation. The domain of an equation may be the entire collection of real numbers or may be restricted to some subcollection of the real numbers. The restrictions may be due to particular applications of the equation or to problems of computability.  || 
book1_ch04_2	 || Algebraic Expressions Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression is a number, a letter, or a collection of numbers and letters along with meaningful signs of operation. Expressions Algebraic expressions are often referred to simply as expressions, as in the following examples: Example 4.1.  x + 4 is an expression. Example 4.2.  7y is an expression. Example 4.3.  is an expression. Example 4.4.  The number 8 is an expression. 8 can be written with explicit signs of operation by writing it as 8 + 0 or 8⋅1 . 3x 2 + 6 = 4x − 1 is not an expression, it is an equation. We will study equations in the next section.  || Terms and Factors Terms In an algebraic expression, the quantities joined by " + " signs are called terms. In some expressions it will appear that terms are joined by " − " signs. We must keep in mind that subtraction is addition of the negative, that is, a − b = a + ( − b) . An important concept that all students of algebra must be aware of is the difference between terms and factors. Factors Any numbers or symbols that are multiplied together are factors of their product. Terms are parts of sums and are therefore joined by addition (or subtraction) signs.Factors are parts of products and are therefore joined by multiplication signs.  || Common Factors Common Factors Sometimes, when we observe an expression carefully, we will notice that some particular factor appears in every term. When we observe this, we say we are observing common factors. We use the phrase common factors since the particular factor we observe is common to all the terms in the expression. The factor appears in each and every term in the expression.  || Coefficients Coefficient In algebra, as we now know, a letter is often used to represent some quantity. Suppose we represent some quantity by the letter x . The notation 5x means x + x + x + x + x . We can now see that we have five of these quantities. In the expression 5x , the number 5 is called the numerical coefficient of the quantity x . Often, the numerical coefficient is just called the coefficient. The coefficient of a quantity records how many of that quantity there are.  || 
book1_ch04_2_2	Algebraic Expressions Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression is a number, a letter, or a collection of numbers and letters along with meaningful signs of operation. Expressions Algebraic expressions are often referred to simply as expressions, as in the following examples: Example 4.1.  x + 4 is an expression. Example 4.2.  7y is an expression. Example 4.3.  is an expression. Example 4.4.  The number 8 is an expression. 8 can be written with explicit signs of operation by writing it as 8 + 0 or 8⋅1 . 3x 2 + 6 = 4x − 1 is not an expression, it is an equation. We will study equations in the next section. Algebraic Expressions Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression is a number, a letter, or a collection of numbers and letters along with meaningful signs of operation. Expressions Algebraic expressions are often referred to simply as expressions, as in the following examples: Example 4.1.  x + 4 is an expression. Example 4.2.  7y is an expression. Example 4.3.  is an expression. Example 4.4.  The number 8 is an expression. 8 can be written with explicit signs of operation by writing it as 8 + 0 or 8⋅1 . 3x 2 + 6 = 4x − 1 is not an expression, it is an equation. We will study equations in the next section.  || 
book1_ch04_2_3	Terms and Factors Terms In an algebraic expression, the quantities joined by " + " signs are called terms. In some expressions it will appear that terms are joined by " − " signs. We must keep in mind that subtraction is addition of the negative, that is, a − b = a + ( − b) . An important concept that all students of algebra must be aware of is the difference between terms and factors. Factors Any numbers or symbols that are multiplied together are factors of their product. Terms are parts of sums and are therefore joined by addition (or subtraction) signs.Factors are parts of products and are therefore joined by multiplication signs. Terms and Factors Terms In an algebraic expression, the quantities joined by " + " signs are called terms. In some expressions it will appear that terms are joined by " − " signs. We must keep in mind that subtraction is addition of the negative, that is, a − b = a + ( − b) . An important concept that all students of algebra must be aware of is the difference between terms and factors. Factors Any numbers or symbols that are multiplied together are factors of their product. Terms are parts of sums and are therefore joined by addition (or subtraction) signs.Factors are parts of products and are therefore joined by multiplication signs.  || 
book1_ch04_2_8	Common Factors Common Factors Sometimes, when we observe an expression carefully, we will notice that some particular factor appears in every term. When we observe this, we say we are observing common factors. We use the phrase common factors since the particular factor we observe is common to all the terms in the expression. The factor appears in each and every term in the expression. Common Factors Common Factors Sometimes, when we observe an expression carefully, we will notice that some particular factor appears in every term. When we observe this, we say we are observing common factors. We use the phrase common factors since the particular factor we observe is common to all the terms in the expression. The factor appears in each and every term in the expression.  || 
book1_ch04_2_11	Coefficients Coefficient In algebra, as we now know, a letter is often used to represent some quantity. Suppose we represent some quantity by the letter x . The notation 5x means x + x + x + x + x . We can now see that we have five of these quantities. In the expression 5x , the number 5 is called the numerical coefficient of the quantity x . Often, the numerical coefficient is just called the coefficient. The coefficient of a quantity records how many of that quantity there are. Coefficients Coefficient In algebra, as we now know, a letter is often used to represent some quantity. Suppose we represent some quantity by the letter x . The notation 5x means x + x + x + x + x . We can now see that we have five of these quantities. In the expression 5x , the number 5 is called the numerical coefficient of the quantity x . Often, the numerical coefficient is just called the coefficient. The coefficient of a quantity records how many of that quantity there are.  || 
book1_ch04_3	 || Equations Equation An equation is a statement that two algebraic expressions are equal. An equation is composed of three parts. Each of the boxes represents an algebraic expression. An equation consists of two expressions separated by an equal sign. The equal sign makes the statement that the two expressions are equivalent, that is, they represent the same value. For example: Example 4.32.  f = 32a .The equation expresses the relationship between the variables f and a . It states that the value of f is always 32 times that of a . Example 4.33.  y = 6x + 8 .The equation expresses the relationship between the variables x and y . It states that the value of y is always 8 more than 6 times the value of x .  || Numerical Evaluation Numerical evaluation Numerical evaluation is the process of determining a value by substituting numbers for letters. Formulas In various areas (business, statistics, physics, chemistry, astronomy, sociology, psychology, etc.), particular equations occur quite frequently. Such equations are called formulas. Numerical evaluation is used frequently with formulas.  || 
book1_ch04_3_2	Equations Equation An equation is a statement that two algebraic expressions are equal. An equation is composed of three parts. Each of the boxes represents an algebraic expression. An equation consists of two expressions separated by an equal sign. The equal sign makes the statement that the two expressions are equivalent, that is, they represent the same value. For example: Example 4.32.  f = 32a .The equation expresses the relationship between the variables f and a . It states that the value of f is always 32 times that of a . Example 4.33.  y = 6x + 8 .The equation expresses the relationship between the variables x and y . It states that the value of y is always 8 more than 6 times the value of x . Equations Equation An equation is a statement that two algebraic expressions are equal. An equation is composed of three parts. Each of the boxes represents an algebraic expression. An equation consists of two expressions separated by an equal sign. The equal sign makes the statement that the two expressions are equivalent, that is, they represent the same value. For example: Example 4.32.  f = 32a .The equation expresses the relationship between the variables f and a . It states that the value of f is always 32 times that of a . Example 4.33.  y = 6x + 8 .The equation expresses the relationship between the variables x and y . It states that the value of y is always 8 more than 6 times the value of x .  || 
book1_ch04_3_3	Numerical Evaluation Numerical evaluation Numerical evaluation is the process of determining a value by substituting numbers for letters. Formulas In various areas (business, statistics, physics, chemistry, astronomy, sociology, psychology, etc.), particular equations occur quite frequently. Such equations are called formulas. Numerical evaluation is used frequently with formulas. Numerical Evaluation Numerical evaluation Numerical evaluation is the process of determining a value by substituting numbers for letters. Formulas In various areas (business, statistics, physics, chemistry, astronomy, sociology, psychology, etc.), particular equations occur quite frequently. Such equations are called formulas. Numerical evaluation is used frequently with formulas.  || 
book1_ch04_4	 || Polynomials Polynomials Let us consider the collection of all algebraic expressions that do not contain variables in the denominators of fractions and where all exponents on the variable quantities are whole numbers. Expressions in this collection are called polynomials. Some expressions that are polynomials are Example 4.38.  3x 4 Example 4.39.  .A fraction occurs, but no variable appears in the denominator. Example 4.40.  5x 3 + 3x 2 − 2x + 1 Some expressions that are not polynomials are Example 4.41.  .A variable appears in the denominator. Example 4.42.  4x 2 − 5x + x − 3 .A negative exponent appears on a variable.  || Classification of Polynomials Polynomials can be classified using two criteria: the number of terms and degree of the polynomial. Table 4.1. Number of Terms Name Example Comment One Monomial 4x 2 mono means “one” in Greek. Two Binomial 4x 2 − 7x bi means “two” in Latin. Three Trinomial 4x 2 − 7x + 3 tri means “three” in Greek. Four or more Polynomial 4x 3 − 7x 2 + 3x − 1 poly means “many” in Greek. Degree of a Term Containing One Variable The degree of a term containing only one variable is the value of the exponent of the variable. Exponents appearing on numbers do not affect the degree of the term. We consider only the exponent of the variable. For example: Example 4.43.  5x 3 is a monomial of degree 3. Example 4.44.  60a 5 is a monomial of degree 5. Example 4.45.  21b 2 is a monomial of degree 2. Example 4.46.  8 is a monomial of degree 0. We say that a nonzero number is a term of 0 degree since it could be written as 8x 0 . Since x 0 = 1(x ≠ 0) , 8x 0 = 8 . The exponent on the variable is 0 so it must be of degree 0. (By convention, the number 0 has no degree.) Example 4.47.  4x is a monomial of the first degree. 4x could be written as 4x 1 . The exponent on the variable is 1 so it must be of the first degree. Degree of a Term Containing Several Variables The degree of a term containing more than one variable is the sum of the exponents of the variables, as shown below. Example 4.48.  4x 2 y 5 is a monomial of degree 2 + 5 = 7 . This is a 7th degree monomial. Example 4.49.  37a b 2 c 6 d 3 is a monomial of degree 1 + 2 + 6 + 3 = 12 . This is a 12th degree monomial. Example 4.50.  5x y is a monomial of degree 1 + 1 = 2 . This is a 2nd degree monomial. Degree of a Polynomial The degree of a polynomial is the degree of the term of highest degree; for example: Example 4.51.  2x 3 + 6x − 1 is a trinomial of degree 3. The first term, 2x 3 , is the term of the highest degree. Therefore, its degree is the degree of the polynomial. Example 4.52.  7y − 10y 4 is a binomial of degree 4. Example 4.53.  a − 4 + 5a 2 is a trinomial of degree 2. Example 4.54.  2x 6 + 9x 4 − x 7 − 8x 3 + x − 9 is a polynomial of degree 7. Example 4.55.  4x 3 y 5 − 2x y 3 is a binomial of degree 8. The degree of the first term is 8. Example 4.56.  3x + 10 is a binomial of degree 1. Linear Quadratic Cubic Polynomials of the first degree are called linear polynomials.Polynomials of the second degree are called quadratic polynomials.Polynomials of the third degree are called cubic polynomials.Polynomials of the fourth degree are called fourth degree polynomials.Polynomials of the n th degree are called n th degree polynomials. Nonzero constants are polynomials of the 0th degree. Some examples of these polynomials follow: Example 4.57.  4x − 9 is a linear polynomial. Example 4.58.  3x 2 + 5x − 7 is a quadratic polynomial. Example 4.59.  8y − 2x 3 is a cubic polynomial. Example 4.60.  16a 2 − 32a 5 − 64 is a 5th degree polynomial. Example 4.61.  x 12 − y 12 is a 12th degree polynomial. Example 4.62.  7x 5 y 7 z 3 − 2x 4 y 7 z + x 3 y 7 is a 15th degree polynomial. The first term is of degree 5 + 7 + 3 = 15 . Example 4.63.  43 is a 0th degree polynomial.  || Classification of Polynomial Equations As we know, an equation is composed of two algebraic expressions separated by an equal sign. If the two expressions happen to be polynomial expressions, then we can classify the equation according to its degree. Classification of equations by degree is useful since equations of the same degree have the same type of graph. (We will study graphs of equations in Chapter 6.) The degree of an equation is the degree of the highest degree expression.  || 
book1_ch04_4_2	Polynomials Polynomials Let us consider the collection of all algebraic expressions that do not contain variables in the denominators of fractions and where all exponents on the variable quantities are whole numbers. Expressions in this collection are called polynomials. Some expressions that are polynomials are Example 4.38.  3x 4 Example 4.39.  .A fraction occurs, but no variable appears in the denominator. Example 4.40.  5x 3 + 3x 2 − 2x + 1 Some expressions that are not polynomials are Example 4.41.  .A variable appears in the denominator. Example 4.42.  4x 2 − 5x + x − 3 .A negative exponent appears on a variable. Polynomials Polynomials Let us consider the collection of all algebraic expressions that do not contain variables in the denominators of fractions and where all exponents on the variable quantities are whole numbers. Expressions in this collection are called polynomials. Some expressions that are polynomials are Example 4.38.  3x 4 Example 4.39.  .A fraction occurs, but no variable appears in the denominator. Example 4.40.  5x 3 + 3x 2 − 2x + 1 Some expressions that are not polynomials are Example 4.41.  .A variable appears in the denominator. Example 4.42.  4x 2 − 5x + x − 3 .A negative exponent appears on a variable.  || 
book1_ch04_4_3	Classification of Polynomials Polynomials can be classified using two criteria: the number of terms and degree of the polynomial. Table 4.1. Number of Terms Name Example Comment One Monomial 4x 2 mono means “one” in Greek. Two Binomial 4x 2 − 7x bi means “two” in Latin. Three Trinomial 4x 2 − 7x + 3 tri means “three” in Greek. Four or more Polynomial 4x 3 − 7x 2 + 3x − 1 poly means “many” in Greek. Degree of a Term Containing One Variable The degree of a term containing only one variable is the value of the exponent of the variable. Exponents appearing on numbers do not affect the degree of the term. We consider only the exponent of the variable. For example: Example 4.43.  5x 3 is a monomial of degree 3. Example 4.44.  60a 5 is a monomial of degree 5. Example 4.45.  21b 2 is a monomial of degree 2. Example 4.46.  8 is a monomial of degree 0. We say that a nonzero number is a term of 0 degree since it could be written as 8x 0 . Since x 0 = 1(x ≠ 0) , 8x 0 = 8 . The exponent on the variable is 0 so it must be of degree 0. (By convention, the number 0 has no degree.) Example 4.47.  4x is a monomial of the first degree. 4x could be written as 4x 1 . The exponent on the variable is 1 so it must be of the first degree. Degree of a Term Containing Several Variables The degree of a term containing more than one variable is the sum of the exponents of the variables, as shown below. Example 4.48.  4x 2 y 5 is a monomial of degree 2 + 5 = 7 . This is a 7th degree monomial. Example 4.49.  37a b 2 c 6 d 3 is a monomial of degree 1 + 2 + 6 + 3 = 12 . This is a 12th degree monomial. Example 4.50.  5x y is a monomial of degree 1 + 1 = 2 . This is a 2nd degree monomial. Degree of a Polynomial The degree of a polynomial is the degree of the term of highest degree; for example: Example 4.51.  2x 3 + 6x − 1 is a trinomial of degree 3. The first term, 2x 3 , is the term of the highest degree. Therefore, its degree is the degree of the polynomial. Example 4.52.  7y − 10y 4 is a binomial of degree 4. Example 4.53.  a − 4 + 5a 2 is a trinomial of degree 2. Example 4.54.  2x 6 + 9x 4 − x 7 − 8x 3 + x − 9 is a polynomial of degree 7. Example 4.55.  4x 3 y 5 − 2x y 3 is a binomial of degree 8. The degree of the first term is 8. Example 4.56.  3x + 10 is a binomial of degree 1. Linear Quadratic Cubic Polynomials of the first degree are called linear polynomials.Polynomials of the second degree are called quadratic polynomials.Polynomials of the third degree are called cubic polynomials.Polynomials of the fourth degree are called fourth degree polynomials.Polynomials of the n th degree are called n th degree polynomials. Nonzero constants are polynomials of the 0th degree. Some examples of these polynomials follow: Example 4.57.  4x − 9 is a linear polynomial. Example 4.58.  3x 2 + 5x − 7 is a quadratic polynomial. Example 4.59.  8y − 2x 3 is a cubic polynomial. Example 4.60.  16a 2 − 32a 5 − 64 is a 5th degree polynomial. Example 4.61.  x 12 − y 12 is a 12th degree polynomial. Example 4.62.  7x 5 y 7 z 3 − 2x 4 y 7 z + x 3 y 7 is a 15th degree polynomial. The first term is of degree 5 + 7 + 3 = 15 . Example 4.63.  43 is a 0th degree polynomial. Classification of Polynomials Polynomials can be classified using two criteria: the number of terms and degree of the polynomial. Table 4.1. Number of Terms Name Example Comment One Monomial 4x 2 mono means “one” in Greek. Two Binomial 4x 2 − 7x bi means “two” in Latin. Three Trinomial 4x 2 − 7x + 3 tri means “three” in Greek. Four or more Polynomial 4x 3 − 7x 2 + 3x − 1 poly means “many” in Greek. Degree of a Term Containing One Variable The degree of a term containing only one variable is the value of the exponent of the variable. Exponents appearing on numbers do not affect the degree of the term. We consider only the exponent of the variable. For example: Example 4.43.  5x 3 is a monomial of degree 3. Example 4.44.  60a 5 is a monomial of degree 5. Example 4.45.  21b 2 is a monomial of degree 2. Example 4.46.  8 is a monomial of degree 0. We say that a nonzero number is a term of 0 degree since it could be written as 8x 0 . Since x 0 = 1(x ≠ 0) , 8x 0 = 8 . The exponent on the variable is 0 so it must be of degree 0. (By convention, the number 0 has no degree.) Example 4.47.  4x is a monomial of the first degree. 4x could be written as 4x 1 . The exponent on the variable is 1 so it must be of the first degree. Degree of a Term Containing Several Variables The degree of a term containing more than one variable is the sum of the exponents of the variables, as shown below. Example 4.48.  4x 2 y 5 is a monomial of degree 2 + 5 = 7 . This is a 7th degree monomial. Example 4.49.  37a b 2 c 6 d 3 is a monomial of degree 1 + 2 + 6 + 3 = 12 . This is a 12th degree monomial. Example 4.50.  5x y is a monomial of degree 1 + 1 = 2 . This is a 2nd degree monomial. Degree of a Polynomial The degree of a polynomial is the degree of the term of highest degree; for example: Example 4.51.  2x 3 + 6x − 1 is a trinomial of degree 3. The first term, 2x 3 , is the term of the highest degree. Therefore, its degree is the degree of the polynomial. Example 4.52.  7y − 10y 4 is a binomial of degree 4. Example 4.53.  a − 4 + 5a 2 is a trinomial of degree 2. Example 4.54.  2x 6 + 9x 4 − x 7 − 8x 3 + x − 9 is a polynomial of degree 7. Example 4.55.  4x 3 y 5 − 2x y 3 is a binomial of degree 8. The degree of the first term is 8. Example 4.56.  3x + 10 is a binomial of degree 1. Linear Quadratic Cubic Polynomials of the first degree are called linear polynomials.Polynomials of the second degree are called quadratic polynomials.Polynomials of the third degree are called cubic polynomials.Polynomials of the fourth degree are called fourth degree polynomials.Polynomials of the n th degree are called n th degree polynomials. Nonzero constants are polynomials of the 0th degree. Some examples of these polynomials follow: Example 4.57.  4x − 9 is a linear polynomial. Example 4.58.  3x 2 + 5x − 7 is a quadratic polynomial. Example 4.59.  8y − 2x 3 is a cubic polynomial. Example 4.60.  16a 2 − 32a 5 − 64 is a 5th degree polynomial. Example 4.61.  x 12 − y 12 is a 12th degree polynomial. Example 4.62.  7x 5 y 7 z 3 − 2x 4 y 7 z + x 3 y 7 is a 15th degree polynomial. The first term is of degree 5 + 7 + 3 = 15 . Example 4.63.  43 is a 0th degree polynomial.  || 
book1_ch04_4_4	Classification of Polynomial Equations As we know, an equation is composed of two algebraic expressions separated by an equal sign. If the two expressions happen to be polynomial expressions, then we can classify the equation according to its degree. Classification of equations by degree is useful since equations of the same degree have the same type of graph. (We will study graphs of equations in Chapter 6.) The degree of an equation is the degree of the highest degree expression. Classification of Polynomial Equations As we know, an equation is composed of two algebraic expressions separated by an equal sign. If the two expressions happen to be polynomial expressions, then we can classify the equation according to its degree. Classification of equations by degree is useful since equations of the same degree have the same type of graph. (We will study graphs of equations in Chapter 6.) The degree of an equation is the degree of the highest degree expression.  || 
book1_ch04_5	 || Like Terms Like Terms Terms whose variable parts, including the exponents, are identical are called like terms. Like terms is an appropriate name since terms with identical variable parts and different numerical coefficients represent different amounts of the same quantity. As long as we are dealing with quantities of the same type we can combine them using addition and subtraction. Simplifying an Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression can be simplified by combining like terms.  || Combining Like Terms Since like terms represent amounts of the same quantity, they may be combined, that is, like terms may be added together.  || Simplifying Expressions Containing Parentheses Simplifying Expressions Containing Parentheses When parentheses occur in expressions, they must be removed before the expression can be simplified. Parentheses can be removed using the distributive property. Distributive Property  || 
book1_ch04_5_2	Like Terms Like Terms Terms whose variable parts, including the exponents, are identical are called like terms. Like terms is an appropriate name since terms with identical variable parts and different numerical coefficients represent different amounts of the same quantity. As long as we are dealing with quantities of the same type we can combine them using addition and subtraction. Simplifying an Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression can be simplified by combining like terms. Like Terms Like Terms Terms whose variable parts, including the exponents, are identical are called like terms. Like terms is an appropriate name since terms with identical variable parts and different numerical coefficients represent different amounts of the same quantity. As long as we are dealing with quantities of the same type we can combine them using addition and subtraction. Simplifying an Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression can be simplified by combining like terms.  || 
book1_ch04_5_5	Combining Like Terms Since like terms represent amounts of the same quantity, they may be combined, that is, like terms may be added together. Combining Like Terms Since like terms represent amounts of the same quantity, they may be combined, that is, like terms may be added together.  || 
book1_ch04_5_8	Simplifying Expressions Containing Parentheses Simplifying Expressions Containing Parentheses When parentheses occur in expressions, they must be removed before the expression can be simplified. Parentheses can be removed using the distributive property. Distributive Property Simplifying Expressions Containing Parentheses Simplifying Expressions Containing Parentheses When parentheses occur in expressions, they must be removed before the expression can be simplified. Parentheses can be removed using the distributive property. Distributive Property  || 
book1_ch04_6	 || Multiplying a Polynomial by a Monomial Multiplying a polynomial by a monomial is a direct application of the distributive property. Distributive Property The distributive property suggests the following rule. Multiplying a Polynomial by a Monomial To multiply a polynomial by a monomial, multiply every term of the polynomial by the monomial and then add the resulting products together.  || Simplifying + (a + b) and – (a + b) + (a + b) and – (a + b)  Oftentimes, we will encounter multiplications of the form + 1(a + b) or – 1(a + b) These terms will actually appear as + (a + b) and – (a + b) Using the distributive property, we can remove the parentheses. The parentheses have been removed and the sign of each term has remained the same. The parentheses have been removed and the sign of each term has been changed to its opposite. To remove a set of parentheses preceded by a " + " sign, simply remove the parentheses and leave the sign of each term the same. To remove a set of parentheses preceded by a “ − ” sign, remove the parentheses and change the sign of each term to its opposite sign.  || Multiplying a Polynomial by a Polynomial Since we can consider an expression enclosed within parentheses as a single quantity, we have, by the distributive property, For convenience we will use the commutative property of addition to write this expression so that the first two terms contain a and the second two contain b . (a + b)(c + d) = a c + a d + b c + b d This method is commonly called the FOIL method. FFirst terms OOuter terms IInner terms LLast terms Rearranging, Combining like terms, = 5a + 5b This use of the distributive property suggests the following rule. Multiplying a Polynomial by a Polynomial To multiply two polynomials together, multiply every term of one polynomial by every term of the other polynomial.  || 
book1_ch04_6_2	Multiplying a Polynomial by a Monomial Multiplying a polynomial by a monomial is a direct application of the distributive property. Distributive Property The distributive property suggests the following rule. Multiplying a Polynomial by a Monomial To multiply a polynomial by a monomial, multiply every term of the polynomial by the monomial and then add the resulting products together. Multiplying a Polynomial by a Monomial Multiplying a polynomial by a monomial is a direct application of the distributive property. Distributive Property The distributive property suggests the following rule. Multiplying a Polynomial by a Monomial To multiply a polynomial by a monomial, multiply every term of the polynomial by the monomial and then add the resulting products together.  || 
book1_ch04_6_5	Simplifying + (a + b) and – (a + b) + (a + b) and – (a + b)  Oftentimes, we will encounter multiplications of the form + 1(a + b) or – 1(a + b) These terms will actually appear as + (a + b) and – (a + b) Using the distributive property, we can remove the parentheses. The parentheses have been removed and the sign of each term has remained the same. The parentheses have been removed and the sign of each term has been changed to its opposite. To remove a set of parentheses preceded by a " + " sign, simply remove the parentheses and leave the sign of each term the same. To remove a set of parentheses preceded by a “ − ” sign, remove the parentheses and change the sign of each term to its opposite sign. Simplifying + (a + b) and – (a + b) + (a + b) and – (a + b)  Oftentimes, we will encounter multiplications of the form + 1(a + b) or – 1(a + b) These terms will actually appear as + (a + b) and – (a + b) Using the distributive property, we can remove the parentheses. The parentheses have been removed and the sign of each term has remained the same. The parentheses have been removed and the sign of each term has been changed to its opposite. To remove a set of parentheses preceded by a " + " sign, simply remove the parentheses and leave the sign of each term the same. To remove a set of parentheses preceded by a “ − ” sign, remove the parentheses and change the sign of each term to its opposite sign.  || 
book1_ch04_6_8	Multiplying a Polynomial by a Polynomial Since we can consider an expression enclosed within parentheses as a single quantity, we have, by the distributive property, For convenience we will use the commutative property of addition to write this expression so that the first two terms contain a and the second two contain b . (a + b)(c + d) = a c + a d + b c + b d This method is commonly called the FOIL method. FFirst terms OOuter terms IInner terms LLast terms Rearranging, Combining like terms, = 5a + 5b This use of the distributive property suggests the following rule. Multiplying a Polynomial by a Polynomial To multiply two polynomials together, multiply every term of one polynomial by every term of the other polynomial. Multiplying a Polynomial by a Polynomial Since we can consider an expression enclosed within parentheses as a single quantity, we have, by the distributive property, For convenience we will use the commutative property of addition to write this expression so that the first two terms contain a and the second two contain b . (a + b)(c + d) = a c + a d + b c + b d This method is commonly called the FOIL method. FFirst terms OOuter terms IInner terms LLast terms Rearranging, Combining like terms, = 5a + 5b This use of the distributive property suggests the following rule. Multiplying a Polynomial by a Polynomial To multiply two polynomials together, multiply every term of one polynomial by every term of the other polynomial.  || 
book1_ch04_7	 || Expanding (a + b)2 and (a − b)2 Squaring a Binomial To square a binomial: * Square the first term. Take the product of the two terms and double it. Square the last term. Add the three results together.  || Expanding (a + b)(a − b) Sum and Difference of Two Terms To expand the sum and difference of two terms: † Square the first term and square the second term. Subtract the square of the second term from the square of the first term. ( a + b )( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 __________ * See problems 56 and 57 at the end of this section. † See problem 58.  || 
book1_ch04_7_2	Expanding (a + b)2 and (a − b)2 Squaring a Binomial To square a binomial: * Square the first term. Take the product of the two terms and double it. Square the last term. Add the three results together. Expanding (a + b)2 and (a − b)2 Squaring a Binomial To square a binomial: * Square the first term. Take the product of the two terms and double it. Square the last term. Add the three results together.  || 
book1_ch04_7_3	Expanding (a + b)(a − b) Sum and Difference of Two Terms To expand the sum and difference of two terms: † Square the first term and square the second term. Subtract the square of the second term from the square of the first term. ( a + b )( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 __________ * See problems 56 and 57 at the end of this section. † See problem 58. Expanding (a + b)(a − b) Sum and Difference of Two Terms To expand the sum and difference of two terms: † Square the first term and square the second term. Subtract the square of the second term from the square of the first term. ( a + b )( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 __________ * See problems 56 and 57 at the end of this section. † See problem 58.  || 
book1_ch04_8	 || Independent and Dependent Variables Independent and Dependent Variables In an equation, any variable whose value can be freely assigned is said to be an independent variable. Any variable whose value is determined once the other values have been assigned is said to be a dependent variable. Two examples will help illustrate these concepts. Consider the equation y = 2x − 7 . If we are free to choose values for x , then x would be considered the independent variable. Since the value of y depends on the value of x , y would be the dependent variable. Consider the equation m = − 4g k 2 . If we are free to choose values for both g and k , then g and k would be considered independent variables. Since the value of m depends on the values chosen for g and k , m would be the dependent variable.  || The Domain of an Equation Domain The process of replacing letters with numbers is called numerical evaluation. The collection of numbers that can replace the independent variable in an equation and yield a meaningful result is called the domain of the equation. The domain of an equation may be the entire collection of real numbers or may be restricted to some subcollection of the real numbers. The restrictions may be due to particular applications of the equation or to problems of computability.  || 
book1_ch04_8_2	Independent and Dependent Variables Independent and Dependent Variables In an equation, any variable whose value can be freely assigned is said to be an independent variable. Any variable whose value is determined once the other values have been assigned is said to be a dependent variable. Two examples will help illustrate these concepts. Consider the equation y = 2x − 7 . If we are free to choose values for x , then x would be considered the independent variable. Since the value of y depends on the value of x , y would be the dependent variable. Consider the equation m = − 4g k 2 . If we are free to choose values for both g and k , then g and k would be considered independent variables. Since the value of m depends on the values chosen for g and k , m would be the dependent variable. Independent and Dependent Variables Independent and Dependent Variables In an equation, any variable whose value can be freely assigned is said to be an independent variable. Any variable whose value is determined once the other values have been assigned is said to be a dependent variable. Two examples will help illustrate these concepts. Consider the equation y = 2x − 7 . If we are free to choose values for x , then x would be considered the independent variable. Since the value of y depends on the value of x , y would be the dependent variable. Consider the equation m = − 4g k 2 . If we are free to choose values for both g and k , then g and k would be considered independent variables. Since the value of m depends on the values chosen for g and k , m would be the dependent variable.  || 
book1_ch04_8_3	The Domain of an Equation Domain The process of replacing letters with numbers is called numerical evaluation. The collection of numbers that can replace the independent variable in an equation and yield a meaningful result is called the domain of the equation. The domain of an equation may be the entire collection of real numbers or may be restricted to some subcollection of the real numbers. The restrictions may be due to particular applications of the equation or to problems of computability. The Domain of an Equation Domain The process of replacing letters with numbers is called numerical evaluation. The collection of numbers that can replace the independent variable in an equation and yield a meaningful result is called the domain of the equation. The domain of an equation may be the entire collection of real numbers or may be restricted to some subcollection of the real numbers. The restrictions may be due to particular applications of the equation or to problems of computability.  || 
book1_ch07	 ||  || Graphs We have, thus far in our study of algebra, developed and used several methods for obtaining solutions to linear equations in both one and two variables. Quite often it is helpful to obtain a picture of the solutions to an equation. These pictures are called graphs and they can reveal information that may not be evident from the equation alone. The Graph of an Equation The geometric representation (picture) of the solutions to an equation is called the graph of the equation.  || Axes, Coordinate Systems, and Dimension Axis The basic structure of the graph is the axis. It is with respect to the axis that all solutions to an equation are located. The most fundamental type of axis is the number line. The Number Line is an Axis We have the following general rules regarding axes. Number of Variables and Number of Axes An equation in one variable requires one axis. An equation in two variables requires two axes. An equation in three variables requires three axes. ... An equation in n variables requires n axes. We shall always draw an axis as a straight line, and if more than one axis is required, we shall draw them so they are all mutually perpendicular (the lines forming the axes will be at 90° angles to one another). Coordinate System A system of axes constructed for graphing an equation is called a coordinate system. The Phrase, Graphing an Equation The phrase graphing an equation is used frequently and should be interpreted as meaning geometrically locating the solutions to an equation. Relating the Number of Variables and the Number of Axes We will not start actually graphing equations until Section Section 7.3, but in the following examples we will relate the number of variables in an equation to the number of axes in the coordinate system. 1. One-Dimensional Graphs: If we wish to graph the equation 5x + 2 = 17 , we would need to construct a coordinate system consisting of a single axis (a single number line) since the equation consists of only one variable. We label the axis with the variable that appears in the equation. We might interpret an equation in one variable as giving information in one-dimensional space. Since we live in three-dimensional space, one-dimensional space might be hard to imagine. Objects in one-dimensional space would have only length, no width or depth. 2. Two-Dimensional Graphs: To graph an equation in two variables such as y = 2x–3 , we would need to construct a coordinate system consisting of two mutually perpendicular number lines (axes). We call the intersection of the two axes the origin and label it with a 0. The two axes are simply number lines; one drawn horizontally, one drawn vertically. Recall that an equation in two variables requires a solution to be a pair of numbers. The solutions can be written as ordered pairs (x,y) . Since the equation y = 2x–3 involves the variables x and y , we label one axis x and the other axis y . In mathematics it is customary to label the horizontal axis with the independent variable and the vertical axis with the dependent variable. We might interpret equations in two variables as giving information in two-dimensional space. Objects in two-dimensional space would have length and width, but no depth. 3. Three-Dimensional Graphs: An equation in three variables, such as 3x 2 –4y 2 + 5z = 0 , requires three mutually perpendicular axes, one for each variable. We would construct the following coordinate system and graph. We might interpret equations in three variables as giving information about three-dimensional space. 4. Four-Dimensional Graphs: To graph an equation in four variables, such as 3x–2y + 8x–5w = –7 , would require four mutually perpendicular number lines. These graphs are left to the imagination. We might interpret equations in four variables as giving information in four-dimensional space. Four-dimensional objects would have length, width, depth, and some other dimension. Black Holes These other spaces are hard for us to imagine, but the existence of “black holes” makes the possibility of other universes of one-, two-, four-, or n-dimensions not entirely unlikely. Although it may be difficult for us “3-D” people to travel around in another dimensional space, at least we could be pretty sure that our mathematics would still work (since it is not restricted to only three dimensions)!  || Graphing in One Dimension Graphing a linear equation in one variable involves solving the equation, then locating the solution on the axis (number line), and marking a point at this location. We have observed that graphs may reveal information that may not be evident from the original equation. The graphs of linear equations in one variable do not yield much, if any, information, but they serve as a foundation to graphs of higher dimension (graphs of two variables and three variables).  ||  || The Plane Ordered Pairs We are now interested in studying graphs of linear equations in two variables. We know that solutions to equations in two variables consist of a pair of values, one value for each variable. We have called these pairs of values ordered pairs. Since we have a pair of values to graph, we must have a pair of axes (number lines) upon which the values can be located. Origin We draw the axes so they are perpendicular to each other and so that they intersect each other at their 0 ' s . This point is called the origin. Rectangular Coordinate System These two lines form what is called a rectangular coordinate system. They also determine a plane. x y-plane   A plane is a flat surface, and a result from geometry states that through any two intersecting lines (the axes) exactly one plane (flat surface) may be passed. If we are dealing with a linear equation in the two variables x and y , we sometimes say we are graphing the equation using a rectangular coordinate system, or that we are graphing the equation in the x y-plane . Quadrant Notice that the two intersecting coordinate axes divide the plane into four equal regions. Since there are four regions, we call each one a quadrant and number them counterclockwise using Roman numerals. Recall that when we first studied the number line we observed the following: For each real number there exists a unique point on the number line, and for each point on the number line we can associate a unique real number. We have a similar situation for the plane. For each ordered pair (a, b) , there exists a unique point in the plane, and to each point in the plane we can associate a unique ordered pair (a, b) of real numbers.  || Coordinates of a Point Coordinates of a Point The numbers in an ordered pair that are associated with a particular point are called the coordinates of the point. The first number in the ordered pair expresses the point’s horizontal distance and direction (left or right) from the origin. The second number expresses the point’s vertical distance and direction (up or down) from the origin. The Coordinates Determine Distance and Direction A positive number means a direction to the right or up. A negative number means a direction to the left or down.  || Plotting Points Since points and ordered pairs are so closely related, the two terms are sometimes used interchangeably. The following two phrases have the same meaning: Plot the point (a, b) . Plot the ordered pair (a, b) . Plotting a Point Both phrases mean: Locate, in the plane, the point associated with the ordered pair (a, b) and draw a mark at that position.  ||  || Solutions and Lines We know that solutions to linear equations in two variables can be expressed as ordered pairs. Hence, the solutions can be represented by point in the plane. We also know that the phrase “graph the equation” means to locate the solution to the given equation in the plane. Consider the equation y − 2x = − 3 . We’ll graph six solutions (ordered pairs) to this equation on the coordinates system below. We’ll find the solutions by choosing x-values (from − 1 to  + 4 ), substituting them into the equation y − 2x = − 3 , and then solving to obtain the corresponding y-values . We can keep track of the ordered pairs by using a table. y − 2x = − 3 Table 7.8. If x = Then y = Ordered Pairs − 1 − 5 ( − 1,  − 5 ) 0 − 3 ( 0,  − 3 ) 1 − 1 ( 1,  − 1 ) 2 1 ( 2, 1 ) 3 3 ( 3, 3 ) 4 5 ( 4, 5 ) We have plotted only six solutions to the equation y − 2x = − 3 . There are, as we know, infinitely many solutions. By observing the six points we have plotted, we can speculate as to the location of all the other points. The six points we plotted seem to lie on a straight line. This would lead us to believe that all the other points (solutions) also lie on that same line. Indeed, this is true. In fact, this is precisely why first-degree equations are called linear equations. Linear Equations Produce Straight Lines  || General Form of a Linear Equation General Form of a Linear Equation in Two Variables There is a standard form in which linear equations in two variables are written. Suppose that a , b , and c are any real numbers and that a and b cannot both be zero at the same time. Then, the linear equation in two variables a x + b y = c is said to be in general form. We must stipulate that a and b cannot both equal zero at the same time, for if they were we would have 0x + 0y = c 0 = c This statement is true only if c = 0 . If c were to be any other number, we would get a false statement. Now, we have the following: The graphing of all ordered pairs that solve a linear equation in two variables produces a straight line. This implies, The graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line. From these statements we can conclude, If an ordered pair is a solution to a linear equations in two variables, then it lies on the graph of the equation. Also, Any point (ordered pairs) that lies on the graph of a linear equation in two variables is a solution to that equation.  || The Intercept Method of Graphing When we want to graph a linear equation, it is certainly impractical to graph infinitely many points. Since a straight line is determined by only two points, we need only find two solutions to the equation (although a third point is helpful as a check). Intercepts When a linear equation in two variables is given in general from, a x + b y = c , often the two most convenient points (solutions) to fine are called the Intercepts: these are the points at which the line intercepts the coordinate axes. Of course, a horizontal or vertical line intercepts only one axis, so this method does not apply. Horizontal and vertical lines are easily recognized as they contain only one variable. (See Sample Set C .) y-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the y-axis is called the y-intercept . The x-value at this point is zero (since the point is neither to the left nor right of the origin). x-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the x-axis is called the x-intercept  and the y-value at that point is zero. The y-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for x into the equation and solving for y . The x-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for y into the equation and solving for x . Intercept Method Since we are graphing an equation by finding the intercepts, we call this method the intercept method  || Graphing Using any Two or More Points The graphs we have constructed so far have been done by finding two particular points, the intercepts. Actually, any two points will do. We chose to use the intercepts because they are usually the easiest to work with. In the next example, we will graph two equations using points other than the intercepts. We’ll use three points, the extra point serving as a check.  || Slanted, Horizontal, and Vertical Lines In all the graphs we have observed so far, the lines have been slanted. This will always be the case when both variables appear in the equation. If only one variable appears in the equation, then the line will be either vertical or horizontal. To see why, let’s consider a specific case: Using the general form of a line, a x + b y = c , we can produce an equation with exactly one variable by choosing a = 0 , b = 5 , and c = 15 . The equation a x + b y = c then becomes 0x + 5y = 15 Since 0⋅( any number ) = 0 , the term 0x is 0 for any number that is chosen for x . Thus, 0x + 5y = 15 becomes 0 + 5y = 15 But, 0 is the additive identity and 0 + 5y = 5y . 5y = 15 Then, solving for y we get y = 3 This is an equation in which exactly one variable appears. This means that regardless of which number we choose for x , the corresponding y-value is 3. Since the y-value is always the same as we move from left-to-right through the x-values , the height of the line above the x-axis is always the same (in this case, 3 units). This type of line must be horizontal. An argument similar to the one above will show that if the only variable that appears is x , we can expect to get a vertical line.  || Calculator Problems Exercise 7.4.33. (Go to Solution) 2.53x + 4.77y = 8.45 Exercise 7.4.34. 1.96x + 2.05y = 6.55 Exercise 7.4.35. (Go to Solution) 4.1x − 6.6y = 15.5 Exercise 7.4.36. 626.01x − 506.73y = 2443.50  ||  || The General Form of a Line We have seen that the general form of a linear equation in two variables is a x + b y = c (Section Section 7.4). When this equation is solved for y , the resulting form is called the slope-intercept form. Let's generate this new form. This equation is of the form y = m x + b if we replace with m and constant with b . (Note: The fact that we let is unfortunate and occurs beacuse of the letters we have chosen to use in the general form. The letter b occurs on both sides of the equal sign and may not represent the same value at all. This problem is one of the historical convention and, fortunately, does not occur very often.) The following examples illustrate this procedure. Example 7.15.  Solve 3x + 2y = 6 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, and b = 3 . Example 7.16.  Solve – 15x + 5y = 20 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, m = 3 and b = 4 . Example 7.17.  Solve 4x – y = 0 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, m = 4 and b = 0 . Notice that we can write y = 4x as y = 4x + 0 .  || The Slope-Intercept Form of a Line The Slope-Intercept Form of a Line y = m x + b A linear equation in two variables written in the form y = m x + b is said to be in slope-intercept form.  || Slope and Intercept When the equation of a line is written in slope-intercept form, two important properties of the line can be seen: the slope and the intercept. Let's look at these two properties by graphing several lines and observing them carefully.  || The Formula for the Slope of a Line We have observed that the slope is a measure of the steepness of a line. We wish to develop a formula for measuring this steepness. It seems reasonable to develop a slope formula that produces the following results: Steepness of line 1 > steepness of line 2. Consider a line on which we select any two points. We’ll denote these points with the ordered pairs (x 1,  y 1  ) and (x 2,  y 2  ) . The subscripts help us to identify the points. (x 1,  y 1  ) is the first point. Subscript 1 indicates the first point. (x 2,  y 2  ) is the second point. Subscript 2 indicates the second point. The difference in x values (x 2 − x 1 ) gives us the horizontal change, and the difference in y values (y 2 − y 1 ) gives us the vertical change. If the line is very steep, then when going from the first point to the second point, we would expect a large vertical change compared to the horizontal change. If the line is not very steep, then when going from the first point to the second point, we would expect a small vertical change compared to the horizontal change. We are comparing changes. We see that we are comparing This is a comparison and is therefore a ratio. Ratios can be expressed as fractions. Thus, a measure of the steepness of a line can be expressed as a ratio. The slope of a line is defined as the ratio Mathematically, we can write these changes as Finding the Slope of a Line The slope of a nonvertical line passing through the points (x 1,  y 1  ) and (x 2,  y 2  ) is found by the formula  || Calculator Problems For the following problems, determine the slope and y-intercept of the lines. Round to two decimal places. Exercise 7.5.73. (Go to Solution) 3.8x + 12.1y = 4.26 Exercise 7.5.74. 8.09x + 5.57y = − 1.42 Exercise 7.5.75. (Go to Solution) 10.813x − 17.0y = − 45.99 Exercise 7.5.76. − 6.003x − 92.388y = 0.008 For the following problems, find the slope of the line through the pairs of points. Round to two decimal places. Exercise 7.5.77. (Go to Solution) (5.56, 9.37), (2.16, 4.90) Exercise 7.5.78. (33.1, 8.9), (42.7,  − 1.06) Exercise 7.5.79. (Go to Solution) (155.89, 227.61), (157.04,227.61) Exercise 7.5.80. (0.00426,  − 0.00404), ( − 0.00191,  − 0.00404) Exercise 7.5.81. (Go to Solution) (88.81,  − 23.19), (88.81,  − 26.87) Exercise 7.5.82. ( − 0.0000567,  − 0.0000567), ( − 0.00765, 0.00764)  ||  || Using the Slope and Intercept to Graph a Line When a linear equation is given in the general form, a x + b y = c , we observed that an efficient graphical approach was the intercept method. We let x = 0 and computed the corresponding value of y , then let y = 0 and computed the corresponding value of x . When an equation is written in the slope-intercept form, y = m x + b , there are also efficient ways of constructing the graph. One way, but less efficient, is to choose two or three x-values and compute to find the corresponding y-values . However, computations are tedious, time consuming, and can lead to errors. Another way, the method listed below, makes use of the slope and the y-intercept for graphing the line. It is quick, simple, and involves no computations. Graphing Method Plot the y-intercept (0, b) . Determine another point by using the slope m . Draw a line through the two points. Recall that we defined the slope m as the ratio . The numerator y 2 − y 1 represents the number of units that y changes and the denominator x 2 − x 1 represents the number of units that x changes. Suppose . Then p is the number of units that y changes and q is the number of units that x changes. Since these changes occur simultaneously, start with your pencil at the y-intercept , move p units in the appropriate vertical direction, and then move q units in the appropriate horizontal direction. Mark a point at this location.  || Excersise for Review Exercise 7.6.21. (Go to Solution) (Section 5.7) Solve the inequality 2 − 4x ≥ x − 3 . Exercise 7.6.22. (Section 7.2) Graph the inequality y + 3 > 1 . Exercise 7.6.23. (Go to Solution) (Section 7.4) Graph the equation y = − 2 . Exercise 7.6.24. (Section 7.5) Determine the slope and y-intercept of the line − 4y − 3x = 16 . Exercise 7.6.25. (Go to Solution) (Section 7.5) Find the slope of the line passing through the points ( − 1, 5) and (2, 3) .  ||  || The Slope-Intercept and Point-Slope Forms In the pervious sections we have been given an equation and have constructed the line to which it corresponds. Now, however, suppose we're given some geometric information about the line and we wish to construct the corresponding equation. We wish to find the equation of a line. We know that the formula for the slope of a line is We can find the equation of a line using the slope formula in either of two ways: Example 7.40.  If we’re given the slope, m , and any point (x, y 1 ) on the line, we can substitute this information into the formula for slope.Let (x, y 1 ) be the known point on the line and let (x,y) be any other point on the line. Then Since this equation was derived using a point and the slope of a line, it is called the point-slope form of a line. Example 7.41.  If we are given the slope, m , y-intercept, (0,b) , we can substitute this information into the formula for slope.Let (0,b) be the y-intercept and (x,y) be any other point on the line. Then, Since this equation was derived using the slope and the intercept, it was called the slope-intercept form of a line. We summarize these two derivations as follows. Forms of the Equation of a Line We can find the equation of a line if we’re given either of the following sets of information: The slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0,b), by substituting these values into This is the slope-intercept form. The slope, m, and any point, (x 1 ,y 1 ), by substituting these values into This is the point-slope form. Notice that both forms rely on knowing the slope. If we are given two points on the line we may still find the equation of the line passing through them by first finding the slope of the line, then using the point-slope form. It is customary to use either the slope-intercept form or the general form for the final form of the line. We will use the slope-intercept form as the final form.  ||  || Location of Solutions In our study of linear equations in two variables, we observed that all the solutions to the equation, and only the solutions to the equation, were located on the graph of the equation. We now wish to determine the location of the solutions to linear inequalities in two variables. Linear inequalities in two variables are inequalities of the forms: Half-Planes A straight line drawn through the plane divides the plane into two half-planes. Boundary Line The straight line is called the boundary line. Solution to an Inequality in Two Variables Recall that when working with linear equations in two variables, we observed that ordered pairs that produced true statements when substituted into an equation were called solutions to that equation. We can make a similar statement for inequalities in two variables. We say that an inequality in two variables has a solution when a pair of values has been found such that when these values are substituted into the inequality a true statement results. The Location of Solutions in the Plane As with equations, solutions to linear inequalities have particular locations in the plane. All solutions to a linear inequality in two variables are located in one and only in one entire half-plane. For example, consider the inequality 2x + 3y ≤ 6 All the solutions to the inequality 2x + 3y ≤ 6 lie in the shaded half-plane. Example 7.51.  Point A(1,  − 1) is a solution since Example 7.52.  Point B(2, 5) is not a solution since  || Method of Graphing The method of graphing linear inequalities in two variables is as follows: Graph the boundary line (consider the inequality as an equation, that is, replace the inequality sign with an equal sign). If the inequality is ≤ or ≥ , draw the boundary line solid. This means that points on the line are solutions and are part of the graph. If the inequality is < or > , draw the boundary line dotted. This means that points on the line are not solutions and are not part of the graph. Determine which half-plane to shade by choosing a test point. If, when substituted, the test point yields a true statement, shade the half-plane containing it. If, when substituted, the test point yields a false statement, shade the half-plane on the opposite side of the boundary line.  || 
book1_ch07_2	 || Graphs We have, thus far in our study of algebra, developed and used several methods for obtaining solutions to linear equations in both one and two variables. Quite often it is helpful to obtain a picture of the solutions to an equation. These pictures are called graphs and they can reveal information that may not be evident from the equation alone. The Graph of an Equation The geometric representation (picture) of the solutions to an equation is called the graph of the equation.  || Axes, Coordinate Systems, and Dimension Axis The basic structure of the graph is the axis. It is with respect to the axis that all solutions to an equation are located. The most fundamental type of axis is the number line. The Number Line is an Axis We have the following general rules regarding axes. Number of Variables and Number of Axes An equation in one variable requires one axis. An equation in two variables requires two axes. An equation in three variables requires three axes. ... An equation in n variables requires n axes. We shall always draw an axis as a straight line, and if more than one axis is required, we shall draw them so they are all mutually perpendicular (the lines forming the axes will be at 90° angles to one another). Coordinate System A system of axes constructed for graphing an equation is called a coordinate system. The Phrase, Graphing an Equation The phrase graphing an equation is used frequently and should be interpreted as meaning geometrically locating the solutions to an equation. Relating the Number of Variables and the Number of Axes We will not start actually graphing equations until Section Section 7.3, but in the following examples we will relate the number of variables in an equation to the number of axes in the coordinate system. 1. One-Dimensional Graphs: If we wish to graph the equation 5x + 2 = 17 , we would need to construct a coordinate system consisting of a single axis (a single number line) since the equation consists of only one variable. We label the axis with the variable that appears in the equation. We might interpret an equation in one variable as giving information in one-dimensional space. Since we live in three-dimensional space, one-dimensional space might be hard to imagine. Objects in one-dimensional space would have only length, no width or depth. 2. Two-Dimensional Graphs: To graph an equation in two variables such as y = 2x–3 , we would need to construct a coordinate system consisting of two mutually perpendicular number lines (axes). We call the intersection of the two axes the origin and label it with a 0. The two axes are simply number lines; one drawn horizontally, one drawn vertically. Recall that an equation in two variables requires a solution to be a pair of numbers. The solutions can be written as ordered pairs (x,y) . Since the equation y = 2x–3 involves the variables x and y , we label one axis x and the other axis y . In mathematics it is customary to label the horizontal axis with the independent variable and the vertical axis with the dependent variable. We might interpret equations in two variables as giving information in two-dimensional space. Objects in two-dimensional space would have length and width, but no depth. 3. Three-Dimensional Graphs: An equation in three variables, such as 3x 2 –4y 2 + 5z = 0 , requires three mutually perpendicular axes, one for each variable. We would construct the following coordinate system and graph. We might interpret equations in three variables as giving information about three-dimensional space. 4. Four-Dimensional Graphs: To graph an equation in four variables, such as 3x–2y + 8x–5w = –7 , would require four mutually perpendicular number lines. These graphs are left to the imagination. We might interpret equations in four variables as giving information in four-dimensional space. Four-dimensional objects would have length, width, depth, and some other dimension. Black Holes These other spaces are hard for us to imagine, but the existence of “black holes” makes the possibility of other universes of one-, two-, four-, or n-dimensions not entirely unlikely. Although it may be difficult for us “3-D” people to travel around in another dimensional space, at least we could be pretty sure that our mathematics would still work (since it is not restricted to only three dimensions)!  || Graphing in One Dimension Graphing a linear equation in one variable involves solving the equation, then locating the solution on the axis (number line), and marking a point at this location. We have observed that graphs may reveal information that may not be evident from the original equation. The graphs of linear equations in one variable do not yield much, if any, information, but they serve as a foundation to graphs of higher dimension (graphs of two variables and three variables).  || 
book1_ch07_2_2	Graphs We have, thus far in our study of algebra, developed and used several methods for obtaining solutions to linear equations in both one and two variables. Quite often it is helpful to obtain a picture of the solutions to an equation. These pictures are called graphs and they can reveal information that may not be evident from the equation alone. The Graph of an Equation The geometric representation (picture) of the solutions to an equation is called the graph of the equation. Graphs We have, thus far in our study of algebra, developed and used several methods for obtaining solutions to linear equations in both one and two variables. Quite often it is helpful to obtain a picture of the solutions to an equation. These pictures are called graphs and they can reveal information that may not be evident from the equation alone. The Graph of an Equation The geometric representation (picture) of the solutions to an equation is called the graph of the equation.  || 
book1_ch07_2_3	Axes, Coordinate Systems, and Dimension Axis The basic structure of the graph is the axis. It is with respect to the axis that all solutions to an equation are located. The most fundamental type of axis is the number line. The Number Line is an Axis We have the following general rules regarding axes. Number of Variables and Number of Axes An equation in one variable requires one axis. An equation in two variables requires two axes. An equation in three variables requires three axes. ... An equation in n variables requires n axes. We shall always draw an axis as a straight line, and if more than one axis is required, we shall draw them so they are all mutually perpendicular (the lines forming the axes will be at 90° angles to one another). Coordinate System A system of axes constructed for graphing an equation is called a coordinate system. The Phrase, Graphing an Equation The phrase graphing an equation is used frequently and should be interpreted as meaning geometrically locating the solutions to an equation. Relating the Number of Variables and the Number of Axes We will not start actually graphing equations until Section Section 7.3, but in the following examples we will relate the number of variables in an equation to the number of axes in the coordinate system. 1. One-Dimensional Graphs: If we wish to graph the equation 5x + 2 = 17 , we would need to construct a coordinate system consisting of a single axis (a single number line) since the equation consists of only one variable. We label the axis with the variable that appears in the equation. We might interpret an equation in one variable as giving information in one-dimensional space. Since we live in three-dimensional space, one-dimensional space might be hard to imagine. Objects in one-dimensional space would have only length, no width or depth. 2. Two-Dimensional Graphs: To graph an equation in two variables such as y = 2x–3 , we would need to construct a coordinate system consisting of two mutually perpendicular number lines (axes). We call the intersection of the two axes the origin and label it with a 0. The two axes are simply number lines; one drawn horizontally, one drawn vertically. Recall that an equation in two variables requires a solution to be a pair of numbers. The solutions can be written as ordered pairs (x,y) . Since the equation y = 2x–3 involves the variables x and y , we label one axis x and the other axis y . In mathematics it is customary to label the horizontal axis with the independent variable and the vertical axis with the dependent variable. We might interpret equations in two variables as giving information in two-dimensional space. Objects in two-dimensional space would have length and width, but no depth. 3. Three-Dimensional Graphs: An equation in three variables, such as 3x 2 –4y 2 + 5z = 0 , requires three mutually perpendicular axes, one for each variable. We would construct the following coordinate system and graph. We might interpret equations in three variables as giving information about three-dimensional space. 4. Four-Dimensional Graphs: To graph an equation in four variables, such as 3x–2y + 8x–5w = –7 , would require four mutually perpendicular number lines. These graphs are left to the imagination. We might interpret equations in four variables as giving information in four-dimensional space. Four-dimensional objects would have length, width, depth, and some other dimension. Black Holes These other spaces are hard for us to imagine, but the existence of “black holes” makes the possibility of other universes of one-, two-, four-, or n-dimensions not entirely unlikely. Although it may be difficult for us “3-D” people to travel around in another dimensional space, at least we could be pretty sure that our mathematics would still work (since it is not restricted to only three dimensions)! Axes, Coordinate Systems, and Dimension Axis The basic structure of the graph is the axis. It is with respect to the axis that all solutions to an equation are located. The most fundamental type of axis is the number line. The Number Line is an Axis We have the following general rules regarding axes. Number of Variables and Number of Axes An equation in one variable requires one axis. An equation in two variables requires two axes. An equation in three variables requires three axes. ... An equation in n variables requires n axes. We shall always draw an axis as a straight line, and if more than one axis is required, we shall draw them so they are all mutually perpendicular (the lines forming the axes will be at 90° angles to one another). Coordinate System A system of axes constructed for graphing an equation is called a coordinate system. The Phrase, Graphing an Equation The phrase graphing an equation is used frequently and should be interpreted as meaning geometrically locating the solutions to an equation. Relating the Number of Variables and the Number of Axes We will not start actually graphing equations until Section Section 7.3, but in the following examples we will relate the number of variables in an equation to the number of axes in the coordinate system. 1. One-Dimensional Graphs: If we wish to graph the equation 5x + 2 = 17 , we would need to construct a coordinate system consisting of a single axis (a single number line) since the equation consists of only one variable. We label the axis with the variable that appears in the equation. We might interpret an equation in one variable as giving information in one-dimensional space. Since we live in three-dimensional space, one-dimensional space might be hard to imagine. Objects in one-dimensional space would have only length, no width or depth. 2. Two-Dimensional Graphs: To graph an equation in two variables such as y = 2x–3 , we would need to construct a coordinate system consisting of two mutually perpendicular number lines (axes). We call the intersection of the two axes the origin and label it with a 0. The two axes are simply number lines; one drawn horizontally, one drawn vertically. Recall that an equation in two variables requires a solution to be a pair of numbers. The solutions can be written as ordered pairs (x,y) . Since the equation y = 2x–3 involves the variables x and y , we label one axis x and the other axis y . In mathematics it is customary to label the horizontal axis with the independent variable and the vertical axis with the dependent variable. We might interpret equations in two variables as giving information in two-dimensional space. Objects in two-dimensional space would have length and width, but no depth. 3. Three-Dimensional Graphs: An equation in three variables, such as 3x 2 –4y 2 + 5z = 0 , requires three mutually perpendicular axes, one for each variable. We would construct the following coordinate system and graph. We might interpret equations in three variables as giving information about three-dimensional space. 4. Four-Dimensional Graphs: To graph an equation in four variables, such as 3x–2y + 8x–5w = –7 , would require four mutually perpendicular number lines. These graphs are left to the imagination. We might interpret equations in four variables as giving information in four-dimensional space. Four-dimensional objects would have length, width, depth, and some other dimension. Black Holes These other spaces are hard for us to imagine, but the existence of “black holes” makes the possibility of other universes of one-, two-, four-, or n-dimensions not entirely unlikely. Although it may be difficult for us “3-D” people to travel around in another dimensional space, at least we could be pretty sure that our mathematics would still work (since it is not restricted to only three dimensions)!  || 
book1_ch07_2_4	Graphing in One Dimension Graphing a linear equation in one variable involves solving the equation, then locating the solution on the axis (number line), and marking a point at this location. We have observed that graphs may reveal information that may not be evident from the original equation. The graphs of linear equations in one variable do not yield much, if any, information, but they serve as a foundation to graphs of higher dimension (graphs of two variables and three variables). Graphing in One Dimension Graphing a linear equation in one variable involves solving the equation, then locating the solution on the axis (number line), and marking a point at this location. We have observed that graphs may reveal information that may not be evident from the original equation. The graphs of linear equations in one variable do not yield much, if any, information, but they serve as a foundation to graphs of higher dimension (graphs of two variables and three variables).  || 
book1_ch07_3	 || The Plane Ordered Pairs We are now interested in studying graphs of linear equations in two variables. We know that solutions to equations in two variables consist of a pair of values, one value for each variable. We have called these pairs of values ordered pairs. Since we have a pair of values to graph, we must have a pair of axes (number lines) upon which the values can be located. Origin We draw the axes so they are perpendicular to each other and so that they intersect each other at their 0 ' s . This point is called the origin. Rectangular Coordinate System These two lines form what is called a rectangular coordinate system. They also determine a plane. x y-plane   A plane is a flat surface, and a result from geometry states that through any two intersecting lines (the axes) exactly one plane (flat surface) may be passed. If we are dealing with a linear equation in the two variables x and y , we sometimes say we are graphing the equation using a rectangular coordinate system, or that we are graphing the equation in the x y-plane . Quadrant Notice that the two intersecting coordinate axes divide the plane into four equal regions. Since there are four regions, we call each one a quadrant and number them counterclockwise using Roman numerals. Recall that when we first studied the number line we observed the following: For each real number there exists a unique point on the number line, and for each point on the number line we can associate a unique real number. We have a similar situation for the plane. For each ordered pair (a, b) , there exists a unique point in the plane, and to each point in the plane we can associate a unique ordered pair (a, b) of real numbers.  || Coordinates of a Point Coordinates of a Point The numbers in an ordered pair that are associated with a particular point are called the coordinates of the point. The first number in the ordered pair expresses the point’s horizontal distance and direction (left or right) from the origin. The second number expresses the point’s vertical distance and direction (up or down) from the origin. The Coordinates Determine Distance and Direction A positive number means a direction to the right or up. A negative number means a direction to the left or down.  || Plotting Points Since points and ordered pairs are so closely related, the two terms are sometimes used interchangeably. The following two phrases have the same meaning: Plot the point (a, b) . Plot the ordered pair (a, b) . Plotting a Point Both phrases mean: Locate, in the plane, the point associated with the ordered pair (a, b) and draw a mark at that position.  || 
book1_ch07_3_2	The Plane Ordered Pairs We are now interested in studying graphs of linear equations in two variables. We know that solutions to equations in two variables consist of a pair of values, one value for each variable. We have called these pairs of values ordered pairs. Since we have a pair of values to graph, we must have a pair of axes (number lines) upon which the values can be located. Origin We draw the axes so they are perpendicular to each other and so that they intersect each other at their 0 ' s . This point is called the origin. Rectangular Coordinate System These two lines form what is called a rectangular coordinate system. They also determine a plane. x y-plane   A plane is a flat surface, and a result from geometry states that through any two intersecting lines (the axes) exactly one plane (flat surface) may be passed. If we are dealing with a linear equation in the two variables x and y , we sometimes say we are graphing the equation using a rectangular coordinate system, or that we are graphing the equation in the x y-plane . Quadrant Notice that the two intersecting coordinate axes divide the plane into four equal regions. Since there are four regions, we call each one a quadrant and number them counterclockwise using Roman numerals. Recall that when we first studied the number line we observed the following: For each real number there exists a unique point on the number line, and for each point on the number line we can associate a unique real number. We have a similar situation for the plane. For each ordered pair (a, b) , there exists a unique point in the plane, and to each point in the plane we can associate a unique ordered pair (a, b) of real numbers. The Plane Ordered Pairs We are now interested in studying graphs of linear equations in two variables. We know that solutions to equations in two variables consist of a pair of values, one value for each variable. We have called these pairs of values ordered pairs. Since we have a pair of values to graph, we must have a pair of axes (number lines) upon which the values can be located. Origin We draw the axes so they are perpendicular to each other and so that they intersect each other at their 0 ' s . This point is called the origin. Rectangular Coordinate System These two lines form what is called a rectangular coordinate system. They also determine a plane. x y-plane   A plane is a flat surface, and a result from geometry states that through any two intersecting lines (the axes) exactly one plane (flat surface) may be passed. If we are dealing with a linear equation in the two variables x and y , we sometimes say we are graphing the equation using a rectangular coordinate system, or that we are graphing the equation in the x y-plane . Quadrant Notice that the two intersecting coordinate axes divide the plane into four equal regions. Since there are four regions, we call each one a quadrant and number them counterclockwise using Roman numerals. Recall that when we first studied the number line we observed the following: For each real number there exists a unique point on the number line, and for each point on the number line we can associate a unique real number. We have a similar situation for the plane. For each ordered pair (a, b) , there exists a unique point in the plane, and to each point in the plane we can associate a unique ordered pair (a, b) of real numbers.  || 
book1_ch07_3_3	Coordinates of a Point Coordinates of a Point The numbers in an ordered pair that are associated with a particular point are called the coordinates of the point. The first number in the ordered pair expresses the point’s horizontal distance and direction (left or right) from the origin. The second number expresses the point’s vertical distance and direction (up or down) from the origin. The Coordinates Determine Distance and Direction A positive number means a direction to the right or up. A negative number means a direction to the left or down. Coordinates of a Point Coordinates of a Point The numbers in an ordered pair that are associated with a particular point are called the coordinates of the point. The first number in the ordered pair expresses the point’s horizontal distance and direction (left or right) from the origin. The second number expresses the point’s vertical distance and direction (up or down) from the origin. The Coordinates Determine Distance and Direction A positive number means a direction to the right or up. A negative number means a direction to the left or down.  || 
book1_ch07_3_4	Plotting Points Since points and ordered pairs are so closely related, the two terms are sometimes used interchangeably. The following two phrases have the same meaning: Plot the point (a, b) . Plot the ordered pair (a, b) . Plotting a Point Both phrases mean: Locate, in the plane, the point associated with the ordered pair (a, b) and draw a mark at that position. Plotting Points Since points and ordered pairs are so closely related, the two terms are sometimes used interchangeably. The following two phrases have the same meaning: Plot the point (a, b) . Plot the ordered pair (a, b) . Plotting a Point Both phrases mean: Locate, in the plane, the point associated with the ordered pair (a, b) and draw a mark at that position.  || 
book1_ch07_4	 || Solutions and Lines We know that solutions to linear equations in two variables can be expressed as ordered pairs. Hence, the solutions can be represented by point in the plane. We also know that the phrase “graph the equation” means to locate the solution to the given equation in the plane. Consider the equation y − 2x = − 3 . We’ll graph six solutions (ordered pairs) to this equation on the coordinates system below. We’ll find the solutions by choosing x-values (from − 1 to  + 4 ), substituting them into the equation y − 2x = − 3 , and then solving to obtain the corresponding y-values . We can keep track of the ordered pairs by using a table. y − 2x = − 3 Table 7.8. If x = Then y = Ordered Pairs − 1 − 5 ( − 1,  − 5 ) 0 − 3 ( 0,  − 3 ) 1 − 1 ( 1,  − 1 ) 2 1 ( 2, 1 ) 3 3 ( 3, 3 ) 4 5 ( 4, 5 ) We have plotted only six solutions to the equation y − 2x = − 3 . There are, as we know, infinitely many solutions. By observing the six points we have plotted, we can speculate as to the location of all the other points. The six points we plotted seem to lie on a straight line. This would lead us to believe that all the other points (solutions) also lie on that same line. Indeed, this is true. In fact, this is precisely why first-degree equations are called linear equations. Linear Equations Produce Straight Lines  || General Form of a Linear Equation General Form of a Linear Equation in Two Variables There is a standard form in which linear equations in two variables are written. Suppose that a , b , and c are any real numbers and that a and b cannot both be zero at the same time. Then, the linear equation in two variables a x + b y = c is said to be in general form. We must stipulate that a and b cannot both equal zero at the same time, for if they were we would have 0x + 0y = c 0 = c This statement is true only if c = 0 . If c were to be any other number, we would get a false statement. Now, we have the following: The graphing of all ordered pairs that solve a linear equation in two variables produces a straight line. This implies, The graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line. From these statements we can conclude, If an ordered pair is a solution to a linear equations in two variables, then it lies on the graph of the equation. Also, Any point (ordered pairs) that lies on the graph of a linear equation in two variables is a solution to that equation.  || The Intercept Method of Graphing When we want to graph a linear equation, it is certainly impractical to graph infinitely many points. Since a straight line is determined by only two points, we need only find two solutions to the equation (although a third point is helpful as a check). Intercepts When a linear equation in two variables is given in general from, a x + b y = c , often the two most convenient points (solutions) to fine are called the Intercepts: these are the points at which the line intercepts the coordinate axes. Of course, a horizontal or vertical line intercepts only one axis, so this method does not apply. Horizontal and vertical lines are easily recognized as they contain only one variable. (See Sample Set C .) y-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the y-axis is called the y-intercept . The x-value at this point is zero (since the point is neither to the left nor right of the origin). x-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the x-axis is called the x-intercept  and the y-value at that point is zero. The y-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for x into the equation and solving for y . The x-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for y into the equation and solving for x . Intercept Method Since we are graphing an equation by finding the intercepts, we call this method the intercept method  || Graphing Using any Two or More Points The graphs we have constructed so far have been done by finding two particular points, the intercepts. Actually, any two points will do. We chose to use the intercepts because they are usually the easiest to work with. In the next example, we will graph two equations using points other than the intercepts. We’ll use three points, the extra point serving as a check.  || Slanted, Horizontal, and Vertical Lines In all the graphs we have observed so far, the lines have been slanted. This will always be the case when both variables appear in the equation. If only one variable appears in the equation, then the line will be either vertical or horizontal. To see why, let’s consider a specific case: Using the general form of a line, a x + b y = c , we can produce an equation with exactly one variable by choosing a = 0 , b = 5 , and c = 15 . The equation a x + b y = c then becomes 0x + 5y = 15 Since 0⋅( any number ) = 0 , the term 0x is 0 for any number that is chosen for x . Thus, 0x + 5y = 15 becomes 0 + 5y = 15 But, 0 is the additive identity and 0 + 5y = 5y . 5y = 15 Then, solving for y we get y = 3 This is an equation in which exactly one variable appears. This means that regardless of which number we choose for x , the corresponding y-value is 3. Since the y-value is always the same as we move from left-to-right through the x-values , the height of the line above the x-axis is always the same (in this case, 3 units). This type of line must be horizontal. An argument similar to the one above will show that if the only variable that appears is x , we can expect to get a vertical line.  || Calculator Problems Exercise 7.4.33. (Go to Solution) 2.53x + 4.77y = 8.45 Exercise 7.4.34. 1.96x + 2.05y = 6.55 Exercise 7.4.35. (Go to Solution) 4.1x − 6.6y = 15.5 Exercise 7.4.36. 626.01x − 506.73y = 2443.50  || 
book1_ch07_4_2	Solutions and Lines We know that solutions to linear equations in two variables can be expressed as ordered pairs. Hence, the solutions can be represented by point in the plane. We also know that the phrase “graph the equation” means to locate the solution to the given equation in the plane. Consider the equation y − 2x = − 3 . We’ll graph six solutions (ordered pairs) to this equation on the coordinates system below. We’ll find the solutions by choosing x-values (from − 1 to  + 4 ), substituting them into the equation y − 2x = − 3 , and then solving to obtain the corresponding y-values . We can keep track of the ordered pairs by using a table. y − 2x = − 3 Table 7.8. If x = Then y = Ordered Pairs − 1 − 5 ( − 1,  − 5 ) 0 − 3 ( 0,  − 3 ) 1 − 1 ( 1,  − 1 ) 2 1 ( 2, 1 ) 3 3 ( 3, 3 ) 4 5 ( 4, 5 ) We have plotted only six solutions to the equation y − 2x = − 3 . There are, as we know, infinitely many solutions. By observing the six points we have plotted, we can speculate as to the location of all the other points. The six points we plotted seem to lie on a straight line. This would lead us to believe that all the other points (solutions) also lie on that same line. Indeed, this is true. In fact, this is precisely why first-degree equations are called linear equations. Linear Equations Produce Straight Lines Solutions and Lines We know that solutions to linear equations in two variables can be expressed as ordered pairs. Hence, the solutions can be represented by point in the plane. We also know that the phrase “graph the equation” means to locate the solution to the given equation in the plane. Consider the equation y − 2x = − 3 . We’ll graph six solutions (ordered pairs) to this equation on the coordinates system below. We’ll find the solutions by choosing x-values (from − 1 to  + 4 ), substituting them into the equation y − 2x = − 3 , and then solving to obtain the corresponding y-values . We can keep track of the ordered pairs by using a table. y − 2x = − 3 Table 7.8. If x = Then y = Ordered Pairs − 1 − 5 ( − 1,  − 5 ) 0 − 3 ( 0,  − 3 ) 1 − 1 ( 1,  − 1 ) 2 1 ( 2, 1 ) 3 3 ( 3, 3 ) 4 5 ( 4, 5 ) We have plotted only six solutions to the equation y − 2x = − 3 . There are, as we know, infinitely many solutions. By observing the six points we have plotted, we can speculate as to the location of all the other points. The six points we plotted seem to lie on a straight line. This would lead us to believe that all the other points (solutions) also lie on that same line. Indeed, this is true. In fact, this is precisely why first-degree equations are called linear equations. Linear Equations Produce Straight Lines  || 
book1_ch07_4_3	General Form of a Linear Equation General Form of a Linear Equation in Two Variables There is a standard form in which linear equations in two variables are written. Suppose that a , b , and c are any real numbers and that a and b cannot both be zero at the same time. Then, the linear equation in two variables a x + b y = c is said to be in general form. We must stipulate that a and b cannot both equal zero at the same time, for if they were we would have 0x + 0y = c 0 = c This statement is true only if c = 0 . If c were to be any other number, we would get a false statement. Now, we have the following: The graphing of all ordered pairs that solve a linear equation in two variables produces a straight line. This implies, The graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line. From these statements we can conclude, If an ordered pair is a solution to a linear equations in two variables, then it lies on the graph of the equation. Also, Any point (ordered pairs) that lies on the graph of a linear equation in two variables is a solution to that equation. General Form of a Linear Equation General Form of a Linear Equation in Two Variables There is a standard form in which linear equations in two variables are written. Suppose that a , b , and c are any real numbers and that a and b cannot both be zero at the same time. Then, the linear equation in two variables a x + b y = c is said to be in general form. We must stipulate that a and b cannot both equal zero at the same time, for if they were we would have 0x + 0y = c 0 = c This statement is true only if c = 0 . If c were to be any other number, we would get a false statement. Now, we have the following: The graphing of all ordered pairs that solve a linear equation in two variables produces a straight line. This implies, The graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line. From these statements we can conclude, If an ordered pair is a solution to a linear equations in two variables, then it lies on the graph of the equation. Also, Any point (ordered pairs) that lies on the graph of a linear equation in two variables is a solution to that equation.  || 
book1_ch07_4_4	The Intercept Method of Graphing When we want to graph a linear equation, it is certainly impractical to graph infinitely many points. Since a straight line is determined by only two points, we need only find two solutions to the equation (although a third point is helpful as a check). Intercepts When a linear equation in two variables is given in general from, a x + b y = c , often the two most convenient points (solutions) to fine are called the Intercepts: these are the points at which the line intercepts the coordinate axes. Of course, a horizontal or vertical line intercepts only one axis, so this method does not apply. Horizontal and vertical lines are easily recognized as they contain only one variable. (See Sample Set C .) y-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the y-axis is called the y-intercept . The x-value at this point is zero (since the point is neither to the left nor right of the origin). x-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the x-axis is called the x-intercept  and the y-value at that point is zero. The y-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for x into the equation and solving for y . The x-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for y into the equation and solving for x . Intercept Method Since we are graphing an equation by finding the intercepts, we call this method the intercept method The Intercept Method of Graphing When we want to graph a linear equation, it is certainly impractical to graph infinitely many points. Since a straight line is determined by only two points, we need only find two solutions to the equation (although a third point is helpful as a check). Intercepts When a linear equation in two variables is given in general from, a x + b y = c , often the two most convenient points (solutions) to fine are called the Intercepts: these are the points at which the line intercepts the coordinate axes. Of course, a horizontal or vertical line intercepts only one axis, so this method does not apply. Horizontal and vertical lines are easily recognized as they contain only one variable. (See Sample Set C .) y-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the y-axis is called the y-intercept . The x-value at this point is zero (since the point is neither to the left nor right of the origin). x-Intercept  The point at which the line crosses the x-axis is called the x-intercept  and the y-value at that point is zero. The y-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for x into the equation and solving for y . The x-intercept can be found by substituting the value 0 for y into the equation and solving for x . Intercept Method Since we are graphing an equation by finding the intercepts, we call this method the intercept method  || 
book1_ch07_4_7	Graphing Using any Two or More Points The graphs we have constructed so far have been done by finding two particular points, the intercepts. Actually, any two points will do. We chose to use the intercepts because they are usually the easiest to work with. In the next example, we will graph two equations using points other than the intercepts. We’ll use three points, the extra point serving as a check. Graphing Using any Two or More Points The graphs we have constructed so far have been done by finding two particular points, the intercepts. Actually, any two points will do. We chose to use the intercepts because they are usually the easiest to work with. In the next example, we will graph two equations using points other than the intercepts. We’ll use three points, the extra point serving as a check.  || 
book1_ch07_4_10	Slanted, Horizontal, and Vertical Lines In all the graphs we have observed so far, the lines have been slanted. This will always be the case when both variables appear in the equation. If only one variable appears in the equation, then the line will be either vertical or horizontal. To see why, let’s consider a specific case: Using the general form of a line, a x + b y = c , we can produce an equation with exactly one variable by choosing a = 0 , b = 5 , and c = 15 . The equation a x + b y = c then becomes 0x + 5y = 15 Since 0⋅( any number ) = 0 , the term 0x is 0 for any number that is chosen for x . Thus, 0x + 5y = 15 becomes 0 + 5y = 15 But, 0 is the additive identity and 0 + 5y = 5y . 5y = 15 Then, solving for y we get y = 3 This is an equation in which exactly one variable appears. This means that regardless of which number we choose for x , the corresponding y-value is 3. Since the y-value is always the same as we move from left-to-right through the x-values , the height of the line above the x-axis is always the same (in this case, 3 units). This type of line must be horizontal. An argument similar to the one above will show that if the only variable that appears is x , we can expect to get a vertical line. Slanted, Horizontal, and Vertical Lines In all the graphs we have observed so far, the lines have been slanted. This will always be the case when both variables appear in the equation. If only one variable appears in the equation, then the line will be either vertical or horizontal. To see why, let’s consider a specific case: Using the general form of a line, a x + b y = c , we can produce an equation with exactly one variable by choosing a = 0 , b = 5 , and c = 15 . The equation a x + b y = c then becomes 0x + 5y = 15 Since 0⋅( any number ) = 0 , the term 0x is 0 for any number that is chosen for x . Thus, 0x + 5y = 15 becomes 0 + 5y = 15 But, 0 is the additive identity and 0 + 5y = 5y . 5y = 15 Then, solving for y we get y = 3 This is an equation in which exactly one variable appears. This means that regardless of which number we choose for x , the corresponding y-value is 3. Since the y-value is always the same as we move from left-to-right through the x-values , the height of the line above the x-axis is always the same (in this case, 3 units). This type of line must be horizontal. An argument similar to the one above will show that if the only variable that appears is x , we can expect to get a vertical line.  || 
book1_ch07_4_14	Calculator Problems Exercise 7.4.33. (Go to Solution) 2.53x + 4.77y = 8.45 Exercise 7.4.34. 1.96x + 2.05y = 6.55 Exercise 7.4.35. (Go to Solution) 4.1x − 6.6y = 15.5 Exercise 7.4.36. 626.01x − 506.73y = 2443.50 Calculator Problems Exercise 7.4.33. (Go to Solution) 2.53x + 4.77y = 8.45 Exercise 7.4.34. 1.96x + 2.05y = 6.55 Exercise 7.4.35. (Go to Solution) 4.1x − 6.6y = 15.5 Exercise 7.4.36. 626.01x − 506.73y = 2443.50  || 
book1_ch07_5	 || The General Form of a Line We have seen that the general form of a linear equation in two variables is a x + b y = c (Section Section 7.4). When this equation is solved for y , the resulting form is called the slope-intercept form. Let's generate this new form. This equation is of the form y = m x + b if we replace with m and constant with b . (Note: The fact that we let is unfortunate and occurs beacuse of the letters we have chosen to use in the general form. The letter b occurs on both sides of the equal sign and may not represent the same value at all. This problem is one of the historical convention and, fortunately, does not occur very often.) The following examples illustrate this procedure. Example 7.15.  Solve 3x + 2y = 6 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, and b = 3 . Example 7.16.  Solve – 15x + 5y = 20 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, m = 3 and b = 4 . Example 7.17.  Solve 4x – y = 0 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, m = 4 and b = 0 . Notice that we can write y = 4x as y = 4x + 0 .  || The Slope-Intercept Form of a Line The Slope-Intercept Form of a Line y = m x + b A linear equation in two variables written in the form y = m x + b is said to be in slope-intercept form.  || Slope and Intercept When the equation of a line is written in slope-intercept form, two important properties of the line can be seen: the slope and the intercept. Let's look at these two properties by graphing several lines and observing them carefully.  || The Formula for the Slope of a Line We have observed that the slope is a measure of the steepness of a line. We wish to develop a formula for measuring this steepness. It seems reasonable to develop a slope formula that produces the following results: Steepness of line 1 > steepness of line 2. Consider a line on which we select any two points. We’ll denote these points with the ordered pairs (x 1,  y 1  ) and (x 2,  y 2  ) . The subscripts help us to identify the points. (x 1,  y 1  ) is the first point. Subscript 1 indicates the first point. (x 2,  y 2  ) is the second point. Subscript 2 indicates the second point. The difference in x values (x 2 − x 1 ) gives us the horizontal change, and the difference in y values (y 2 − y 1 ) gives us the vertical change. If the line is very steep, then when going from the first point to the second point, we would expect a large vertical change compared to the horizontal change. If the line is not very steep, then when going from the first point to the second point, we would expect a small vertical change compared to the horizontal change. We are comparing changes. We see that we are comparing This is a comparison and is therefore a ratio. Ratios can be expressed as fractions. Thus, a measure of the steepness of a line can be expressed as a ratio. The slope of a line is defined as the ratio Mathematically, we can write these changes as Finding the Slope of a Line The slope of a nonvertical line passing through the points (x 1,  y 1  ) and (x 2,  y 2  ) is found by the formula  || Calculator Problems For the following problems, determine the slope and y-intercept of the lines. Round to two decimal places. Exercise 7.5.73. (Go to Solution) 3.8x + 12.1y = 4.26 Exercise 7.5.74. 8.09x + 5.57y = − 1.42 Exercise 7.5.75. (Go to Solution) 10.813x − 17.0y = − 45.99 Exercise 7.5.76. − 6.003x − 92.388y = 0.008 For the following problems, find the slope of the line through the pairs of points. Round to two decimal places. Exercise 7.5.77. (Go to Solution) (5.56, 9.37), (2.16, 4.90) Exercise 7.5.78. (33.1, 8.9), (42.7,  − 1.06) Exercise 7.5.79. (Go to Solution) (155.89, 227.61), (157.04,227.61) Exercise 7.5.80. (0.00426,  − 0.00404), ( − 0.00191,  − 0.00404) Exercise 7.5.81. (Go to Solution) (88.81,  − 23.19), (88.81,  − 26.87) Exercise 7.5.82. ( − 0.0000567,  − 0.0000567), ( − 0.00765, 0.00764)  || 
book1_ch07_5_2	The General Form of a Line We have seen that the general form of a linear equation in two variables is a x + b y = c (Section Section 7.4). When this equation is solved for y , the resulting form is called the slope-intercept form. Let's generate this new form. This equation is of the form y = m x + b if we replace with m and constant with b . (Note: The fact that we let is unfortunate and occurs beacuse of the letters we have chosen to use in the general form. The letter b occurs on both sides of the equal sign and may not represent the same value at all. This problem is one of the historical convention and, fortunately, does not occur very often.) The following examples illustrate this procedure. Example 7.15.  Solve 3x + 2y = 6 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, and b = 3 . Example 7.16.  Solve – 15x + 5y = 20 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, m = 3 and b = 4 . Example 7.17.  Solve 4x – y = 0 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, m = 4 and b = 0 . Notice that we can write y = 4x as y = 4x + 0 . The General Form of a Line We have seen that the general form of a linear equation in two variables is a x + b y = c (Section Section 7.4). When this equation is solved for y , the resulting form is called the slope-intercept form. Let's generate this new form. This equation is of the form y = m x + b if we replace with m and constant with b . (Note: The fact that we let is unfortunate and occurs beacuse of the letters we have chosen to use in the general form. The letter b occurs on both sides of the equal sign and may not represent the same value at all. This problem is one of the historical convention and, fortunately, does not occur very often.) The following examples illustrate this procedure. Example 7.15.  Solve 3x + 2y = 6 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, and b = 3 . Example 7.16.  Solve – 15x + 5y = 20 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, m = 3 and b = 4 . Example 7.17.  Solve 4x – y = 0 for y . This equation is of the form y = m x + b . In this case, m = 4 and b = 0 . Notice that we can write y = 4x as y = 4x + 0 .  || 
book1_ch07_5_3	The Slope-Intercept Form of a Line The Slope-Intercept Form of a Line y = m x + b A linear equation in two variables written in the form y = m x + b is said to be in slope-intercept form. The Slope-Intercept Form of a Line The Slope-Intercept Form of a Line y = m x + b A linear equation in two variables written in the form y = m x + b is said to be in slope-intercept form.  || 
book1_ch07_5_6	Slope and Intercept When the equation of a line is written in slope-intercept form, two important properties of the line can be seen: the slope and the intercept. Let's look at these two properties by graphing several lines and observing them carefully. Slope and Intercept When the equation of a line is written in slope-intercept form, two important properties of the line can be seen: the slope and the intercept. Let's look at these two properties by graphing several lines and observing them carefully.  || 
book1_ch07_5_11	The Formula for the Slope of a Line We have observed that the slope is a measure of the steepness of a line. We wish to develop a formula for measuring this steepness. It seems reasonable to develop a slope formula that produces the following results: Steepness of line 1 > steepness of line 2. Consider a line on which we select any two points. We’ll denote these points with the ordered pairs (x 1,  y 1  ) and (x 2,  y 2  ) . The subscripts help us to identify the points. (x 1,  y 1  ) is the first point. Subscript 1 indicates the first point. (x 2,  y 2  ) is the second point. Subscript 2 indicates the second point. The difference in x values (x 2 − x 1 ) gives us the horizontal change, and the difference in y values (y 2 − y 1 ) gives us the vertical change. If the line is very steep, then when going from the first point to the second point, we would expect a large vertical change compared to the horizontal change. If the line is not very steep, then when going from the first point to the second point, we would expect a small vertical change compared to the horizontal change. We are comparing changes. We see that we are comparing This is a comparison and is therefore a ratio. Ratios can be expressed as fractions. Thus, a measure of the steepness of a line can be expressed as a ratio. The slope of a line is defined as the ratio Mathematically, we can write these changes as Finding the Slope of a Line The slope of a nonvertical line passing through the points (x 1,  y 1  ) and (x 2,  y 2  ) is found by the formula The Formula for the Slope of a Line We have observed that the slope is a measure of the steepness of a line. We wish to develop a formula for measuring this steepness. It seems reasonable to develop a slope formula that produces the following results: Steepness of line 1 > steepness of line 2. Consider a line on which we select any two points. We’ll denote these points with the ordered pairs (x 1,  y 1  ) and (x 2,  y 2  ) . The subscripts help us to identify the points. (x 1,  y 1  ) is the first point. Subscript 1 indicates the first point. (x 2,  y 2  ) is the second point. Subscript 2 indicates the second point. The difference in x values (x 2 − x 1 ) gives us the horizontal change, and the difference in y values (y 2 − y 1 ) gives us the vertical change. If the line is very steep, then when going from the first point to the second point, we would expect a large vertical change compared to the horizontal change. If the line is not very steep, then when going from the first point to the second point, we would expect a small vertical change compared to the horizontal change. We are comparing changes. We see that we are comparing This is a comparison and is therefore a ratio. Ratios can be expressed as fractions. Thus, a measure of the steepness of a line can be expressed as a ratio. The slope of a line is defined as the ratio Mathematically, we can write these changes as Finding the Slope of a Line The slope of a nonvertical line passing through the points (x 1,  y 1  ) and (x 2,  y 2  ) is found by the formula  || 
book1_ch07_5_15	Calculator Problems For the following problems, determine the slope and y-intercept of the lines. Round to two decimal places. Exercise 7.5.73. (Go to Solution) 3.8x + 12.1y = 4.26 Exercise 7.5.74. 8.09x + 5.57y = − 1.42 Exercise 7.5.75. (Go to Solution) 10.813x − 17.0y = − 45.99 Exercise 7.5.76. − 6.003x − 92.388y = 0.008 For the following problems, find the slope of the line through the pairs of points. Round to two decimal places. Exercise 7.5.77. (Go to Solution) (5.56, 9.37), (2.16, 4.90) Exercise 7.5.78. (33.1, 8.9), (42.7,  − 1.06) Exercise 7.5.79. (Go to Solution) (155.89, 227.61), (157.04,227.61) Exercise 7.5.80. (0.00426,  − 0.00404), ( − 0.00191,  − 0.00404) Exercise 7.5.81. (Go to Solution) (88.81,  − 23.19), (88.81,  − 26.87) Exercise 7.5.82. ( − 0.0000567,  − 0.0000567), ( − 0.00765, 0.00764) Calculator Problems For the following problems, determine the slope and y-intercept of the lines. Round to two decimal places. Exercise 7.5.73. (Go to Solution) 3.8x + 12.1y = 4.26 Exercise 7.5.74. 8.09x + 5.57y = − 1.42 Exercise 7.5.75. (Go to Solution) 10.813x − 17.0y = − 45.99 Exercise 7.5.76. − 6.003x − 92.388y = 0.008 For the following problems, find the slope of the line through the pairs of points. Round to two decimal places. Exercise 7.5.77. (Go to Solution) (5.56, 9.37), (2.16, 4.90) Exercise 7.5.78. (33.1, 8.9), (42.7,  − 1.06) Exercise 7.5.79. (Go to Solution) (155.89, 227.61), (157.04,227.61) Exercise 7.5.80. (0.00426,  − 0.00404), ( − 0.00191,  − 0.00404) Exercise 7.5.81. (Go to Solution) (88.81,  − 23.19), (88.81,  − 26.87) Exercise 7.5.82. ( − 0.0000567,  − 0.0000567), ( − 0.00765, 0.00764)  || 
book1_ch07_6	 || Using the Slope and Intercept to Graph a Line When a linear equation is given in the general form, a x + b y = c , we observed that an efficient graphical approach was the intercept method. We let x = 0 and computed the corresponding value of y , then let y = 0 and computed the corresponding value of x . When an equation is written in the slope-intercept form, y = m x + b , there are also efficient ways of constructing the graph. One way, but less efficient, is to choose two or three x-values and compute to find the corresponding y-values . However, computations are tedious, time consuming, and can lead to errors. Another way, the method listed below, makes use of the slope and the y-intercept for graphing the line. It is quick, simple, and involves no computations. Graphing Method Plot the y-intercept (0, b) . Determine another point by using the slope m . Draw a line through the two points. Recall that we defined the slope m as the ratio . The numerator y 2 − y 1 represents the number of units that y changes and the denominator x 2 − x 1 represents the number of units that x changes. Suppose . Then p is the number of units that y changes and q is the number of units that x changes. Since these changes occur simultaneously, start with your pencil at the y-intercept , move p units in the appropriate vertical direction, and then move q units in the appropriate horizontal direction. Mark a point at this location.  || Excersise for Review Exercise 7.6.21. (Go to Solution) (Section 5.7) Solve the inequality 2 − 4x ≥ x − 3 . Exercise 7.6.22. (Section 7.2) Graph the inequality y + 3 > 1 . Exercise 7.6.23. (Go to Solution) (Section 7.4) Graph the equation y = − 2 . Exercise 7.6.24. (Section 7.5) Determine the slope and y-intercept of the line − 4y − 3x = 16 . Exercise 7.6.25. (Go to Solution) (Section 7.5) Find the slope of the line passing through the points ( − 1, 5) and (2, 3) .  || 
book1_ch07_6_2	Using the Slope and Intercept to Graph a Line When a linear equation is given in the general form, a x + b y = c , we observed that an efficient graphical approach was the intercept method. We let x = 0 and computed the corresponding value of y , then let y = 0 and computed the corresponding value of x . When an equation is written in the slope-intercept form, y = m x + b , there are also efficient ways of constructing the graph. One way, but less efficient, is to choose two or three x-values and compute to find the corresponding y-values . However, computations are tedious, time consuming, and can lead to errors. Another way, the method listed below, makes use of the slope and the y-intercept for graphing the line. It is quick, simple, and involves no computations. Graphing Method Plot the y-intercept (0, b) . Determine another point by using the slope m . Draw a line through the two points. Recall that we defined the slope m as the ratio . The numerator y 2 − y 1 represents the number of units that y changes and the denominator x 2 − x 1 represents the number of units that x changes. Suppose . Then p is the number of units that y changes and q is the number of units that x changes. Since these changes occur simultaneously, start with your pencil at the y-intercept , move p units in the appropriate vertical direction, and then move q units in the appropriate horizontal direction. Mark a point at this location. Using the Slope and Intercept to Graph a Line When a linear equation is given in the general form, a x + b y = c , we observed that an efficient graphical approach was the intercept method. We let x = 0 and computed the corresponding value of y , then let y = 0 and computed the corresponding value of x . When an equation is written in the slope-intercept form, y = m x + b , there are also efficient ways of constructing the graph. One way, but less efficient, is to choose two or three x-values and compute to find the corresponding y-values . However, computations are tedious, time consuming, and can lead to errors. Another way, the method listed below, makes use of the slope and the y-intercept for graphing the line. It is quick, simple, and involves no computations. Graphing Method Plot the y-intercept (0, b) . Determine another point by using the slope m . Draw a line through the two points. Recall that we defined the slope m as the ratio . The numerator y 2 − y 1 represents the number of units that y changes and the denominator x 2 − x 1 represents the number of units that x changes. Suppose . Then p is the number of units that y changes and q is the number of units that x changes. Since these changes occur simultaneously, start with your pencil at the y-intercept , move p units in the appropriate vertical direction, and then move q units in the appropriate horizontal direction. Mark a point at this location.  || 
book1_ch07_6_6	Excersise for Review Exercise 7.6.21. (Go to Solution) (Section 5.7) Solve the inequality 2 − 4x ≥ x − 3 . Exercise 7.6.22. (Section 7.2) Graph the inequality y + 3 > 1 . Exercise 7.6.23. (Go to Solution) (Section 7.4) Graph the equation y = − 2 . Exercise 7.6.24. (Section 7.5) Determine the slope and y-intercept of the line − 4y − 3x = 16 . Exercise 7.6.25. (Go to Solution) (Section 7.5) Find the slope of the line passing through the points ( − 1, 5) and (2, 3) . Excersise for Review Exercise 7.6.21. (Go to Solution) (Section 5.7) Solve the inequality 2 − 4x ≥ x − 3 . Exercise 7.6.22. (Section 7.2) Graph the inequality y + 3 > 1 . Exercise 7.6.23. (Go to Solution) (Section 7.4) Graph the equation y = − 2 . Exercise 7.6.24. (Section 7.5) Determine the slope and y-intercept of the line − 4y − 3x = 16 . Exercise 7.6.25. (Go to Solution) (Section 7.5) Find the slope of the line passing through the points ( − 1, 5) and (2, 3) .  || 
book1_ch07_7	 || The Slope-Intercept and Point-Slope Forms In the pervious sections we have been given an equation and have constructed the line to which it corresponds. Now, however, suppose we're given some geometric information about the line and we wish to construct the corresponding equation. We wish to find the equation of a line. We know that the formula for the slope of a line is We can find the equation of a line using the slope formula in either of two ways: Example 7.40.  If we’re given the slope, m , and any point (x, y 1 ) on the line, we can substitute this information into the formula for slope.Let (x, y 1 ) be the known point on the line and let (x,y) be any other point on the line. Then Since this equation was derived using a point and the slope of a line, it is called the point-slope form of a line. Example 7.41.  If we are given the slope, m , y-intercept, (0,b) , we can substitute this information into the formula for slope.Let (0,b) be the y-intercept and (x,y) be any other point on the line. Then, Since this equation was derived using the slope and the intercept, it was called the slope-intercept form of a line. We summarize these two derivations as follows. Forms of the Equation of a Line We can find the equation of a line if we’re given either of the following sets of information: The slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0,b), by substituting these values into This is the slope-intercept form. The slope, m, and any point, (x 1 ,y 1 ), by substituting these values into This is the point-slope form. Notice that both forms rely on knowing the slope. If we are given two points on the line we may still find the equation of the line passing through them by first finding the slope of the line, then using the point-slope form. It is customary to use either the slope-intercept form or the general form for the final form of the line. We will use the slope-intercept form as the final form.  || 
book1_ch07_7_2	The Slope-Intercept and Point-Slope Forms In the pervious sections we have been given an equation and have constructed the line to which it corresponds. Now, however, suppose we're given some geometric information about the line and we wish to construct the corresponding equation. We wish to find the equation of a line. We know that the formula for the slope of a line is We can find the equation of a line using the slope formula in either of two ways: Example 7.40.  If we’re given the slope, m , and any point (x, y 1 ) on the line, we can substitute this information into the formula for slope.Let (x, y 1 ) be the known point on the line and let (x,y) be any other point on the line. Then Since this equation was derived using a point and the slope of a line, it is called the point-slope form of a line. Example 7.41.  If we are given the slope, m , y-intercept, (0,b) , we can substitute this information into the formula for slope.Let (0,b) be the y-intercept and (x,y) be any other point on the line. Then, Since this equation was derived using the slope and the intercept, it was called the slope-intercept form of a line. We summarize these two derivations as follows. Forms of the Equation of a Line We can find the equation of a line if we’re given either of the following sets of information: The slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0,b), by substituting these values into This is the slope-intercept form. The slope, m, and any point, (x 1 ,y 1 ), by substituting these values into This is the point-slope form. Notice that both forms rely on knowing the slope. If we are given two points on the line we may still find the equation of the line passing through them by first finding the slope of the line, then using the point-slope form. It is customary to use either the slope-intercept form or the general form for the final form of the line. We will use the slope-intercept form as the final form. The Slope-Intercept and Point-Slope Forms In the pervious sections we have been given an equation and have constructed the line to which it corresponds. Now, however, suppose we're given some geometric information about the line and we wish to construct the corresponding equation. We wish to find the equation of a line. We know that the formula for the slope of a line is We can find the equation of a line using the slope formula in either of two ways: Example 7.40.  If we’re given the slope, m , and any point (x, y 1 ) on the line, we can substitute this information into the formula for slope.Let (x, y 1 ) be the known point on the line and let (x,y) be any other point on the line. Then Since this equation was derived using a point and the slope of a line, it is called the point-slope form of a line. Example 7.41.  If we are given the slope, m , y-intercept, (0,b) , we can substitute this information into the formula for slope.Let (0,b) be the y-intercept and (x,y) be any other point on the line. Then, Since this equation was derived using the slope and the intercept, it was called the slope-intercept form of a line. We summarize these two derivations as follows. Forms of the Equation of a Line We can find the equation of a line if we’re given either of the following sets of information: The slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0,b), by substituting these values into This is the slope-intercept form. The slope, m, and any point, (x 1 ,y 1 ), by substituting these values into This is the point-slope form. Notice that both forms rely on knowing the slope. If we are given two points on the line we may still find the equation of the line passing through them by first finding the slope of the line, then using the point-slope form. It is customary to use either the slope-intercept form or the general form for the final form of the line. We will use the slope-intercept form as the final form.  || 
book1_ch07_8	 || Location of Solutions In our study of linear equations in two variables, we observed that all the solutions to the equation, and only the solutions to the equation, were located on the graph of the equation. We now wish to determine the location of the solutions to linear inequalities in two variables. Linear inequalities in two variables are inequalities of the forms: Half-Planes A straight line drawn through the plane divides the plane into two half-planes. Boundary Line The straight line is called the boundary line. Solution to an Inequality in Two Variables Recall that when working with linear equations in two variables, we observed that ordered pairs that produced true statements when substituted into an equation were called solutions to that equation. We can make a similar statement for inequalities in two variables. We say that an inequality in two variables has a solution when a pair of values has been found such that when these values are substituted into the inequality a true statement results. The Location of Solutions in the Plane As with equations, solutions to linear inequalities have particular locations in the plane. All solutions to a linear inequality in two variables are located in one and only in one entire half-plane. For example, consider the inequality 2x + 3y ≤ 6 All the solutions to the inequality 2x + 3y ≤ 6 lie in the shaded half-plane. Example 7.51.  Point A(1,  − 1) is a solution since Example 7.52.  Point B(2, 5) is not a solution since  || Method of Graphing The method of graphing linear inequalities in two variables is as follows: Graph the boundary line (consider the inequality as an equation, that is, replace the inequality sign with an equal sign). If the inequality is ≤ or ≥ , draw the boundary line solid. This means that points on the line are solutions and are part of the graph. If the inequality is < or > , draw the boundary line dotted. This means that points on the line are not solutions and are not part of the graph. Determine which half-plane to shade by choosing a test point. If, when substituted, the test point yields a true statement, shade the half-plane containing it. If, when substituted, the test point yields a false statement, shade the half-plane on the opposite side of the boundary line.  || 
book1_ch07_8_2	Location of Solutions In our study of linear equations in two variables, we observed that all the solutions to the equation, and only the solutions to the equation, were located on the graph of the equation. We now wish to determine the location of the solutions to linear inequalities in two variables. Linear inequalities in two variables are inequalities of the forms: Half-Planes A straight line drawn through the plane divides the plane into two half-planes. Boundary Line The straight line is called the boundary line. Solution to an Inequality in Two Variables Recall that when working with linear equations in two variables, we observed that ordered pairs that produced true statements when substituted into an equation were called solutions to that equation. We can make a similar statement for inequalities in two variables. We say that an inequality in two variables has a solution when a pair of values has been found such that when these values are substituted into the inequality a true statement results. The Location of Solutions in the Plane As with equations, solutions to linear inequalities have particular locations in the plane. All solutions to a linear inequality in two variables are located in one and only in one entire half-plane. For example, consider the inequality 2x + 3y ≤ 6 All the solutions to the inequality 2x + 3y ≤ 6 lie in the shaded half-plane. Example 7.51.  Point A(1,  − 1) is a solution since Example 7.52.  Point B(2, 5) is not a solution since Location of Solutions In our study of linear equations in two variables, we observed that all the solutions to the equation, and only the solutions to the equation, were located on the graph of the equation. We now wish to determine the location of the solutions to linear inequalities in two variables. Linear inequalities in two variables are inequalities of the forms: Half-Planes A straight line drawn through the plane divides the plane into two half-planes. Boundary Line The straight line is called the boundary line. Solution to an Inequality in Two Variables Recall that when working with linear equations in two variables, we observed that ordered pairs that produced true statements when substituted into an equation were called solutions to that equation. We can make a similar statement for inequalities in two variables. We say that an inequality in two variables has a solution when a pair of values has been found such that when these values are substituted into the inequality a true statement results. The Location of Solutions in the Plane As with equations, solutions to linear inequalities have particular locations in the plane. All solutions to a linear inequality in two variables are located in one and only in one entire half-plane. For example, consider the inequality 2x + 3y ≤ 6 All the solutions to the inequality 2x + 3y ≤ 6 lie in the shaded half-plane. Example 7.51.  Point A(1,  − 1) is a solution since Example 7.52.  Point B(2, 5) is not a solution since  || 
book1_ch07_8_3	Method of Graphing The method of graphing linear inequalities in two variables is as follows: Graph the boundary line (consider the inequality as an equation, that is, replace the inequality sign with an equal sign). If the inequality is ≤ or ≥ , draw the boundary line solid. This means that points on the line are solutions and are part of the graph. If the inequality is < or > , draw the boundary line dotted. This means that points on the line are not solutions and are not part of the graph. Determine which half-plane to shade by choosing a test point. If, when substituted, the test point yields a true statement, shade the half-plane containing it. If, when substituted, the test point yields a false statement, shade the half-plane on the opposite side of the boundary line. Method of Graphing The method of graphing linear inequalities in two variables is as follows: Graph the boundary line (consider the inequality as an equation, that is, replace the inequality sign with an equal sign). If the inequality is ≤ or ≥ , draw the boundary line solid. This means that points on the line are solutions and are part of the graph. If the inequality is < or > , draw the boundary line dotted. This means that points on the line are not solutions and are not part of the graph. Determine which half-plane to shade by choosing a test point. If, when substituted, the test point yields a true statement, shade the half-plane containing it. If, when substituted, the test point yields a false statement, shade the half-plane on the opposite side of the boundary line.  || 
book1_ch01	 ||  || Factors Let’s begin our review of arithmetic by recalling the meaning of multiplication for whole numbers (the counting numbers and zero). Multiplication Multiplication is a description of repeated addition. In the addition 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 the number 7 is repeated as an addend* 4 times. Therefore, we say we have four times seven and describe it by writing 4  ·  7 The raised dot between the numbers 4 and 7 indicates multiplication. The dot directs us to multiply the two numbers that it separates. In algebra, the dot is preferred over the symbol × to denote multiplication because the letter x is often used to represent a number. Thus, 4  ·  7 = 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 Factors and Products In a multiplication, the numbers being multiplied are called factors. The result of a multiplication is called the product. For example, in the multiplication 4  ·  7 = 28 the numbers 4 and 7 are factors, and the number 28 is the product. We say that 4 and 7 are factors of 28. (They are not the only factors of 28. Can you think of others?)Now we know thatThis indicates that a first number is a factor of a second number if the first number divides into the second number with no remainder. For example, since 4  ·  7 = 28 both 4 and 7 are factors of 28 since both 4 and 7 divide into 28 with no remainder.  || Exponential Notation Quite often, a particular number will be repeated as a factor in a multiplication. For example, in the multiplication 7  ·  7  ·  7  ·  7 the number 7 is repeated as a factor 4 times. We describe this by writing 74 . Thus, 7  ·  7  ·  7  ·  7 = 74 The repeated factor is the lower number (the base), and the number recording how many times the factor is repeated is the higher number (the superscript). The superscript number is called an exponent. Exponent An exponent is a number that records how many times the number to which it is attached occurs as a factor in a multiplication.  ||  || Prime And Composite Numbers Notice that the only factors of 7 are 1 and 7 itself, and that the only factors of 23 are 1 and 23 itself. Prime Number A whole number greater than 1 whose only whole number factors are itself and 1 is called a prime number. The first seven prime numbers are2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and 17The number 1 is not considered to be a prime number, and the number 2 is the first and only even prime number.Many numbers have factors other than themselves and 1. For example, the factors of 28 are 1, 2, 4, 7, 14, and 28 (since each of these whole numbers and only these whole numbers divide into 28 without a remainder). Composite Numbers A whole number that is composed of factors other than itself and 1 is called a composite number. Composite numbers are not prime numbers.Some composite numbers are 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 15.  || The Fundamental Principle Of Arithmetic Prime numbers are very important in the study of mathematics. We will use them soon in our study of fractions. We will now, however, be introduced to an important mathematical principle. The Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic Except for the order of the factors, every whole number, other than 1, can be factored in one and only one way as a product of prime numbers. Prime Factorization When a number is factored so that all its factors are prime numbers, the factorization is called the prime factorization of the number.  || The Prime Factorization Of A Whole Number The following method provides a way of finding the prime factorization of a whole number. The examples that follow will use the method and make it more clear. Divide the number repeatedly by the smallest prime number that will divide into the number without a remainder. When the prime number used in step 1 no longer divides into the given number without a remainder, repeat the process with the next largest prime number. Continue this process until the quotient is 1. The prime factorization of the given number is the product of all these prime divisors.  ||  || Multiples Multiples When a whole number is multiplied by other whole numbers, with the exception of Multiples zero, the resulting products are called multiples of the given whole number. Table 1.1. Multiples of 2   Multiples of 3   Multiples of 8   Multiples of 10 2 · 1 = 2   3 · 1 = 3   8 · 1 = 8   10 · 1 = 10 2 · 2 = 4   3 · 2 = 6   8 · 2 = 16   10 · 2 = 20 2 · 3 = 6   3 · 3 = 9   8 · 3 = 24   10 · 3 = 30 2 · 4 = 8   3 · 4 = 12   8 · 4 = 32   10 · 4 = 40 2 · 5 = 10   3 · 5 = 15   8 · 5 = 40   10 · 5 = 50 …   …   …   …  || Common Multiples There will be times when we are given two or more whole numbers and we will need to know if there are any multiples that are common to each of them. If there are, we will need to know what they are. For example, some of the multiples that are common to 2 and 3 are 6, 12, and 18.  || The Least Common Multiple (LCM) Notice that in our number line visualization of common multiples (above) the first common multiple is also the smallest, or least common multiple, abbreviated by LCM. Least Common Multiple The least common multiple, LCM, of two or more whole numbers is the smallest whole number that each of the given numbers will divide into without a remainder.  || Finding The Least Common Multiple Finding the LCM To find the LCM of two or more numbers, Write the prime factorization of each number, using exponents on repeated factors. Write each base that appears in each of the prime factorizations. To each base, attach the largest exponent that appears on it in the prime factorizations. The LCM is the product of the numbers found in step 3.  ||  || Equivalent Fractions Equivalent Fractions Fractions that have the same value are called equivalent fractions. For example, and represent the same part of a whole quantity and are therefore equivalent. Several more collections of equivalent fractions are listed below. Example 1.15.  Example 1.16.  Example 1.17.   || Reducing Fractions To Lowest Terms Reduced to Lowest Terms It is often useful to convert one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. When a fraction is converted to an equivalent fraction that has the smallest numerator and denominator in the collection of equivalent fractions, it is said to be reduced to lowest terms. The conversion process is called reducing a fraction. We can reduce a fraction to lowest terms by Expressing the numerator and denominator as a product of prime numbers. (Find the prime factorization of the numerator and denominator. See Section (Section 1.3) for this technique.) Divide the numerator and denominator by all common factors. (This technique is commonly called “cancelling.”)  || Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms Equally important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. The higher, equivalent fraction is constructed by multiplying the original fraction by 1.Notice that and are equivalent, that is Also, This observation helps us suggest the following method for raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to higher terms by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number. For example, can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8, that is, multiplying by 1 in the form How did we know to choose 8 as the proper factor? Since we wish to convert 4 to 32 by multiplying it by some number, we know that 4 must be a factor of 32. This means that 4 divides into 32. In fact, 32÷4 = 8. We divided the original denominator into the new, specified denominator to obtain the proper factor for the multiplication.  ||  || Multiplication of Fractions Multiplication of Fractions To multiply two fractions, multiply the numerators together and multiply the denominators together. Reduce to lowest terms if possible. Example 1.24.  For example, multiply Notice that we since had to reduce, we nearly started over again with the original two fractions. If we factor first, then cancel, then multiply, we will save time and energy and still obtain the correct product.  || Division of Fractions Reciprocals Two numbers whose product is 1 are reciprocals of each other. For example, since and are reciprocals of each other. Some other pairs of reciprocals are listed below.Reciprocals are used in division of fractions. Division of Fractions To divide a first fraction by a second fraction, multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second fraction. Reduce if possible. This method is sometimes called the “invert and multiply” method.  || Addition and Subtraction of Fractions Fractions with Like Denominators To add (or subtract) two or more fractions that have the same denominators, add (or subtract) the numerators and place the resulting sum over the common denominator. Reduce if possible. CAUTIONAdd or subtract only the numerators. Do not add or subtract the denominators!  ||  || Decimal Fractions Fractions are one way we can represent parts of whole numbers. Decimal fractions are another way of representing parts of whole numbers. Decimal Fractions A decimal fraction is a fraction in which the denominator is a power of 10. A decimal fraction uses a decimal point to separate whole parts and fractional parts. Whole parts are written to the left of the decimal point and fractional parts are written to the right of the decimal point. Just as each digit in a whole number has a particular value, so do the digits in decimal positions.  || Adding and Subtracting Decimal Fractions Adding/Subtracting Decimal Fractions To add or subtract decimal fractions, Align the numbers vertically so that the decimal points line up under each other and corresponding decimal positions are in the same column. Add zeros if necessary. Add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Place a decimal point in the resulting sum or difference directly under the other decimal points.  || Multiplying Decimal Fractions Multiplying Decimal Fractions To multiply decimals, Multiply tbe numbers as if they were whole numbers. Find the sum of the number of decimal places in the factors. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum found in step 2.  || Dividing Decimal Fractions Dividing Decimal Fractions To divide a decimal by a nonzero decimal, Convert the divisor to a whole number by moving the decimal point to the position immediately to the right of the divisor’s last digit. Move the decimal point of the dividend to the right the same number of digits it was moved in the divisor. Set the decimal point in the quotient by placing a decimal point directly above the decimal point in the dividend. Divide as usual.  || Converting Decimal Fractions to Fractions We can convert a decimal fraction to a fraction by reading it and then writing the phrase we have just read. As we read the decimal fraction, we note the place value farthest to the right. We may have to reduce the fraction.  || Converting Fractions to Decimal Fractions  ||  || The Meaning of Percent The word percent comes from the Latin word “per centum,” “per” meaning “for each,” and “centum” meaning “hundred.” Percent (%) Percent means “for each hundred” or “for every hundred.” The symbol % is used to represent the word percent. Thus,  || Converting A Fraction To A Percent We can see how a fraction can be converted to a percent by analyzing the method that is converted to a percent. In order to convert to a percent, we need to introduce (since percent means for each hundred). Example 1.51.  Fraction to Percent To convert a fraction to a percent, multiply the fraction by 1 in the form , then replace with the % symbol.  || Converting A Decimal To A Percent We can see how a decimal is converted to a percent by analyzing the method that 0.75 is converted to a percent. We need to introduce Decimal to Percent To convert a fraction to a percent, multiply the decimal by 1 in the form , then replace with the % symbol. This amounts to moving the decimal point 2 places to the right.  || Converting A Percent To A Decimal We can see how a percent is converted to a decimal by analyzing the method that 12% is converted to a decimal. We need to introduce Percent to Decimal To convert a percent to a decimal, replace the % symbol with then divide the number by 100. This amounts to moving the decimal point 2 places to the left.  || 
book1_ch01_2	 || Factors Let’s begin our review of arithmetic by recalling the meaning of multiplication for whole numbers (the counting numbers and zero). Multiplication Multiplication is a description of repeated addition. In the addition 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 the number 7 is repeated as an addend* 4 times. Therefore, we say we have four times seven and describe it by writing 4  ·  7 The raised dot between the numbers 4 and 7 indicates multiplication. The dot directs us to multiply the two numbers that it separates. In algebra, the dot is preferred over the symbol × to denote multiplication because the letter x is often used to represent a number. Thus, 4  ·  7 = 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 Factors and Products In a multiplication, the numbers being multiplied are called factors. The result of a multiplication is called the product. For example, in the multiplication 4  ·  7 = 28 the numbers 4 and 7 are factors, and the number 28 is the product. We say that 4 and 7 are factors of 28. (They are not the only factors of 28. Can you think of others?)Now we know thatThis indicates that a first number is a factor of a second number if the first number divides into the second number with no remainder. For example, since 4  ·  7 = 28 both 4 and 7 are factors of 28 since both 4 and 7 divide into 28 with no remainder.  || Exponential Notation Quite often, a particular number will be repeated as a factor in a multiplication. For example, in the multiplication 7  ·  7  ·  7  ·  7 the number 7 is repeated as a factor 4 times. We describe this by writing 74 . Thus, 7  ·  7  ·  7  ·  7 = 74 The repeated factor is the lower number (the base), and the number recording how many times the factor is repeated is the higher number (the superscript). The superscript number is called an exponent. Exponent An exponent is a number that records how many times the number to which it is attached occurs as a factor in a multiplication.  || 
book1_ch01_2_2	Factors Let’s begin our review of arithmetic by recalling the meaning of multiplication for whole numbers (the counting numbers and zero). Multiplication Multiplication is a description of repeated addition. In the addition 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 the number 7 is repeated as an addend* 4 times. Therefore, we say we have four times seven and describe it by writing 4  ·  7 The raised dot between the numbers 4 and 7 indicates multiplication. The dot directs us to multiply the two numbers that it separates. In algebra, the dot is preferred over the symbol × to denote multiplication because the letter x is often used to represent a number. Thus, 4  ·  7 = 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 Factors and Products In a multiplication, the numbers being multiplied are called factors. The result of a multiplication is called the product. For example, in the multiplication 4  ·  7 = 28 the numbers 4 and 7 are factors, and the number 28 is the product. We say that 4 and 7 are factors of 28. (They are not the only factors of 28. Can you think of others?)Now we know thatThis indicates that a first number is a factor of a second number if the first number divides into the second number with no remainder. For example, since 4  ·  7 = 28 both 4 and 7 are factors of 28 since both 4 and 7 divide into 28 with no remainder. Factors Let’s begin our review of arithmetic by recalling the meaning of multiplication for whole numbers (the counting numbers and zero). Multiplication Multiplication is a description of repeated addition. In the addition 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 the number 7 is repeated as an addend* 4 times. Therefore, we say we have four times seven and describe it by writing 4  ·  7 The raised dot between the numbers 4 and 7 indicates multiplication. The dot directs us to multiply the two numbers that it separates. In algebra, the dot is preferred over the symbol × to denote multiplication because the letter x is often used to represent a number. Thus, 4  ·  7 = 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 Factors and Products In a multiplication, the numbers being multiplied are called factors. The result of a multiplication is called the product. For example, in the multiplication 4  ·  7 = 28 the numbers 4 and 7 are factors, and the number 28 is the product. We say that 4 and 7 are factors of 28. (They are not the only factors of 28. Can you think of others?)Now we know thatThis indicates that a first number is a factor of a second number if the first number divides into the second number with no remainder. For example, since 4  ·  7 = 28 both 4 and 7 are factors of 28 since both 4 and 7 divide into 28 with no remainder.  || 
book1_ch01_2_3	Exponential Notation Quite often, a particular number will be repeated as a factor in a multiplication. For example, in the multiplication 7  ·  7  ·  7  ·  7 the number 7 is repeated as a factor 4 times. We describe this by writing 74 . Thus, 7  ·  7  ·  7  ·  7 = 74 The repeated factor is the lower number (the base), and the number recording how many times the factor is repeated is the higher number (the superscript). The superscript number is called an exponent. Exponent An exponent is a number that records how many times the number to which it is attached occurs as a factor in a multiplication. Exponential Notation Quite often, a particular number will be repeated as a factor in a multiplication. For example, in the multiplication 7  ·  7  ·  7  ·  7 the number 7 is repeated as a factor 4 times. We describe this by writing 74 . Thus, 7  ·  7  ·  7  ·  7 = 74 The repeated factor is the lower number (the base), and the number recording how many times the factor is repeated is the higher number (the superscript). The superscript number is called an exponent. Exponent An exponent is a number that records how many times the number to which it is attached occurs as a factor in a multiplication.  || 
book1_ch01_3	 || Prime And Composite Numbers Notice that the only factors of 7 are 1 and 7 itself, and that the only factors of 23 are 1 and 23 itself. Prime Number A whole number greater than 1 whose only whole number factors are itself and 1 is called a prime number. The first seven prime numbers are2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and 17The number 1 is not considered to be a prime number, and the number 2 is the first and only even prime number.Many numbers have factors other than themselves and 1. For example, the factors of 28 are 1, 2, 4, 7, 14, and 28 (since each of these whole numbers and only these whole numbers divide into 28 without a remainder). Composite Numbers A whole number that is composed of factors other than itself and 1 is called a composite number. Composite numbers are not prime numbers.Some composite numbers are 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 15.  || The Fundamental Principle Of Arithmetic Prime numbers are very important in the study of mathematics. We will use them soon in our study of fractions. We will now, however, be introduced to an important mathematical principle. The Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic Except for the order of the factors, every whole number, other than 1, can be factored in one and only one way as a product of prime numbers. Prime Factorization When a number is factored so that all its factors are prime numbers, the factorization is called the prime factorization of the number.  || The Prime Factorization Of A Whole Number The following method provides a way of finding the prime factorization of a whole number. The examples that follow will use the method and make it more clear. Divide the number repeatedly by the smallest prime number that will divide into the number without a remainder. When the prime number used in step 1 no longer divides into the given number without a remainder, repeat the process with the next largest prime number. Continue this process until the quotient is 1. The prime factorization of the given number is the product of all these prime divisors.  || 
book1_ch01_3_2	Prime And Composite Numbers Notice that the only factors of 7 are 1 and 7 itself, and that the only factors of 23 are 1 and 23 itself. Prime Number A whole number greater than 1 whose only whole number factors are itself and 1 is called a prime number. The first seven prime numbers are2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and 17The number 1 is not considered to be a prime number, and the number 2 is the first and only even prime number.Many numbers have factors other than themselves and 1. For example, the factors of 28 are 1, 2, 4, 7, 14, and 28 (since each of these whole numbers and only these whole numbers divide into 28 without a remainder). Composite Numbers A whole number that is composed of factors other than itself and 1 is called a composite number. Composite numbers are not prime numbers.Some composite numbers are 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 15. Prime And Composite Numbers Notice that the only factors of 7 are 1 and 7 itself, and that the only factors of 23 are 1 and 23 itself. Prime Number A whole number greater than 1 whose only whole number factors are itself and 1 is called a prime number. The first seven prime numbers are2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and 17The number 1 is not considered to be a prime number, and the number 2 is the first and only even prime number.Many numbers have factors other than themselves and 1. For example, the factors of 28 are 1, 2, 4, 7, 14, and 28 (since each of these whole numbers and only these whole numbers divide into 28 without a remainder). Composite Numbers A whole number that is composed of factors other than itself and 1 is called a composite number. Composite numbers are not prime numbers.Some composite numbers are 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 15.  || 
book1_ch01_3_3	The Fundamental Principle Of Arithmetic Prime numbers are very important in the study of mathematics. We will use them soon in our study of fractions. We will now, however, be introduced to an important mathematical principle. The Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic Except for the order of the factors, every whole number, other than 1, can be factored in one and only one way as a product of prime numbers. Prime Factorization When a number is factored so that all its factors are prime numbers, the factorization is called the prime factorization of the number. The Fundamental Principle Of Arithmetic Prime numbers are very important in the study of mathematics. We will use them soon in our study of fractions. We will now, however, be introduced to an important mathematical principle. The Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic Except for the order of the factors, every whole number, other than 1, can be factored in one and only one way as a product of prime numbers. Prime Factorization When a number is factored so that all its factors are prime numbers, the factorization is called the prime factorization of the number.  || 
book1_ch01_3_5	The Prime Factorization Of A Whole Number The following method provides a way of finding the prime factorization of a whole number. The examples that follow will use the method and make it more clear. Divide the number repeatedly by the smallest prime number that will divide into the number without a remainder. When the prime number used in step 1 no longer divides into the given number without a remainder, repeat the process with the next largest prime number. Continue this process until the quotient is 1. The prime factorization of the given number is the product of all these prime divisors. The Prime Factorization Of A Whole Number The following method provides a way of finding the prime factorization of a whole number. The examples that follow will use the method and make it more clear. Divide the number repeatedly by the smallest prime number that will divide into the number without a remainder. When the prime number used in step 1 no longer divides into the given number without a remainder, repeat the process with the next largest prime number. Continue this process until the quotient is 1. The prime factorization of the given number is the product of all these prime divisors.  || 
book1_ch01_4	 || Multiples Multiples When a whole number is multiplied by other whole numbers, with the exception of Multiples zero, the resulting products are called multiples of the given whole number. Table 1.1. Multiples of 2   Multiples of 3   Multiples of 8   Multiples of 10 2 · 1 = 2   3 · 1 = 3   8 · 1 = 8   10 · 1 = 10 2 · 2 = 4   3 · 2 = 6   8 · 2 = 16   10 · 2 = 20 2 · 3 = 6   3 · 3 = 9   8 · 3 = 24   10 · 3 = 30 2 · 4 = 8   3 · 4 = 12   8 · 4 = 32   10 · 4 = 40 2 · 5 = 10   3 · 5 = 15   8 · 5 = 40   10 · 5 = 50 …   …   …   …  || Common Multiples There will be times when we are given two or more whole numbers and we will need to know if there are any multiples that are common to each of them. If there are, we will need to know what they are. For example, some of the multiples that are common to 2 and 3 are 6, 12, and 18.  || The Least Common Multiple (LCM) Notice that in our number line visualization of common multiples (above) the first common multiple is also the smallest, or least common multiple, abbreviated by LCM. Least Common Multiple The least common multiple, LCM, of two or more whole numbers is the smallest whole number that each of the given numbers will divide into without a remainder.  || Finding The Least Common Multiple Finding the LCM To find the LCM of two or more numbers, Write the prime factorization of each number, using exponents on repeated factors. Write each base that appears in each of the prime factorizations. To each base, attach the largest exponent that appears on it in the prime factorizations. The LCM is the product of the numbers found in step 3.  || 
book1_ch01_4_2	Multiples Multiples When a whole number is multiplied by other whole numbers, with the exception of Multiples zero, the resulting products are called multiples of the given whole number. Table 1.1. Multiples of 2   Multiples of 3   Multiples of 8   Multiples of 10 2 · 1 = 2   3 · 1 = 3   8 · 1 = 8   10 · 1 = 10 2 · 2 = 4   3 · 2 = 6   8 · 2 = 16   10 · 2 = 20 2 · 3 = 6   3 · 3 = 9   8 · 3 = 24   10 · 3 = 30 2 · 4 = 8   3 · 4 = 12   8 · 4 = 32   10 · 4 = 40 2 · 5 = 10   3 · 5 = 15   8 · 5 = 40   10 · 5 = 50 …   …   …   … Multiples Multiples When a whole number is multiplied by other whole numbers, with the exception of Multiples zero, the resulting products are called multiples of the given whole number. Table 1.1. Multiples of 2   Multiples of 3   Multiples of 8   Multiples of 10 2 · 1 = 2   3 · 1 = 3   8 · 1 = 8   10 · 1 = 10 2 · 2 = 4   3 · 2 = 6   8 · 2 = 16   10 · 2 = 20 2 · 3 = 6   3 · 3 = 9   8 · 3 = 24   10 · 3 = 30 2 · 4 = 8   3 · 4 = 12   8 · 4 = 32   10 · 4 = 40 2 · 5 = 10   3 · 5 = 15   8 · 5 = 40   10 · 5 = 50 …   …   …   …  || 
book1_ch01_4_3	Common Multiples There will be times when we are given two or more whole numbers and we will need to know if there are any multiples that are common to each of them. If there are, we will need to know what they are. For example, some of the multiples that are common to 2 and 3 are 6, 12, and 18. Common Multiples There will be times when we are given two or more whole numbers and we will need to know if there are any multiples that are common to each of them. If there are, we will need to know what they are. For example, some of the multiples that are common to 2 and 3 are 6, 12, and 18.  || 
book1_ch01_4_5	The Least Common Multiple (LCM) Notice that in our number line visualization of common multiples (above) the first common multiple is also the smallest, or least common multiple, abbreviated by LCM. Least Common Multiple The least common multiple, LCM, of two or more whole numbers is the smallest whole number that each of the given numbers will divide into without a remainder. The Least Common Multiple (LCM) Notice that in our number line visualization of common multiples (above) the first common multiple is also the smallest, or least common multiple, abbreviated by LCM. Least Common Multiple The least common multiple, LCM, of two or more whole numbers is the smallest whole number that each of the given numbers will divide into without a remainder.  || 
book1_ch01_4_6	Finding The Least Common Multiple Finding the LCM To find the LCM of two or more numbers, Write the prime factorization of each number, using exponents on repeated factors. Write each base that appears in each of the prime factorizations. To each base, attach the largest exponent that appears on it in the prime factorizations. The LCM is the product of the numbers found in step 3. Finding The Least Common Multiple Finding the LCM To find the LCM of two or more numbers, Write the prime factorization of each number, using exponents on repeated factors. Write each base that appears in each of the prime factorizations. To each base, attach the largest exponent that appears on it in the prime factorizations. The LCM is the product of the numbers found in step 3.  || 
book1_ch01_5	 || Equivalent Fractions Equivalent Fractions Fractions that have the same value are called equivalent fractions. For example, and represent the same part of a whole quantity and are therefore equivalent. Several more collections of equivalent fractions are listed below. Example 1.15.  Example 1.16.  Example 1.17.   || Reducing Fractions To Lowest Terms Reduced to Lowest Terms It is often useful to convert one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. When a fraction is converted to an equivalent fraction that has the smallest numerator and denominator in the collection of equivalent fractions, it is said to be reduced to lowest terms. The conversion process is called reducing a fraction. We can reduce a fraction to lowest terms by Expressing the numerator and denominator as a product of prime numbers. (Find the prime factorization of the numerator and denominator. See Section (Section 1.3) for this technique.) Divide the numerator and denominator by all common factors. (This technique is commonly called “cancelling.”)  || Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms Equally important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. The higher, equivalent fraction is constructed by multiplying the original fraction by 1.Notice that and are equivalent, that is Also, This observation helps us suggest the following method for raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to higher terms by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number. For example, can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8, that is, multiplying by 1 in the form How did we know to choose 8 as the proper factor? Since we wish to convert 4 to 32 by multiplying it by some number, we know that 4 must be a factor of 32. This means that 4 divides into 32. In fact, 32÷4 = 8. We divided the original denominator into the new, specified denominator to obtain the proper factor for the multiplication.  || 
book1_ch01_5_2	Equivalent Fractions Equivalent Fractions Fractions that have the same value are called equivalent fractions. For example, and represent the same part of a whole quantity and are therefore equivalent. Several more collections of equivalent fractions are listed below. Example 1.15.  Example 1.16.  Example 1.17.  Equivalent Fractions Equivalent Fractions Fractions that have the same value are called equivalent fractions. For example, and represent the same part of a whole quantity and are therefore equivalent. Several more collections of equivalent fractions are listed below. Example 1.15.  Example 1.16.  Example 1.17.   || 
book1_ch01_5_3	Reducing Fractions To Lowest Terms Reduced to Lowest Terms It is often useful to convert one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. When a fraction is converted to an equivalent fraction that has the smallest numerator and denominator in the collection of equivalent fractions, it is said to be reduced to lowest terms. The conversion process is called reducing a fraction. We can reduce a fraction to lowest terms by Expressing the numerator and denominator as a product of prime numbers. (Find the prime factorization of the numerator and denominator. See Section (Section 1.3) for this technique.) Divide the numerator and denominator by all common factors. (This technique is commonly called “cancelling.”) Reducing Fractions To Lowest Terms Reduced to Lowest Terms It is often useful to convert one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. When a fraction is converted to an equivalent fraction that has the smallest numerator and denominator in the collection of equivalent fractions, it is said to be reduced to lowest terms. The conversion process is called reducing a fraction. We can reduce a fraction to lowest terms by Expressing the numerator and denominator as a product of prime numbers. (Find the prime factorization of the numerator and denominator. See Section (Section 1.3) for this technique.) Divide the numerator and denominator by all common factors. (This technique is commonly called “cancelling.”)  || 
book1_ch01_5_5	Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms Equally important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. The higher, equivalent fraction is constructed by multiplying the original fraction by 1.Notice that and are equivalent, that is Also, This observation helps us suggest the following method for raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to higher terms by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number. For example, can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8, that is, multiplying by 1 in the form How did we know to choose 8 as the proper factor? Since we wish to convert 4 to 32 by multiplying it by some number, we know that 4 must be a factor of 32. This means that 4 divides into 32. In fact, 32÷4 = 8. We divided the original denominator into the new, specified denominator to obtain the proper factor for the multiplication. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms Equally important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. The higher, equivalent fraction is constructed by multiplying the original fraction by 1.Notice that and are equivalent, that is Also, This observation helps us suggest the following method for raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to higher terms by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero number. For example, can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8, that is, multiplying by 1 in the form How did we know to choose 8 as the proper factor? Since we wish to convert 4 to 32 by multiplying it by some number, we know that 4 must be a factor of 32. This means that 4 divides into 32. In fact, 32÷4 = 8. We divided the original denominator into the new, specified denominator to obtain the proper factor for the multiplication.  || 
book1_ch01_6	 || Multiplication of Fractions Multiplication of Fractions To multiply two fractions, multiply the numerators together and multiply the denominators together. Reduce to lowest terms if possible. Example 1.24.  For example, multiply Notice that we since had to reduce, we nearly started over again with the original two fractions. If we factor first, then cancel, then multiply, we will save time and energy and still obtain the correct product.  || Division of Fractions Reciprocals Two numbers whose product is 1 are reciprocals of each other. For example, since and are reciprocals of each other. Some other pairs of reciprocals are listed below.Reciprocals are used in division of fractions. Division of Fractions To divide a first fraction by a second fraction, multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second fraction. Reduce if possible. This method is sometimes called the “invert and multiply” method.  || Addition and Subtraction of Fractions Fractions with Like Denominators To add (or subtract) two or more fractions that have the same denominators, add (or subtract) the numerators and place the resulting sum over the common denominator. Reduce if possible. CAUTIONAdd or subtract only the numerators. Do not add or subtract the denominators!  || 
book1_ch01_6_2	Multiplication of Fractions Multiplication of Fractions To multiply two fractions, multiply the numerators together and multiply the denominators together. Reduce to lowest terms if possible. Example 1.24.  For example, multiply Notice that we since had to reduce, we nearly started over again with the original two fractions. If we factor first, then cancel, then multiply, we will save time and energy and still obtain the correct product. Multiplication of Fractions Multiplication of Fractions To multiply two fractions, multiply the numerators together and multiply the denominators together. Reduce to lowest terms if possible. Example 1.24.  For example, multiply Notice that we since had to reduce, we nearly started over again with the original two fractions. If we factor first, then cancel, then multiply, we will save time and energy and still obtain the correct product.  || 
book1_ch01_6_4	Division of Fractions Reciprocals Two numbers whose product is 1 are reciprocals of each other. For example, since and are reciprocals of each other. Some other pairs of reciprocals are listed below.Reciprocals are used in division of fractions. Division of Fractions To divide a first fraction by a second fraction, multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second fraction. Reduce if possible. This method is sometimes called the “invert and multiply” method. Division of Fractions Reciprocals Two numbers whose product is 1 are reciprocals of each other. For example, since and are reciprocals of each other. Some other pairs of reciprocals are listed below.Reciprocals are used in division of fractions. Division of Fractions To divide a first fraction by a second fraction, multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second fraction. Reduce if possible. This method is sometimes called the “invert and multiply” method.  || 
book1_ch01_6_6	Addition and Subtraction of Fractions Fractions with Like Denominators To add (or subtract) two or more fractions that have the same denominators, add (or subtract) the numerators and place the resulting sum over the common denominator. Reduce if possible. CAUTIONAdd or subtract only the numerators. Do not add or subtract the denominators! Addition and Subtraction of Fractions Fractions with Like Denominators To add (or subtract) two or more fractions that have the same denominators, add (or subtract) the numerators and place the resulting sum over the common denominator. Reduce if possible. CAUTIONAdd or subtract only the numerators. Do not add or subtract the denominators!  || 
book1_ch01_7	 || Decimal Fractions Fractions are one way we can represent parts of whole numbers. Decimal fractions are another way of representing parts of whole numbers. Decimal Fractions A decimal fraction is a fraction in which the denominator is a power of 10. A decimal fraction uses a decimal point to separate whole parts and fractional parts. Whole parts are written to the left of the decimal point and fractional parts are written to the right of the decimal point. Just as each digit in a whole number has a particular value, so do the digits in decimal positions.  || Adding and Subtracting Decimal Fractions Adding/Subtracting Decimal Fractions To add or subtract decimal fractions, Align the numbers vertically so that the decimal points line up under each other and corresponding decimal positions are in the same column. Add zeros if necessary. Add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Place a decimal point in the resulting sum or difference directly under the other decimal points.  || Multiplying Decimal Fractions Multiplying Decimal Fractions To multiply decimals, Multiply tbe numbers as if they were whole numbers. Find the sum of the number of decimal places in the factors. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum found in step 2.  || Dividing Decimal Fractions Dividing Decimal Fractions To divide a decimal by a nonzero decimal, Convert the divisor to a whole number by moving the decimal point to the position immediately to the right of the divisor’s last digit. Move the decimal point of the dividend to the right the same number of digits it was moved in the divisor. Set the decimal point in the quotient by placing a decimal point directly above the decimal point in the dividend. Divide as usual.  || Converting Decimal Fractions to Fractions We can convert a decimal fraction to a fraction by reading it and then writing the phrase we have just read. As we read the decimal fraction, we note the place value farthest to the right. We may have to reduce the fraction.  || Converting Fractions to Decimal Fractions  || 
book1_ch01_7_2	Decimal Fractions Fractions are one way we can represent parts of whole numbers. Decimal fractions are another way of representing parts of whole numbers. Decimal Fractions A decimal fraction is a fraction in which the denominator is a power of 10. A decimal fraction uses a decimal point to separate whole parts and fractional parts. Whole parts are written to the left of the decimal point and fractional parts are written to the right of the decimal point. Just as each digit in a whole number has a particular value, so do the digits in decimal positions. Decimal Fractions Fractions are one way we can represent parts of whole numbers. Decimal fractions are another way of representing parts of whole numbers. Decimal Fractions A decimal fraction is a fraction in which the denominator is a power of 10. A decimal fraction uses a decimal point to separate whole parts and fractional parts. Whole parts are written to the left of the decimal point and fractional parts are written to the right of the decimal point. Just as each digit in a whole number has a particular value, so do the digits in decimal positions.  || 
book1_ch01_7_4	Adding and Subtracting Decimal Fractions Adding/Subtracting Decimal Fractions To add or subtract decimal fractions, Align the numbers vertically so that the decimal points line up under each other and corresponding decimal positions are in the same column. Add zeros if necessary. Add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Place a decimal point in the resulting sum or difference directly under the other decimal points. Adding and Subtracting Decimal Fractions Adding/Subtracting Decimal Fractions To add or subtract decimal fractions, Align the numbers vertically so that the decimal points line up under each other and corresponding decimal positions are in the same column. Add zeros if necessary. Add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Place a decimal point in the resulting sum or difference directly under the other decimal points.  || 
book1_ch01_7_6	Multiplying Decimal Fractions Multiplying Decimal Fractions To multiply decimals, Multiply tbe numbers as if they were whole numbers. Find the sum of the number of decimal places in the factors. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum found in step 2. Multiplying Decimal Fractions Multiplying Decimal Fractions To multiply decimals, Multiply tbe numbers as if they were whole numbers. Find the sum of the number of decimal places in the factors. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum found in step 2.  || 
book1_ch01_7_8	Dividing Decimal Fractions Dividing Decimal Fractions To divide a decimal by a nonzero decimal, Convert the divisor to a whole number by moving the decimal point to the position immediately to the right of the divisor’s last digit. Move the decimal point of the dividend to the right the same number of digits it was moved in the divisor. Set the decimal point in the quotient by placing a decimal point directly above the decimal point in the dividend. Divide as usual. Dividing Decimal Fractions Dividing Decimal Fractions To divide a decimal by a nonzero decimal, Convert the divisor to a whole number by moving the decimal point to the position immediately to the right of the divisor’s last digit. Move the decimal point of the dividend to the right the same number of digits it was moved in the divisor. Set the decimal point in the quotient by placing a decimal point directly above the decimal point in the dividend. Divide as usual.  || 
book1_ch01_7_10	Converting Decimal Fractions to Fractions We can convert a decimal fraction to a fraction by reading it and then writing the phrase we have just read. As we read the decimal fraction, we note the place value farthest to the right. We may have to reduce the fraction. Converting Decimal Fractions to Fractions We can convert a decimal fraction to a fraction by reading it and then writing the phrase we have just read. As we read the decimal fraction, we note the place value farthest to the right. We may have to reduce the fraction.  || 
book1_ch01_7_12	Converting Fractions to Decimal Fractions Converting Fractions to Decimal Fractions  || 
book1_ch01_8	 || The Meaning of Percent The word percent comes from the Latin word “per centum,” “per” meaning “for each,” and “centum” meaning “hundred.” Percent (%) Percent means “for each hundred” or “for every hundred.” The symbol % is used to represent the word percent. Thus,  || Converting A Fraction To A Percent We can see how a fraction can be converted to a percent by analyzing the method that is converted to a percent. In order to convert to a percent, we need to introduce (since percent means for each hundred). Example 1.51.  Fraction to Percent To convert a fraction to a percent, multiply the fraction by 1 in the form , then replace with the % symbol.  || Converting A Decimal To A Percent We can see how a decimal is converted to a percent by analyzing the method that 0.75 is converted to a percent. We need to introduce Decimal to Percent To convert a fraction to a percent, multiply the decimal by 1 in the form , then replace with the % symbol. This amounts to moving the decimal point 2 places to the right.  || Converting A Percent To A Decimal We can see how a percent is converted to a decimal by analyzing the method that 12% is converted to a decimal. We need to introduce Percent to Decimal To convert a percent to a decimal, replace the % symbol with then divide the number by 100. This amounts to moving the decimal point 2 places to the left.  || 
book1_ch01_8_2	The Meaning of Percent The word percent comes from the Latin word “per centum,” “per” meaning “for each,” and “centum” meaning “hundred.” Percent (%) Percent means “for each hundred” or “for every hundred.” The symbol % is used to represent the word percent. Thus, The Meaning of Percent The word percent comes from the Latin word “per centum,” “per” meaning “for each,” and “centum” meaning “hundred.” Percent (%) Percent means “for each hundred” or “for every hundred.” The symbol % is used to represent the word percent. Thus,  || 
book1_ch01_8_3	Converting A Fraction To A Percent We can see how a fraction can be converted to a percent by analyzing the method that is converted to a percent. In order to convert to a percent, we need to introduce (since percent means for each hundred). Example 1.51.  Fraction to Percent To convert a fraction to a percent, multiply the fraction by 1 in the form , then replace with the % symbol. Converting A Fraction To A Percent We can see how a fraction can be converted to a percent by analyzing the method that is converted to a percent. In order to convert to a percent, we need to introduce (since percent means for each hundred). Example 1.51.  Fraction to Percent To convert a fraction to a percent, multiply the fraction by 1 in the form , then replace with the % symbol.  || 
book1_ch01_8_5	Converting A Decimal To A Percent We can see how a decimal is converted to a percent by analyzing the method that 0.75 is converted to a percent. We need to introduce Decimal to Percent To convert a fraction to a percent, multiply the decimal by 1 in the form , then replace with the % symbol. This amounts to moving the decimal point 2 places to the right. Converting A Decimal To A Percent We can see how a decimal is converted to a percent by analyzing the method that 0.75 is converted to a percent. We need to introduce Decimal to Percent To convert a fraction to a percent, multiply the decimal by 1 in the form , then replace with the % symbol. This amounts to moving the decimal point 2 places to the right.  || 
book1_ch01_8_7	Converting A Percent To A Decimal We can see how a percent is converted to a decimal by analyzing the method that 12% is converted to a decimal. We need to introduce Percent to Decimal To convert a percent to a decimal, replace the % symbol with then divide the number by 100. This amounts to moving the decimal point 2 places to the left. Converting A Percent To A Decimal We can see how a percent is converted to a decimal by analyzing the method that 12% is converted to a decimal. We need to introduce Percent to Decimal To convert a percent to a decimal, replace the % symbol with then divide the number by 100. This amounts to moving the decimal point 2 places to the left.  || 
book1_ch09	 ||  || Square Roots When we studied exponents in Section Section 2.5, we noted that 42 = 16 and ( − 4 ) 2 = 16. We can see that 16 is the square of both 4 and − 4 . Since 16 comes from squaring 4 or − 4 , 4 and − 4 are called the square roots of 16. Thus 16 has two square roots, 4 and − 4 . Notice that these two square roots are opposites of each other. We can say that Square Root The square root of a positive number x is a number such that when it is squared the number x results. Every positive number has two square roots, one positive square root and one negative square root. Furthermore, the two square roots of a positive number are opposites of each other. The square root of 0 is 0.  || Principal and Secondary Square Roots There is a notation for distinguishing the positive square root of a number x from the negative square root of x . Principal Square Root: If x is a positive real number, then represents the positive square root of x . The positive square root of a number is called the principal square root of the number. Secondary Square Root: represents the negative square root of x . The negative square root of a number is called the secondary square root of the number. indicates the secondary square root of x . Radical Sign, Radicand, and Radical In the expression is called a radical sign. x is called the radicand. is called a radical. The horizontal bar that appears attached to the radical sign, , is a grouping symbol that specifies the radicand. Because and are the two square root of x ,  || Meaningful Expressions Since we know that the square of any real number is a positive number or zero, we can see that expressions such as do not describe real numbers. There is no real number that can be squared that will produce −16. For to be a real number, we must have x ≥ 0. In our study of algebra, we will assume that all variables and all expressions in radicands represent nonnegative numbers (numbers greater than or equal to zero).  || Simplifying Square Roots When variables occur in the radicand, we can often simplify the expression by removing the radical sign. We can do so by keeping in mind that the radicand is the square of some other expression. We can simplify a radical by seeking an expression whose square is the radicand. The following observations will help us find the square root of a variable quantity. Example 9.9.  Since is a square root of x 6 . Also Example 9.10.  Since is a square root of x 8 . Also Example 9.11.  Since is a square root of x 12 . Also These examples suggest the following rule: If a variable has an even exponent, its square root can be found by dividing that exponent by 2. The examples of Sample Set B illustrate the use of this rule.  || Exercised for Review Exercise 9.2.93. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.4) Find the quotient. Exercise 9.2.94. (Section 8.6) Find the sum. Exercise 9.2.95. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.7) Solve the equation, if possible: Exercise 9.2.96. (Section 8.10) Perform the division: Exercise 9.2.97. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.10) Perform the division:  ||  || Perfect Squares Perfect Squares Real numbers that are squares of rational numbers are called perfect squares. The numbers 25 and are examples of perfect squares since 25 = 52 and and 5 and are rational numbers. The number 2 is not a perfect square since and is not a rational number. Although we will not make a detailed study of irrational numbers, we will make the following observation: Any indicated square root whose radicand is not a perfect square is an irrational number. The numbers and are each irrational since each radicand is not a perfect square.  || The Product Property of Square Roots Notice that     and Since both and equal 6, it must be that The Product Property This suggests that in general, if x and y are positive real numbers, The square root of the product is the product of the square roots.  || The Quotient Property of Square Roots We can suggest a similar rule for quotients. Notice that      and Since both and equal 3, it must be that The Quotient Property This suggests that in general, if x and y are positive real numbers,      y ≠ 0 The square root of the quotient is the quotient of the square roots. CAUTIONIt is extremely important to remember that For example, notice that but We shall study the process of simplifying a square root expression by distinguishing between two types of square roots: square roots not involving a fraction and square roots involving a fraction.  || Square Roots Not Involving Fractions A square root that does not involve fractions is in simplified form if there are no perfect square in the radicand. The square roots are in simplified form since none of the radicands contains a perfect square. The square roots are not in simplified form since each radicand contains a perfect square. To simplify a square root expression that does not involve a fraction, we can use the following two rules: SIMPLIFYING SQUARE ROOTS WITHOUT FRACTIONS If a factor of the radicand contains a variable with an even exponent, the square root is obtained by dividing the exponent by 2. If a factor of the radicand contains a variable with an odd exponent, the square root is obtained by first factoring the variable factor into two factors so that one has an even exponent and the other has an exponent of 1, then using the product property of square roots.  || Square Roots Involving Fractions A square root expression is in simplified form if there are no perfect squares in the radicand, no fractions in the radicand, or 3. no square root expressions in the denominator. The square root expressions and are in simplified form. The square root expressions and are not in simplified form. SIMPLIFYING SQUARE ROOTS WITH FRACTIONS To simplify the square root expression Write the expression as using the rule Multiply the fraction by 1 in the form of Simplify the remaining fraction, Rationalizing the Denominator The process involved in step 2 is called rationalizing the denominator. This process removes square root expressions from the denominator using the fact that  ||  || The Product Property of Square Roots In our work with simplifying square root expressions, we noted that Since this is an equation, we may write it as To multiply two square root expressions, we use the product property of square roots. The Product Property The product of the square roots is the square root of the product. In practice, it is usually easier to simplify the square root expressions before actually performing the multiplication. To see this, consider the following product: We can multiply these square roots in either of two ways: Example 9.27.  Simplify then multiply. Example 9.28.  Multiply then simplify. Notice that in the second method, the expanded term (the third expression, ) may be difficult to factor into a perfect square and some other number.  || Multiplication Rule for Square Root Expressions The preceding example suggests that the following rule for multiplying two square root expressions. Rule for Multiplying Square Root Expressions Simplify each square root expression, if necessary. Perform the multiplecation. Simplify, if necessary.  ||  || The Division Property of Square Roots In our work with simplifying square root expressions, we noted that Since this is an equation, we may write it as To divide two square root expressions, we use the division property of square roots. The Division Property The quotient of the square roots is the square root of the quotient.  || Rationalizing the Denominator As we can see by observing the right side of the equation governing the division of square roots, the process may produce a fraction in the radicand. This means, of course, that the square root expression is not in simplified form. It is sometimes more useful to rationalize the denominator of a square root expression before actually performing the division.  || Conjugates and Rationalizing the Denominator To perform a division that contains a binomial in the denominator, such as we multiply the numerator and denominator by a conjugate of the denominator. Conjugate A conjugate of the binomial a + b is a – b . Similarly, a conjugate of a – b is a + b . Notice that when the conjugates a + b and a – b are multiplied together, they produce a difference of two squares. ( a + b )( a – b ) = a 2 – a b + a b – b 2 = a 2 – b 2 This principle helps us eliminate square root radicals, as shown in these examples that illustrate finding the product of conjugates. Example 9.45.  Example 9.46.   ||  || The Logic Behind The Process Now we will study methods of simplifying radical expressions such as The procedure for adding and subtracting square root expressions will become apparent if we think back to the procedure we used for simplifying polynomial expressions such as The variables x and a are letters representing some unknown quantities (perhaps x represents and a represents ). Combining like terms gives us  || The Process Let’s consider the expression There are two ways to look at the simplification process: We are asking, “How many square roots of 3 do we have?” means we have 4 “square roots of 3” means we have 8 “square roots of 3”Thus, altogether we have 12 “square roots of 3.” We can also use the idea of combining like terms. If we recall, the process of combining like terms is based on the distributive propertyWe could simplify using the distributive property. Both methods will give us the same result. The first method is probably a bit quicker, but keep in mind, however, that the process works because it is based on one of the basic rules of algebra, the distributive property of real numbers.  ||  || Square Root Equations And Extraneous Solutions Square Root Equation A square root equation is an equation that contains a variable under a square root sign. The fact that suggests that we can solve a square root equation by squaring both sides of the equation. Extraneous Solutions Squaring both sides of an equation can, however, introduce extraneous solutions. Consider the equation x = − 6 The solution is − 6. Square both sides. x 2 = ( − 6 ) 2 x 2 = 36 This equation has two solutions, − 6 and + 6. The + 6 is an extraneous solution since it does not check in the original equation: + 6 ≠ − 6.  || Method For Solving Square Root Equations Solving Square Root Equations Isolate a radical. This means get a square root expression by itself on one side of the equal sign. Square both sides of the equation. Simplify the equation by combining like terms. Repeat step 1 if radicals are still present. Obtain potential solutions by solving the resulting non-square root equation. Check each potential solution by substitution into the original equation.  || 
book1_ch09_2	 || Square Roots When we studied exponents in Section Section 2.5, we noted that 42 = 16 and ( − 4 ) 2 = 16. We can see that 16 is the square of both 4 and − 4 . Since 16 comes from squaring 4 or − 4 , 4 and − 4 are called the square roots of 16. Thus 16 has two square roots, 4 and − 4 . Notice that these two square roots are opposites of each other. We can say that Square Root The square root of a positive number x is a number such that when it is squared the number x results. Every positive number has two square roots, one positive square root and one negative square root. Furthermore, the two square roots of a positive number are opposites of each other. The square root of 0 is 0.  || Principal and Secondary Square Roots There is a notation for distinguishing the positive square root of a number x from the negative square root of x . Principal Square Root: If x is a positive real number, then represents the positive square root of x . The positive square root of a number is called the principal square root of the number. Secondary Square Root: represents the negative square root of x . The negative square root of a number is called the secondary square root of the number. indicates the secondary square root of x . Radical Sign, Radicand, and Radical In the expression is called a radical sign. x is called the radicand. is called a radical. The horizontal bar that appears attached to the radical sign, , is a grouping symbol that specifies the radicand. Because and are the two square root of x ,  || Meaningful Expressions Since we know that the square of any real number is a positive number or zero, we can see that expressions such as do not describe real numbers. There is no real number that can be squared that will produce −16. For to be a real number, we must have x ≥ 0. In our study of algebra, we will assume that all variables and all expressions in radicands represent nonnegative numbers (numbers greater than or equal to zero).  || Simplifying Square Roots When variables occur in the radicand, we can often simplify the expression by removing the radical sign. We can do so by keeping in mind that the radicand is the square of some other expression. We can simplify a radical by seeking an expression whose square is the radicand. The following observations will help us find the square root of a variable quantity. Example 9.9.  Since is a square root of x 6 . Also Example 9.10.  Since is a square root of x 8 . Also Example 9.11.  Since is a square root of x 12 . Also These examples suggest the following rule: If a variable has an even exponent, its square root can be found by dividing that exponent by 2. The examples of Sample Set B illustrate the use of this rule.  || Exercised for Review Exercise 9.2.93. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.4) Find the quotient. Exercise 9.2.94. (Section 8.6) Find the sum. Exercise 9.2.95. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.7) Solve the equation, if possible: Exercise 9.2.96. (Section 8.10) Perform the division: Exercise 9.2.97. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.10) Perform the division:  || 
book1_ch09_2_2	Square Roots When we studied exponents in Section Section 2.5, we noted that 42 = 16 and ( − 4 ) 2 = 16. We can see that 16 is the square of both 4 and − 4 . Since 16 comes from squaring 4 or − 4 , 4 and − 4 are called the square roots of 16. Thus 16 has two square roots, 4 and − 4 . Notice that these two square roots are opposites of each other. We can say that Square Root The square root of a positive number x is a number such that when it is squared the number x results. Every positive number has two square roots, one positive square root and one negative square root. Furthermore, the two square roots of a positive number are opposites of each other. The square root of 0 is 0. Square Roots When we studied exponents in Section Section 2.5, we noted that 42 = 16 and ( − 4 ) 2 = 16. We can see that 16 is the square of both 4 and − 4 . Since 16 comes from squaring 4 or − 4 , 4 and − 4 are called the square roots of 16. Thus 16 has two square roots, 4 and − 4 . Notice that these two square roots are opposites of each other. We can say that Square Root The square root of a positive number x is a number such that when it is squared the number x results. Every positive number has two square roots, one positive square root and one negative square root. Furthermore, the two square roots of a positive number are opposites of each other. The square root of 0 is 0.  || 
book1_ch09_2_5	Principal and Secondary Square Roots There is a notation for distinguishing the positive square root of a number x from the negative square root of x . Principal Square Root: If x is a positive real number, then represents the positive square root of x . The positive square root of a number is called the principal square root of the number. Secondary Square Root: represents the negative square root of x . The negative square root of a number is called the secondary square root of the number. indicates the secondary square root of x . Radical Sign, Radicand, and Radical In the expression is called a radical sign. x is called the radicand. is called a radical. The horizontal bar that appears attached to the radical sign, , is a grouping symbol that specifies the radicand. Because and are the two square root of x , Principal and Secondary Square Roots There is a notation for distinguishing the positive square root of a number x from the negative square root of x . Principal Square Root: If x is a positive real number, then represents the positive square root of x . The positive square root of a number is called the principal square root of the number. Secondary Square Root: represents the negative square root of x . The negative square root of a number is called the secondary square root of the number. indicates the secondary square root of x . Radical Sign, Radicand, and Radical In the expression is called a radical sign. x is called the radicand. is called a radical. The horizontal bar that appears attached to the radical sign, , is a grouping symbol that specifies the radicand. Because and are the two square root of x ,  || 
book1_ch09_2_8	Meaningful Expressions Since we know that the square of any real number is a positive number or zero, we can see that expressions such as do not describe real numbers. There is no real number that can be squared that will produce −16. For to be a real number, we must have x ≥ 0. In our study of algebra, we will assume that all variables and all expressions in radicands represent nonnegative numbers (numbers greater than or equal to zero). Meaningful Expressions Since we know that the square of any real number is a positive number or zero, we can see that expressions such as do not describe real numbers. There is no real number that can be squared that will produce −16. For to be a real number, we must have x ≥ 0. In our study of algebra, we will assume that all variables and all expressions in radicands represent nonnegative numbers (numbers greater than or equal to zero).  || 
book1_ch09_2_11	Simplifying Square Roots When variables occur in the radicand, we can often simplify the expression by removing the radical sign. We can do so by keeping in mind that the radicand is the square of some other expression. We can simplify a radical by seeking an expression whose square is the radicand. The following observations will help us find the square root of a variable quantity. Example 9.9.  Since is a square root of x 6 . Also Example 9.10.  Since is a square root of x 8 . Also Example 9.11.  Since is a square root of x 12 . Also These examples suggest the following rule: If a variable has an even exponent, its square root can be found by dividing that exponent by 2. The examples of Sample Set B illustrate the use of this rule. Simplifying Square Roots When variables occur in the radicand, we can often simplify the expression by removing the radical sign. We can do so by keeping in mind that the radicand is the square of some other expression. We can simplify a radical by seeking an expression whose square is the radicand. The following observations will help us find the square root of a variable quantity. Example 9.9.  Since is a square root of x 6 . Also Example 9.10.  Since is a square root of x 8 . Also Example 9.11.  Since is a square root of x 12 . Also These examples suggest the following rule: If a variable has an even exponent, its square root can be found by dividing that exponent by 2. The examples of Sample Set B illustrate the use of this rule.  || 
book1_ch09_2_15	Exercised for Review Exercise 9.2.93. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.4) Find the quotient. Exercise 9.2.94. (Section 8.6) Find the sum. Exercise 9.2.95. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.7) Solve the equation, if possible: Exercise 9.2.96. (Section 8.10) Perform the division: Exercise 9.2.97. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.10) Perform the division: Exercised for Review Exercise 9.2.93. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.4) Find the quotient. Exercise 9.2.94. (Section 8.6) Find the sum. Exercise 9.2.95. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.7) Solve the equation, if possible: Exercise 9.2.96. (Section 8.10) Perform the division: Exercise 9.2.97. (Go to Solution) (Section 8.10) Perform the division:  || 
book1_ch09_3	 || Perfect Squares Perfect Squares Real numbers that are squares of rational numbers are called perfect squares. The numbers 25 and are examples of perfect squares since 25 = 52 and and 5 and are rational numbers. The number 2 is not a perfect square since and is not a rational number. Although we will not make a detailed study of irrational numbers, we will make the following observation: Any indicated square root whose radicand is not a perfect square is an irrational number. The numbers and are each irrational since each radicand is not a perfect square.  || The Product Property of Square Roots Notice that     and Since both and equal 6, it must be that The Product Property This suggests that in general, if x and y are positive real numbers, The square root of the product is the product of the square roots.  || The Quotient Property of Square Roots We can suggest a similar rule for quotients. Notice that      and Since both and equal 3, it must be that The Quotient Property This suggests that in general, if x and y are positive real numbers,      y ≠ 0 The square root of the quotient is the quotient of the square roots. CAUTIONIt is extremely important to remember that For example, notice that but We shall study the process of simplifying a square root expression by distinguishing between two types of square roots: square roots not involving a fraction and square roots involving a fraction.  || Square Roots Not Involving Fractions A square root that does not involve fractions is in simplified form if there are no perfect square in the radicand. The square roots are in simplified form since none of the radicands contains a perfect square. The square roots are not in simplified form since each radicand contains a perfect square. To simplify a square root expression that does not involve a fraction, we can use the following two rules: SIMPLIFYING SQUARE ROOTS WITHOUT FRACTIONS If a factor of the radicand contains a variable with an even exponent, the square root is obtained by dividing the exponent by 2. If a factor of the radicand contains a variable with an odd exponent, the square root is obtained by first factoring the variable factor into two factors so that one has an even exponent and the other has an exponent of 1, then using the product property of square roots.  || Square Roots Involving Fractions A square root expression is in simplified form if there are no perfect squares in the radicand, no fractions in the radicand, or 3. no square root expressions in the denominator. The square root expressions and are in simplified form. The square root expressions and are not in simplified form. SIMPLIFYING SQUARE ROOTS WITH FRACTIONS To simplify the square root expression Write the expression as using the rule Multiply the fraction by 1 in the form of Simplify the remaining fraction, Rationalizing the Denominator The process involved in step 2 is called rationalizing the denominator. This process removes square root expressions from the denominator using the fact that  || 
book1_ch09_3_2	Perfect Squares Perfect Squares Real numbers that are squares of rational numbers are called perfect squares. The numbers 25 and are examples of perfect squares since 25 = 52 and and 5 and are rational numbers. The number 2 is not a perfect square since and is not a rational number. Although we will not make a detailed study of irrational numbers, we will make the following observation: Any indicated square root whose radicand is not a perfect square is an irrational number. The numbers and are each irrational since each radicand is not a perfect square. Perfect Squares Perfect Squares Real numbers that are squares of rational numbers are called perfect squares. The numbers 25 and are examples of perfect squares since 25 = 52 and and 5 and are rational numbers. The number 2 is not a perfect square since and is not a rational number. Although we will not make a detailed study of irrational numbers, we will make the following observation: Any indicated square root whose radicand is not a perfect square is an irrational number. The numbers and are each irrational since each radicand is not a perfect square.  || 
book1_ch09_3_3	The Product Property of Square Roots Notice that     and Since both and equal 6, it must be that The Product Property This suggests that in general, if x and y are positive real numbers, The square root of the product is the product of the square roots. The Product Property of Square Roots Notice that     and Since both and equal 6, it must be that The Product Property This suggests that in general, if x and y are positive real numbers, The square root of the product is the product of the square roots.  || 
book1_ch09_3_4	The Quotient Property of Square Roots We can suggest a similar rule for quotients. Notice that      and Since both and equal 3, it must be that The Quotient Property This suggests that in general, if x and y are positive real numbers,      y ≠ 0 The square root of the quotient is the quotient of the square roots. CAUTIONIt is extremely important to remember that For example, notice that but We shall study the process of simplifying a square root expression by distinguishing between two types of square roots: square roots not involving a fraction and square roots involving a fraction. The Quotient Property of Square Roots We can suggest a similar rule for quotients. Notice that      and Since both and equal 3, it must be that The Quotient Property This suggests that in general, if x and y are positive real numbers,      y ≠ 0 The square root of the quotient is the quotient of the square roots. CAUTIONIt is extremely important to remember that For example, notice that but We shall study the process of simplifying a square root expression by distinguishing between two types of square roots: square roots not involving a fraction and square roots involving a fraction.  || 
book1_ch09_3_5	Square Roots Not Involving Fractions A square root that does not involve fractions is in simplified form if there are no perfect square in the radicand. The square roots are in simplified form since none of the radicands contains a perfect square. The square roots are not in simplified form since each radicand contains a perfect square. To simplify a square root expression that does not involve a fraction, we can use the following two rules: SIMPLIFYING SQUARE ROOTS WITHOUT FRACTIONS If a factor of the radicand contains a variable with an even exponent, the square root is obtained by dividing the exponent by 2. If a factor of the radicand contains a variable with an odd exponent, the square root is obtained by first factoring the variable factor into two factors so that one has an even exponent and the other has an exponent of 1, then using the product property of square roots. Square Roots Not Involving Fractions A square root that does not involve fractions is in simplified form if there are no perfect square in the radicand. The square roots are in simplified form since none of the radicands contains a perfect square. The square roots are not in simplified form since each radicand contains a perfect square. To simplify a square root expression that does not involve a fraction, we can use the following two rules: SIMPLIFYING SQUARE ROOTS WITHOUT FRACTIONS If a factor of the radicand contains a variable with an even exponent, the square root is obtained by dividing the exponent by 2. If a factor of the radicand contains a variable with an odd exponent, the square root is obtained by first factoring the variable factor into two factors so that one has an even exponent and the other has an exponent of 1, then using the product property of square roots.  || 
book1_ch09_3_8	Square Roots Involving Fractions A square root expression is in simplified form if there are no perfect squares in the radicand, no fractions in the radicand, or 3. no square root expressions in the denominator. The square root expressions and are in simplified form. The square root expressions and are not in simplified form. SIMPLIFYING SQUARE ROOTS WITH FRACTIONS To simplify the square root expression Write the expression as using the rule Multiply the fraction by 1 in the form of Simplify the remaining fraction, Rationalizing the Denominator The process involved in step 2 is called rationalizing the denominator. This process removes square root expressions from the denominator using the fact that Square Roots Involving Fractions A square root expression is in simplified form if there are no perfect squares in the radicand, no fractions in the radicand, or 3. no square root expressions in the denominator. The square root expressions and are in simplified form. The square root expressions and are not in simplified form. SIMPLIFYING SQUARE ROOTS WITH FRACTIONS To simplify the square root expression Write the expression as using the rule Multiply the fraction by 1 in the form of Simplify the remaining fraction, Rationalizing the Denominator The process involved in step 2 is called rationalizing the denominator. This process removes square root expressions from the denominator using the fact that  || 
book1_ch09_4	 || The Product Property of Square Roots In our work with simplifying square root expressions, we noted that Since this is an equation, we may write it as To multiply two square root expressions, we use the product property of square roots. The Product Property The product of the square roots is the square root of the product. In practice, it is usually easier to simplify the square root expressions before actually performing the multiplication. To see this, consider the following product: We can multiply these square roots in either of two ways: Example 9.27.  Simplify then multiply. Example 9.28.  Multiply then simplify. Notice that in the second method, the expanded term (the third expression, ) may be difficult to factor into a perfect square and some other number.  || Multiplication Rule for Square Root Expressions The preceding example suggests that the following rule for multiplying two square root expressions. Rule for Multiplying Square Root Expressions Simplify each square root expression, if necessary. Perform the multiplecation. Simplify, if necessary.  || 
book1_ch09_4_2	The Product Property of Square Roots In our work with simplifying square root expressions, we noted that Since this is an equation, we may write it as To multiply two square root expressions, we use the product property of square roots. The Product Property The product of the square roots is the square root of the product. In practice, it is usually easier to simplify the square root expressions before actually performing the multiplication. To see this, consider the following product: We can multiply these square roots in either of two ways: Example 9.27.  Simplify then multiply. Example 9.28.  Multiply then simplify. Notice that in the second method, the expanded term (the third expression, ) may be difficult to factor into a perfect square and some other number. The Product Property of Square Roots In our work with simplifying square root expressions, we noted that Since this is an equation, we may write it as To multiply two square root expressions, we use the product property of square roots. The Product Property The product of the square roots is the square root of the product. In practice, it is usually easier to simplify the square root expressions before actually performing the multiplication. To see this, consider the following product: We can multiply these square roots in either of two ways: Example 9.27.  Simplify then multiply. Example 9.28.  Multiply then simplify. Notice that in the second method, the expanded term (the third expression, ) may be difficult to factor into a perfect square and some other number.  || 
book1_ch09_4_3	Multiplication Rule for Square Root Expressions The preceding example suggests that the following rule for multiplying two square root expressions. Rule for Multiplying Square Root Expressions Simplify each square root expression, if necessary. Perform the multiplecation. Simplify, if necessary. Multiplication Rule for Square Root Expressions The preceding example suggests that the following rule for multiplying two square root expressions. Rule for Multiplying Square Root Expressions Simplify each square root expression, if necessary. Perform the multiplecation. Simplify, if necessary.  || 
book1_ch09_5	 || The Division Property of Square Roots In our work with simplifying square root expressions, we noted that Since this is an equation, we may write it as To divide two square root expressions, we use the division property of square roots. The Division Property The quotient of the square roots is the square root of the quotient.  || Rationalizing the Denominator As we can see by observing the right side of the equation governing the division of square roots, the process may produce a fraction in the radicand. This means, of course, that the square root expression is not in simplified form. It is sometimes more useful to rationalize the denominator of a square root expression before actually performing the division.  || Conjugates and Rationalizing the Denominator To perform a division that contains a binomial in the denominator, such as we multiply the numerator and denominator by a conjugate of the denominator. Conjugate A conjugate of the binomial a + b is a – b . Similarly, a conjugate of a – b is a + b . Notice that when the conjugates a + b and a – b are multiplied together, they produce a difference of two squares. ( a + b )( a – b ) = a 2 – a b + a b – b 2 = a 2 – b 2 This principle helps us eliminate square root radicals, as shown in these examples that illustrate finding the product of conjugates. Example 9.45.  Example 9.46.   || 
book1_ch09_5_2	The Division Property of Square Roots In our work with simplifying square root expressions, we noted that Since this is an equation, we may write it as To divide two square root expressions, we use the division property of square roots. The Division Property The quotient of the square roots is the square root of the quotient. The Division Property of Square Roots In our work with simplifying square root expressions, we noted that Since this is an equation, we may write it as To divide two square root expressions, we use the division property of square roots. The Division Property The quotient of the square roots is the square root of the quotient.  || 
book1_ch09_5_3	Rationalizing the Denominator As we can see by observing the right side of the equation governing the division of square roots, the process may produce a fraction in the radicand. This means, of course, that the square root expression is not in simplified form. It is sometimes more useful to rationalize the denominator of a square root expression before actually performing the division. Rationalizing the Denominator As we can see by observing the right side of the equation governing the division of square roots, the process may produce a fraction in the radicand. This means, of course, that the square root expression is not in simplified form. It is sometimes more useful to rationalize the denominator of a square root expression before actually performing the division.  || 
book1_ch09_5_6	Conjugates and Rationalizing the Denominator To perform a division that contains a binomial in the denominator, such as we multiply the numerator and denominator by a conjugate of the denominator. Conjugate A conjugate of the binomial a + b is a – b . Similarly, a conjugate of a – b is a + b . Notice that when the conjugates a + b and a – b are multiplied together, they produce a difference of two squares. ( a + b )( a – b ) = a 2 – a b + a b – b 2 = a 2 – b 2 This principle helps us eliminate square root radicals, as shown in these examples that illustrate finding the product of conjugates. Example 9.45.  Example 9.46.  Conjugates and Rationalizing the Denominator To perform a division that contains a binomial in the denominator, such as we multiply the numerator and denominator by a conjugate of the denominator. Conjugate A conjugate of the binomial a + b is a – b . Similarly, a conjugate of a – b is a + b . Notice that when the conjugates a + b and a – b are multiplied together, they produce a difference of two squares. ( a + b )( a – b ) = a 2 – a b + a b – b 2 = a 2 – b 2 This principle helps us eliminate square root radicals, as shown in these examples that illustrate finding the product of conjugates. Example 9.45.  Example 9.46.   || 
book1_ch09_6	 || The Logic Behind The Process Now we will study methods of simplifying radical expressions such as The procedure for adding and subtracting square root expressions will become apparent if we think back to the procedure we used for simplifying polynomial expressions such as The variables x and a are letters representing some unknown quantities (perhaps x represents and a represents ). Combining like terms gives us  || The Process Let’s consider the expression There are two ways to look at the simplification process: We are asking, “How many square roots of 3 do we have?” means we have 4 “square roots of 3” means we have 8 “square roots of 3”Thus, altogether we have 12 “square roots of 3.” We can also use the idea of combining like terms. If we recall, the process of combining like terms is based on the distributive propertyWe could simplify using the distributive property. Both methods will give us the same result. The first method is probably a bit quicker, but keep in mind, however, that the process works because it is based on one of the basic rules of algebra, the distributive property of real numbers.  || 
book1_ch09_6_2	The Logic Behind The Process Now we will study methods of simplifying radical expressions such as The procedure for adding and subtracting square root expressions will become apparent if we think back to the procedure we used for simplifying polynomial expressions such as The variables x and a are letters representing some unknown quantities (perhaps x represents and a represents ). Combining like terms gives us The Logic Behind The Process Now we will study methods of simplifying radical expressions such as The procedure for adding and subtracting square root expressions will become apparent if we think back to the procedure we used for simplifying polynomial expressions such as The variables x and a are letters representing some unknown quantities (perhaps x represents and a represents ). Combining like terms gives us  || 
book1_ch09_6_3	The Process Let’s consider the expression There are two ways to look at the simplification process: We are asking, “How many square roots of 3 do we have?” means we have 4 “square roots of 3” means we have 8 “square roots of 3”Thus, altogether we have 12 “square roots of 3.” We can also use the idea of combining like terms. If we recall, the process of combining like terms is based on the distributive propertyWe could simplify using the distributive property. Both methods will give us the same result. The first method is probably a bit quicker, but keep in mind, however, that the process works because it is based on one of the basic rules of algebra, the distributive property of real numbers. The Process Let’s consider the expression There are two ways to look at the simplification process: We are asking, “How many square roots of 3 do we have?” means we have 4 “square roots of 3” means we have 8 “square roots of 3”Thus, altogether we have 12 “square roots of 3.” We can also use the idea of combining like terms. If we recall, the process of combining like terms is based on the distributive propertyWe could simplify using the distributive property. Both methods will give us the same result. The first method is probably a bit quicker, but keep in mind, however, that the process works because it is based on one of the basic rules of algebra, the distributive property of real numbers.  || 
book1_ch09_7	 || Square Root Equations And Extraneous Solutions Square Root Equation A square root equation is an equation that contains a variable under a square root sign. The fact that suggests that we can solve a square root equation by squaring both sides of the equation. Extraneous Solutions Squaring both sides of an equation can, however, introduce extraneous solutions. Consider the equation x = − 6 The solution is − 6. Square both sides. x 2 = ( − 6 ) 2 x 2 = 36 This equation has two solutions, − 6 and + 6. The + 6 is an extraneous solution since it does not check in the original equation: + 6 ≠ − 6.  || Method For Solving Square Root Equations Solving Square Root Equations Isolate a radical. This means get a square root expression by itself on one side of the equal sign. Square both sides of the equation. Simplify the equation by combining like terms. Repeat step 1 if radicals are still present. Obtain potential solutions by solving the resulting non-square root equation. Check each potential solution by substitution into the original equation.  || 
book1_ch09_7_2	Square Root Equations And Extraneous Solutions Square Root Equation A square root equation is an equation that contains a variable under a square root sign. The fact that suggests that we can solve a square root equation by squaring both sides of the equation. Extraneous Solutions Squaring both sides of an equation can, however, introduce extraneous solutions. Consider the equation x = − 6 The solution is − 6. Square both sides. x 2 = ( − 6 ) 2 x 2 = 36 This equation has two solutions, − 6 and + 6. The + 6 is an extraneous solution since it does not check in the original equation: + 6 ≠ − 6. Square Root Equations And Extraneous Solutions Square Root Equation A square root equation is an equation that contains a variable under a square root sign. The fact that suggests that we can solve a square root equation by squaring both sides of the equation. Extraneous Solutions Squaring both sides of an equation can, however, introduce extraneous solutions. Consider the equation x = − 6 The solution is − 6. Square both sides. x 2 = ( − 6 ) 2 x 2 = 36 This equation has two solutions, − 6 and + 6. The + 6 is an extraneous solution since it does not check in the original equation: + 6 ≠ − 6.  || 
book1_ch09_7_3	Method For Solving Square Root Equations Solving Square Root Equations Isolate a radical. This means get a square root expression by itself on one side of the equal sign. Square both sides of the equation. Simplify the equation by combining like terms. Repeat step 1 if radicals are still present. Obtain potential solutions by solving the resulting non-square root equation. Check each potential solution by substitution into the original equation. Method For Solving Square Root Equations Solving Square Root Equations Isolate a radical. This means get a square root expression by itself on one side of the equal sign. Square both sides of the equation. Simplify the equation by combining like terms. Repeat step 1 if radicals are still present. Obtain potential solutions by solving the resulting non-square root equation. Check each potential solution by substitution into the original equation.  || 
book1_ch03	 ||  || Positive and Negative Numbers When we studied the number line in Section Section 2.3 we noted that Each point on the number line corresponds to a real number, and each real number is located at a unique point on the number line. Positive and Negative Numbers Each real number has a sign inherently associated with it. A real number is said to be a positive number if it is located to the right of 0 on the number line. It is a negative number if it is located to the left of 0 on the number line. THE NOTATION OF SIGNED NUMBERS A number is denoted as positive if it is directly preceded by a " + " sign or no sign at all.A number is denoted as negative if it is directly preceded by a " − " sign. The " + " and " – " signs now have two meanings: + can denote the operation of addition or a positive number. − can denote the operation of subtraction or a negative number. Read the "-" Sign as "Negative" To avoid any confusion between "sign" and "operation," it is preferable to read the sign of a number as "positive" or "negative."  || Opposites Opposites On the number line, each real number has an image on the opposite side of 0. For this reason we say that each real number has an opposite. Opposites are the same distance from zero but have opposite signs. The opposite of a real number is denoted by placing a negative sign directly in front of the number. Thus, if a is any real number, then − a is its opposite. Notice that the letter a is a variable. Thus, " a " need not be positive, and " − a " need not be negative. If a is a real number, − a is opposite a on the number line and a is opposite − a on the number line. − ( − a ) is opposite − a on the number line. This implies that − ( − a ) = a . This property of opposites suggests the double-negative property for real numbers. THE DOUBLE-NEGATIVE PROPERTY If a is a real number, then − ( − a ) = a  ||  || Geometric Definition of Absolute Value Absolute Value—Geometric Approach The absolute value of a number a , denoted | a | , is the distance from a to 0 on the number line. Absolute value speaks to the question of "how far," and not "which way." The phrase how far implies length, and length is always a nonnegative (zero or positive) quantity. Thus, the absolute value of a number is a nonnegative number. This is shown in the following examples: Example 3.9.  | 4 | = 4 Example 3.10.  | − 4 | = 4 Example 3.11.  | 0 | = 0 Example 3.12.  − | 5 | = − 5 .The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of 5." The absolute value of 5 is 5. Hence, negative the absolute value of 5 is − 5 . Example 3.13.  − | − 3 | = − 3 .The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of − 3 ." The absolute value of − 3 is 3. Hence, negative the absolute value of − 3 is − ( 3 ) = − 3 .  || Algebraic Definition of Absolute Value The problems in the first example may help to suggest the following algebraic definition of absolute value. The definition is interpreted below. Examples follow the interpretation. Absolute Value—Algebraic Approach The absolute value of a number a is The algebraic definition takes into account the fact that the number a could be either positive or zero ( ≥ 0 ) or negative ( < 0 ) . If the number a is positive or zero ( ≥ 0 ) , the first part of the definition applies. The first part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed in the absolute bars is a nonnegative number, the absolute value of the number is the number itself. If the number a is negative ( < 0 ) , the second part of the definition applies. The second part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a negative number, the absolute value of the number is the opposite of the number. The opposite of a negative number is a positive number.  ||  || Addition of Numbers with Like Signs Let us add the two positive numbers 2 and 3. We perform this addition on the number line as follows. We begin at 0, the origin.Since 2 is positive, we move 2 units to the right.Since 3 is positive, we move 3 more units to the right.We are now located at 5.Thus, 2 + 3 = 5 . Summarizing, we have (2 positive units) + (3 positive units) = (5 positive units) Now let us add the two negative numbers − 2 and − 3 . We perform this addition on the number line as follows. We begin at 0, the origin.Since − 2 is negative, we move 2 units to the left.Since − 3 is negative, we move 3 more units to the left.We are now located at − 5 . Thus, ( − 2) + ( − 3) = − 5 . Summarizing, we have (2 negative units) + (3 negative units) = (5 negative units) These two examples suggest that Adding Numbers with the Same Sign To add two real numbers that have the same sign, add the absolute values of the numbers and associate the common sign with the sum.  || Addition with Zero Notice that Addition with 0 The Additive Identity Is 0 Since adding 0 to a real number leaves that number unchanged, 0 is called the additive identity.  || Addition of Numbers with Unlike Signs Now let us perform the addition 2 + ( − 6) . These two numbers have unlike signs. This type of addition can also be illustrated using the number line. We begin at 0, the origin.Since 2 is positive, we move 2 units to the right.Since − 6 is negative, we move, from the 2, 6 units to the left.We are now located at − 4 . A rule for adding two numbers that have unlike signs is suggested by noting that if the signs are disregarded, 4 can be obtained from 2 and 6 by subtracting 2 from 6. But 2 and 6 are precisely the absolute values of 2 and − 6 . Also, notice that the sign of the number with the larger absolute value is negative and that the sign of the resulting sum is negative. Adding Numbers with Unlike Signs To add two real numbers that have unlike signs, subtract the smaller absolute value from the larger absolute value and associate the sign of the number with the larger absolute value with this difference.  ||  || Definition of Subtraction We know from our experience with arithmetic that the subtraction 5 − 2 produces 3, that is, 5 − 2 = 3 . Illustrating this process on the number line suggests a rule for subtracting signed numbers. We begin at 0, the origin. Since 5 is positive, we move 5 units to the right. Then, we move 2 units to the left to get to 3. (This reminds us of addition with a negative number.) This illustration suggests that 5 − 2 is the same as 5 + ( − 2) .This leads us directly to the definition of subtraction. Definition of Subtraction If a and b are real numbers, a − b is the same as a + ( − b) , where − b is the opposite of b .  || Subtraction of Signed Numbers The preceding definition suggests the rule for subtracting signed numbers. Subtraction of Signed Numbers To perform the subtraction a − b , add the opposite of b to a , that is, change the sign of b and add.  ||  || Multiplication of Signed Numbers Let us consider first the product of two positive numbers. Multiply: 3⋅5 . 3⋅5 means 5 + 5 + 5 = 15 . This suggests that (positive number)⋅(positive number) = positive number . More briefly, ( + )( + ) = + . Now consider the product of a positive number and a negative number. Multiply: (3)( − 5) . (3)( − 5) means ( − 5) + ( − 5) + ( − 5) = − 15 . This suggests that (positive number)⋅(negative number) = negative number More briefly, ( + )( – ) = – . By the commutative property of multiplication, we get (negative number)⋅(positive number) = negative number More briefly, ( – )( + ) = – . The sign of the product of two negative numbers can be determined using the following illustration: Multiply − 2 by, respectively, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0,  − 1,  − 2,  − 3,  − 4 . Notice that when the multiplier decreases by 1, the product increases by 2. We have the following rules for multiplying signed numbers. Rules for Multiplying Signed Numbers To multiply two real numbers that have the same sign, multiply their absolute values. The product is positive. opposite signs, multiply their absolute values. The product is negative.  || Division of Signed Numbers We can determine the sign pattern for division by relating division to multiplication. Division is defined in terms of multiplication in the following way. If b⋅c = a , then . For example, since 3⋅4 = 12 , it follows that . Notice the pattern: Since , it follows that The sign pattern for division follows from the sign pattern for multiplication. Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is We have the following rules for dividing signed numbers. Rules for Dividing Signed Numbers To divide two real numbers that have the same sign, divide their absolute values. The quotient is positive. opposite signs, divide their absolute values. The quotient is negative.  ||  || Reciprocals Reciprocals Two real numbers are said to be reciprocals of each other if their product is 1. Every nonzero real number has exactly one reciprocal, as shown in the examples below. Zero has no reciprocal. Example 3.38.  Example 3.39.  Example 3.40.  Example 3.41.  Example 3.42.  Example 3.43.   || Negative Exponents We can use the idea of reciprocals to find a meaning for negative exponents. Consider the product of x 3 and x − 3 . Assume x ≠ 0 . x 3 ⋅x − 3 = x 3 + ( − 3) = x 0 = 1 Thus, since the product of x 3 and x − 3 is 1, x 3 and x − 3 must be reciprocals. We also know that . (See problem 6 above.) Thus, x 3 and are also reciprocals. Then, since x − 3 and are both reciprocals of x 3 and a real number can have only one reciprocal, it must be that . We have used − 3 as the exponent, but the process works as well for all other negative integers. We make the following definition. If n is any natural number and x is any nonzero real number, then  || Working with Negative Exponents The problems of Sample Set A suggest the following rule for working with exponents: Moving Factors Up and Down In a fraction, a factor can be moved from the numerator to the denominator or from the denominator to the numerator by changing the sign of the exponent.  ||  || Standard Form to Scientific Form Very large numbers such as 43,000,000,000,000,000,000 (the number of different possible configurations of Rubik’s cube) and very small numbers such as 0.000000000000000000000340 (the mass of the amino acid tryptophan) are extremely inconvenient to write and read. Such numbers can be expressed more conveniently by writing them as part of a power of 10. To see how this is done, let us start with a somewhat smaller number such as 2480. Notice that Scientific Form The last form is called the scientific form of the number. There is one nonzero digit to the left of the decimal point and the absolute value of the exponent on 10 records the number of places the original decimal point was moved to the left. There is one nonzero digit to the left of the decimal point and the absolute value of the exponent of 10 records the number of places the original decimal point was moved to the right. Scientific Notation Numbers written in scientific form are also said to be written using scientific notation. In scientific notation, a number is written as the product of a number between and including 1 and 10 (1 is included,10 is not) and some power of 10. Writing a Number in Scientific Notation To write a number in scientific notation: Move the decimal point so that there is one nonzero digit to its left. Multiply the result by a power of 10 using an exponent whose absolute value is the number of places the decimal point was moved. Make the exponent positive if the decimal point was moved to the left and negative if the decimal point was moved to the right.  || Scientific Form to Standard Form A number written in scientific notation can be converted to standard form by reversing the process shown in Sample Set A. Converting from Scientific Notation To convert a number written in scientific notation to a number in standard form, move the decimal point the number of places prescribed by the exponent on the 10. Positive Exponent Negative Exponent Move the decimal point to the right when you have a positive exponent, and move the decimal point to the left when you have a negative exponent.  || Working with Numbers in Scientific Notation Multiplying Numbers Using Scientific Notation There are many occasions (particularly in the sciences) when it is necessary to find the product of two numbers written in scientific notation. This is accomplished by using two of the basic rules of algebra. Suppose we wish to find (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) . Since the only operation is multiplication, we can use the commutative property of multiplication to rearrange the numbers. (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) = (a × b)( 10 n × 10 m ) Then, by the rules of exponents, 10 n × 10 m = 10 n + m . Thus, (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) = (a × b) × 10 n + m The product of (a × b) may not be between 1 and 10, so (a × b) × 10 n + m may not be in scientific form. The decimal point in (a × b) may have to be moved. An example of this situation is in Sample Set C, problem 2.  || 
book1_ch03_2	 || Positive and Negative Numbers When we studied the number line in Section Section 2.3 we noted that Each point on the number line corresponds to a real number, and each real number is located at a unique point on the number line. Positive and Negative Numbers Each real number has a sign inherently associated with it. A real number is said to be a positive number if it is located to the right of 0 on the number line. It is a negative number if it is located to the left of 0 on the number line. THE NOTATION OF SIGNED NUMBERS A number is denoted as positive if it is directly preceded by a " + " sign or no sign at all.A number is denoted as negative if it is directly preceded by a " − " sign. The " + " and " – " signs now have two meanings: + can denote the operation of addition or a positive number. − can denote the operation of subtraction or a negative number. Read the "-" Sign as "Negative" To avoid any confusion between "sign" and "operation," it is preferable to read the sign of a number as "positive" or "negative."  || Opposites Opposites On the number line, each real number has an image on the opposite side of 0. For this reason we say that each real number has an opposite. Opposites are the same distance from zero but have opposite signs. The opposite of a real number is denoted by placing a negative sign directly in front of the number. Thus, if a is any real number, then − a is its opposite. Notice that the letter a is a variable. Thus, " a " need not be positive, and " − a " need not be negative. If a is a real number, − a is opposite a on the number line and a is opposite − a on the number line. − ( − a ) is opposite − a on the number line. This implies that − ( − a ) = a . This property of opposites suggests the double-negative property for real numbers. THE DOUBLE-NEGATIVE PROPERTY If a is a real number, then − ( − a ) = a  || 
book1_ch03_2_2	Positive and Negative Numbers When we studied the number line in Section Section 2.3 we noted that Each point on the number line corresponds to a real number, and each real number is located at a unique point on the number line. Positive and Negative Numbers Each real number has a sign inherently associated with it. A real number is said to be a positive number if it is located to the right of 0 on the number line. It is a negative number if it is located to the left of 0 on the number line. THE NOTATION OF SIGNED NUMBERS A number is denoted as positive if it is directly preceded by a " + " sign or no sign at all.A number is denoted as negative if it is directly preceded by a " − " sign. The " + " and " – " signs now have two meanings: + can denote the operation of addition or a positive number. − can denote the operation of subtraction or a negative number. Read the "-" Sign as "Negative" To avoid any confusion between "sign" and "operation," it is preferable to read the sign of a number as "positive" or "negative." Positive and Negative Numbers When we studied the number line in Section Section 2.3 we noted that Each point on the number line corresponds to a real number, and each real number is located at a unique point on the number line. Positive and Negative Numbers Each real number has a sign inherently associated with it. A real number is said to be a positive number if it is located to the right of 0 on the number line. It is a negative number if it is located to the left of 0 on the number line. THE NOTATION OF SIGNED NUMBERS A number is denoted as positive if it is directly preceded by a " + " sign or no sign at all.A number is denoted as negative if it is directly preceded by a " − " sign. The " + " and " – " signs now have two meanings: + can denote the operation of addition or a positive number. − can denote the operation of subtraction or a negative number. Read the "-" Sign as "Negative" To avoid any confusion between "sign" and "operation," it is preferable to read the sign of a number as "positive" or "negative."  || 
book1_ch03_2_5	Opposites Opposites On the number line, each real number has an image on the opposite side of 0. For this reason we say that each real number has an opposite. Opposites are the same distance from zero but have opposite signs. The opposite of a real number is denoted by placing a negative sign directly in front of the number. Thus, if a is any real number, then − a is its opposite. Notice that the letter a is a variable. Thus, " a " need not be positive, and " − a " need not be negative. If a is a real number, − a is opposite a on the number line and a is opposite − a on the number line. − ( − a ) is opposite − a on the number line. This implies that − ( − a ) = a . This property of opposites suggests the double-negative property for real numbers. THE DOUBLE-NEGATIVE PROPERTY If a is a real number, then − ( − a ) = a Opposites Opposites On the number line, each real number has an image on the opposite side of 0. For this reason we say that each real number has an opposite. Opposites are the same distance from zero but have opposite signs. The opposite of a real number is denoted by placing a negative sign directly in front of the number. Thus, if a is any real number, then − a is its opposite. Notice that the letter a is a variable. Thus, " a " need not be positive, and " − a " need not be negative. If a is a real number, − a is opposite a on the number line and a is opposite − a on the number line. − ( − a ) is opposite − a on the number line. This implies that − ( − a ) = a . This property of opposites suggests the double-negative property for real numbers. THE DOUBLE-NEGATIVE PROPERTY If a is a real number, then − ( − a ) = a  || 
book1_ch03_3	 || Geometric Definition of Absolute Value Absolute Value—Geometric Approach The absolute value of a number a , denoted | a | , is the distance from a to 0 on the number line. Absolute value speaks to the question of "how far," and not "which way." The phrase how far implies length, and length is always a nonnegative (zero or positive) quantity. Thus, the absolute value of a number is a nonnegative number. This is shown in the following examples: Example 3.9.  | 4 | = 4 Example 3.10.  | − 4 | = 4 Example 3.11.  | 0 | = 0 Example 3.12.  − | 5 | = − 5 .The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of 5." The absolute value of 5 is 5. Hence, negative the absolute value of 5 is − 5 . Example 3.13.  − | − 3 | = − 3 .The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of − 3 ." The absolute value of − 3 is 3. Hence, negative the absolute value of − 3 is − ( 3 ) = − 3 .  || Algebraic Definition of Absolute Value The problems in the first example may help to suggest the following algebraic definition of absolute value. The definition is interpreted below. Examples follow the interpretation. Absolute Value—Algebraic Approach The absolute value of a number a is The algebraic definition takes into account the fact that the number a could be either positive or zero ( ≥ 0 ) or negative ( < 0 ) . If the number a is positive or zero ( ≥ 0 ) , the first part of the definition applies. The first part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed in the absolute bars is a nonnegative number, the absolute value of the number is the number itself. If the number a is negative ( < 0 ) , the second part of the definition applies. The second part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a negative number, the absolute value of the number is the opposite of the number. The opposite of a negative number is a positive number.  || 
book1_ch03_3_2	Geometric Definition of Absolute Value Absolute Value—Geometric Approach The absolute value of a number a , denoted | a | , is the distance from a to 0 on the number line. Absolute value speaks to the question of "how far," and not "which way." The phrase how far implies length, and length is always a nonnegative (zero or positive) quantity. Thus, the absolute value of a number is a nonnegative number. This is shown in the following examples: Example 3.9.  | 4 | = 4 Example 3.10.  | − 4 | = 4 Example 3.11.  | 0 | = 0 Example 3.12.  − | 5 | = − 5 .The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of 5." The absolute value of 5 is 5. Hence, negative the absolute value of 5 is − 5 . Example 3.13.  − | − 3 | = − 3 .The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of − 3 ." The absolute value of − 3 is 3. Hence, negative the absolute value of − 3 is − ( 3 ) = − 3 . Geometric Definition of Absolute Value Absolute Value—Geometric Approach The absolute value of a number a , denoted | a | , is the distance from a to 0 on the number line. Absolute value speaks to the question of "how far," and not "which way." The phrase how far implies length, and length is always a nonnegative (zero or positive) quantity. Thus, the absolute value of a number is a nonnegative number. This is shown in the following examples: Example 3.9.  | 4 | = 4 Example 3.10.  | − 4 | = 4 Example 3.11.  | 0 | = 0 Example 3.12.  − | 5 | = − 5 .The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of 5." The absolute value of 5 is 5. Hence, negative the absolute value of 5 is − 5 . Example 3.13.  − | − 3 | = − 3 .The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of − 3 ." The absolute value of − 3 is 3. Hence, negative the absolute value of − 3 is − ( 3 ) = − 3 .  || 
book1_ch03_3_3	Algebraic Definition of Absolute Value The problems in the first example may help to suggest the following algebraic definition of absolute value. The definition is interpreted below. Examples follow the interpretation. Absolute Value—Algebraic Approach The absolute value of a number a is The algebraic definition takes into account the fact that the number a could be either positive or zero ( ≥ 0 ) or negative ( < 0 ) . If the number a is positive or zero ( ≥ 0 ) , the first part of the definition applies. The first part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed in the absolute bars is a nonnegative number, the absolute value of the number is the number itself. If the number a is negative ( < 0 ) , the second part of the definition applies. The second part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a negative number, the absolute value of the number is the opposite of the number. The opposite of a negative number is a positive number. Algebraic Definition of Absolute Value The problems in the first example may help to suggest the following algebraic definition of absolute value. The definition is interpreted below. Examples follow the interpretation. Absolute Value—Algebraic Approach The absolute value of a number a is The algebraic definition takes into account the fact that the number a could be either positive or zero ( ≥ 0 ) or negative ( < 0 ) . If the number a is positive or zero ( ≥ 0 ) , the first part of the definition applies. The first part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed in the absolute bars is a nonnegative number, the absolute value of the number is the number itself. If the number a is negative ( < 0 ) , the second part of the definition applies. The second part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a negative number, the absolute value of the number is the opposite of the number. The opposite of a negative number is a positive number.  || 
book1_ch03_4	 || Addition of Numbers with Like Signs Let us add the two positive numbers 2 and 3. We perform this addition on the number line as follows. We begin at 0, the origin.Since 2 is positive, we move 2 units to the right.Since 3 is positive, we move 3 more units to the right.We are now located at 5.Thus, 2 + 3 = 5 . Summarizing, we have (2 positive units) + (3 positive units) = (5 positive units) Now let us add the two negative numbers − 2 and − 3 . We perform this addition on the number line as follows. We begin at 0, the origin.Since − 2 is negative, we move 2 units to the left.Since − 3 is negative, we move 3 more units to the left.We are now located at − 5 . Thus, ( − 2) + ( − 3) = − 5 . Summarizing, we have (2 negative units) + (3 negative units) = (5 negative units) These two examples suggest that Adding Numbers with the Same Sign To add two real numbers that have the same sign, add the absolute values of the numbers and associate the common sign with the sum.  || Addition with Zero Notice that Addition with 0 The Additive Identity Is 0 Since adding 0 to a real number leaves that number unchanged, 0 is called the additive identity.  || Addition of Numbers with Unlike Signs Now let us perform the addition 2 + ( − 6) . These two numbers have unlike signs. This type of addition can also be illustrated using the number line. We begin at 0, the origin.Since 2 is positive, we move 2 units to the right.Since − 6 is negative, we move, from the 2, 6 units to the left.We are now located at − 4 . A rule for adding two numbers that have unlike signs is suggested by noting that if the signs are disregarded, 4 can be obtained from 2 and 6 by subtracting 2 from 6. But 2 and 6 are precisely the absolute values of 2 and − 6 . Also, notice that the sign of the number with the larger absolute value is negative and that the sign of the resulting sum is negative. Adding Numbers with Unlike Signs To add two real numbers that have unlike signs, subtract the smaller absolute value from the larger absolute value and associate the sign of the number with the larger absolute value with this difference.  || 
book1_ch03_4_2	Addition of Numbers with Like Signs Let us add the two positive numbers 2 and 3. We perform this addition on the number line as follows. We begin at 0, the origin.Since 2 is positive, we move 2 units to the right.Since 3 is positive, we move 3 more units to the right.We are now located at 5.Thus, 2 + 3 = 5 . Summarizing, we have (2 positive units) + (3 positive units) = (5 positive units) Now let us add the two negative numbers − 2 and − 3 . We perform this addition on the number line as follows. We begin at 0, the origin.Since − 2 is negative, we move 2 units to the left.Since − 3 is negative, we move 3 more units to the left.We are now located at − 5 . Thus, ( − 2) + ( − 3) = − 5 . Summarizing, we have (2 negative units) + (3 negative units) = (5 negative units) These two examples suggest that Adding Numbers with the Same Sign To add two real numbers that have the same sign, add the absolute values of the numbers and associate the common sign with the sum. Addition of Numbers with Like Signs Let us add the two positive numbers 2 and 3. We perform this addition on the number line as follows. We begin at 0, the origin.Since 2 is positive, we move 2 units to the right.Since 3 is positive, we move 3 more units to the right.We are now located at 5.Thus, 2 + 3 = 5 . Summarizing, we have (2 positive units) + (3 positive units) = (5 positive units) Now let us add the two negative numbers − 2 and − 3 . We perform this addition on the number line as follows. We begin at 0, the origin.Since − 2 is negative, we move 2 units to the left.Since − 3 is negative, we move 3 more units to the left.We are now located at − 5 . Thus, ( − 2) + ( − 3) = − 5 . Summarizing, we have (2 negative units) + (3 negative units) = (5 negative units) These two examples suggest that Adding Numbers with the Same Sign To add two real numbers that have the same sign, add the absolute values of the numbers and associate the common sign with the sum.  || 
book1_ch03_4_5	Addition with Zero Notice that Addition with 0 The Additive Identity Is 0 Since adding 0 to a real number leaves that number unchanged, 0 is called the additive identity. Addition with Zero Notice that Addition with 0 The Additive Identity Is 0 Since adding 0 to a real number leaves that number unchanged, 0 is called the additive identity.  || 
book1_ch03_4_6	Addition of Numbers with Unlike Signs Now let us perform the addition 2 + ( − 6) . These two numbers have unlike signs. This type of addition can also be illustrated using the number line. We begin at 0, the origin.Since 2 is positive, we move 2 units to the right.Since − 6 is negative, we move, from the 2, 6 units to the left.We are now located at − 4 . A rule for adding two numbers that have unlike signs is suggested by noting that if the signs are disregarded, 4 can be obtained from 2 and 6 by subtracting 2 from 6. But 2 and 6 are precisely the absolute values of 2 and − 6 . Also, notice that the sign of the number with the larger absolute value is negative and that the sign of the resulting sum is negative. Adding Numbers with Unlike Signs To add two real numbers that have unlike signs, subtract the smaller absolute value from the larger absolute value and associate the sign of the number with the larger absolute value with this difference. Addition of Numbers with Unlike Signs Now let us perform the addition 2 + ( − 6) . These two numbers have unlike signs. This type of addition can also be illustrated using the number line. We begin at 0, the origin.Since 2 is positive, we move 2 units to the right.Since − 6 is negative, we move, from the 2, 6 units to the left.We are now located at − 4 . A rule for adding two numbers that have unlike signs is suggested by noting that if the signs are disregarded, 4 can be obtained from 2 and 6 by subtracting 2 from 6. But 2 and 6 are precisely the absolute values of 2 and − 6 . Also, notice that the sign of the number with the larger absolute value is negative and that the sign of the resulting sum is negative. Adding Numbers with Unlike Signs To add two real numbers that have unlike signs, subtract the smaller absolute value from the larger absolute value and associate the sign of the number with the larger absolute value with this difference.  || 
book1_ch03_5	 || Definition of Subtraction We know from our experience with arithmetic that the subtraction 5 − 2 produces 3, that is, 5 − 2 = 3 . Illustrating this process on the number line suggests a rule for subtracting signed numbers. We begin at 0, the origin. Since 5 is positive, we move 5 units to the right. Then, we move 2 units to the left to get to 3. (This reminds us of addition with a negative number.) This illustration suggests that 5 − 2 is the same as 5 + ( − 2) .This leads us directly to the definition of subtraction. Definition of Subtraction If a and b are real numbers, a − b is the same as a + ( − b) , where − b is the opposite of b .  || Subtraction of Signed Numbers The preceding definition suggests the rule for subtracting signed numbers. Subtraction of Signed Numbers To perform the subtraction a − b , add the opposite of b to a , that is, change the sign of b and add.  || 
book1_ch03_5_2	Definition of Subtraction We know from our experience with arithmetic that the subtraction 5 − 2 produces 3, that is, 5 − 2 = 3 . Illustrating this process on the number line suggests a rule for subtracting signed numbers. We begin at 0, the origin. Since 5 is positive, we move 5 units to the right. Then, we move 2 units to the left to get to 3. (This reminds us of addition with a negative number.) This illustration suggests that 5 − 2 is the same as 5 + ( − 2) .This leads us directly to the definition of subtraction. Definition of Subtraction If a and b are real numbers, a − b is the same as a + ( − b) , where − b is the opposite of b . Definition of Subtraction We know from our experience with arithmetic that the subtraction 5 − 2 produces 3, that is, 5 − 2 = 3 . Illustrating this process on the number line suggests a rule for subtracting signed numbers. We begin at 0, the origin. Since 5 is positive, we move 5 units to the right. Then, we move 2 units to the left to get to 3. (This reminds us of addition with a negative number.) This illustration suggests that 5 − 2 is the same as 5 + ( − 2) .This leads us directly to the definition of subtraction. Definition of Subtraction If a and b are real numbers, a − b is the same as a + ( − b) , where − b is the opposite of b .  || 
book1_ch03_5_3	Subtraction of Signed Numbers The preceding definition suggests the rule for subtracting signed numbers. Subtraction of Signed Numbers To perform the subtraction a − b , add the opposite of b to a , that is, change the sign of b and add. Subtraction of Signed Numbers The preceding definition suggests the rule for subtracting signed numbers. Subtraction of Signed Numbers To perform the subtraction a − b , add the opposite of b to a , that is, change the sign of b and add.  || 
book1_ch03_6	 || Multiplication of Signed Numbers Let us consider first the product of two positive numbers. Multiply: 3⋅5 . 3⋅5 means 5 + 5 + 5 = 15 . This suggests that (positive number)⋅(positive number) = positive number . More briefly, ( + )( + ) = + . Now consider the product of a positive number and a negative number. Multiply: (3)( − 5) . (3)( − 5) means ( − 5) + ( − 5) + ( − 5) = − 15 . This suggests that (positive number)⋅(negative number) = negative number More briefly, ( + )( – ) = – . By the commutative property of multiplication, we get (negative number)⋅(positive number) = negative number More briefly, ( – )( + ) = – . The sign of the product of two negative numbers can be determined using the following illustration: Multiply − 2 by, respectively, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0,  − 1,  − 2,  − 3,  − 4 . Notice that when the multiplier decreases by 1, the product increases by 2. We have the following rules for multiplying signed numbers. Rules for Multiplying Signed Numbers To multiply two real numbers that have the same sign, multiply their absolute values. The product is positive. opposite signs, multiply their absolute values. The product is negative.  || Division of Signed Numbers We can determine the sign pattern for division by relating division to multiplication. Division is defined in terms of multiplication in the following way. If b⋅c = a , then . For example, since 3⋅4 = 12 , it follows that . Notice the pattern: Since , it follows that The sign pattern for division follows from the sign pattern for multiplication. Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is We have the following rules for dividing signed numbers. Rules for Dividing Signed Numbers To divide two real numbers that have the same sign, divide their absolute values. The quotient is positive. opposite signs, divide their absolute values. The quotient is negative.  || 
book1_ch03_6_2	Multiplication of Signed Numbers Let us consider first the product of two positive numbers. Multiply: 3⋅5 . 3⋅5 means 5 + 5 + 5 = 15 . This suggests that (positive number)⋅(positive number) = positive number . More briefly, ( + )( + ) = + . Now consider the product of a positive number and a negative number. Multiply: (3)( − 5) . (3)( − 5) means ( − 5) + ( − 5) + ( − 5) = − 15 . This suggests that (positive number)⋅(negative number) = negative number More briefly, ( + )( – ) = – . By the commutative property of multiplication, we get (negative number)⋅(positive number) = negative number More briefly, ( – )( + ) = – . The sign of the product of two negative numbers can be determined using the following illustration: Multiply − 2 by, respectively, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0,  − 1,  − 2,  − 3,  − 4 . Notice that when the multiplier decreases by 1, the product increases by 2. We have the following rules for multiplying signed numbers. Rules for Multiplying Signed Numbers To multiply two real numbers that have the same sign, multiply their absolute values. The product is positive. opposite signs, multiply their absolute values. The product is negative. Multiplication of Signed Numbers Let us consider first the product of two positive numbers. Multiply: 3⋅5 . 3⋅5 means 5 + 5 + 5 = 15 . This suggests that (positive number)⋅(positive number) = positive number . More briefly, ( + )( + ) = + . Now consider the product of a positive number and a negative number. Multiply: (3)( − 5) . (3)( − 5) means ( − 5) + ( − 5) + ( − 5) = − 15 . This suggests that (positive number)⋅(negative number) = negative number More briefly, ( + )( – ) = – . By the commutative property of multiplication, we get (negative number)⋅(positive number) = negative number More briefly, ( – )( + ) = – . The sign of the product of two negative numbers can be determined using the following illustration: Multiply − 2 by, respectively, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0,  − 1,  − 2,  − 3,  − 4 . Notice that when the multiplier decreases by 1, the product increases by 2. We have the following rules for multiplying signed numbers. Rules for Multiplying Signed Numbers To multiply two real numbers that have the same sign, multiply their absolute values. The product is positive. opposite signs, multiply their absolute values. The product is negative.  || 
book1_ch03_6_5	Division of Signed Numbers We can determine the sign pattern for division by relating division to multiplication. Division is defined in terms of multiplication in the following way. If b⋅c = a , then . For example, since 3⋅4 = 12 , it follows that . Notice the pattern: Since , it follows that The sign pattern for division follows from the sign pattern for multiplication. Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is We have the following rules for dividing signed numbers. Rules for Dividing Signed Numbers To divide two real numbers that have the same sign, divide their absolute values. The quotient is positive. opposite signs, divide their absolute values. The quotient is negative. Division of Signed Numbers We can determine the sign pattern for division by relating division to multiplication. Division is defined in terms of multiplication in the following way. If b⋅c = a , then . For example, since 3⋅4 = 12 , it follows that . Notice the pattern: Since , it follows that The sign pattern for division follows from the sign pattern for multiplication. Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is, Since , it follows that , that is We have the following rules for dividing signed numbers. Rules for Dividing Signed Numbers To divide two real numbers that have the same sign, divide their absolute values. The quotient is positive. opposite signs, divide their absolute values. The quotient is negative.  || 
book1_ch03_7	 || Reciprocals Reciprocals Two real numbers are said to be reciprocals of each other if their product is 1. Every nonzero real number has exactly one reciprocal, as shown in the examples below. Zero has no reciprocal. Example 3.38.  Example 3.39.  Example 3.40.  Example 3.41.  Example 3.42.  Example 3.43.   || Negative Exponents We can use the idea of reciprocals to find a meaning for negative exponents. Consider the product of x 3 and x − 3 . Assume x ≠ 0 . x 3 ⋅x − 3 = x 3 + ( − 3) = x 0 = 1 Thus, since the product of x 3 and x − 3 is 1, x 3 and x − 3 must be reciprocals. We also know that . (See problem 6 above.) Thus, x 3 and are also reciprocals. Then, since x − 3 and are both reciprocals of x 3 and a real number can have only one reciprocal, it must be that . We have used − 3 as the exponent, but the process works as well for all other negative integers. We make the following definition. If n is any natural number and x is any nonzero real number, then  || Working with Negative Exponents The problems of Sample Set A suggest the following rule for working with exponents: Moving Factors Up and Down In a fraction, a factor can be moved from the numerator to the denominator or from the denominator to the numerator by changing the sign of the exponent.  || 
book1_ch03_7_2	Reciprocals Reciprocals Two real numbers are said to be reciprocals of each other if their product is 1. Every nonzero real number has exactly one reciprocal, as shown in the examples below. Zero has no reciprocal. Example 3.38.  Example 3.39.  Example 3.40.  Example 3.41.  Example 3.42.  Example 3.43.  Reciprocals Reciprocals Two real numbers are said to be reciprocals of each other if their product is 1. Every nonzero real number has exactly one reciprocal, as shown in the examples below. Zero has no reciprocal. Example 3.38.  Example 3.39.  Example 3.40.  Example 3.41.  Example 3.42.  Example 3.43.   || 
book1_ch03_7_3	Negative Exponents We can use the idea of reciprocals to find a meaning for negative exponents. Consider the product of x 3 and x − 3 . Assume x ≠ 0 . x 3 ⋅x − 3 = x 3 + ( − 3) = x 0 = 1 Thus, since the product of x 3 and x − 3 is 1, x 3 and x − 3 must be reciprocals. We also know that . (See problem 6 above.) Thus, x 3 and are also reciprocals. Then, since x − 3 and are both reciprocals of x 3 and a real number can have only one reciprocal, it must be that . We have used − 3 as the exponent, but the process works as well for all other negative integers. We make the following definition. If n is any natural number and x is any nonzero real number, then Negative Exponents We can use the idea of reciprocals to find a meaning for negative exponents. Consider the product of x 3 and x − 3 . Assume x ≠ 0 . x 3 ⋅x − 3 = x 3 + ( − 3) = x 0 = 1 Thus, since the product of x 3 and x − 3 is 1, x 3 and x − 3 must be reciprocals. We also know that . (See problem 6 above.) Thus, x 3 and are also reciprocals. Then, since x − 3 and are both reciprocals of x 3 and a real number can have only one reciprocal, it must be that . We have used − 3 as the exponent, but the process works as well for all other negative integers. We make the following definition. If n is any natural number and x is any nonzero real number, then  || 
book1_ch03_7_6	Working with Negative Exponents The problems of Sample Set A suggest the following rule for working with exponents: Moving Factors Up and Down In a fraction, a factor can be moved from the numerator to the denominator or from the denominator to the numerator by changing the sign of the exponent. Working with Negative Exponents The problems of Sample Set A suggest the following rule for working with exponents: Moving Factors Up and Down In a fraction, a factor can be moved from the numerator to the denominator or from the denominator to the numerator by changing the sign of the exponent.  || 
book1_ch03_8	 || Standard Form to Scientific Form Very large numbers such as 43,000,000,000,000,000,000 (the number of different possible configurations of Rubik’s cube) and very small numbers such as 0.000000000000000000000340 (the mass of the amino acid tryptophan) are extremely inconvenient to write and read. Such numbers can be expressed more conveniently by writing them as part of a power of 10. To see how this is done, let us start with a somewhat smaller number such as 2480. Notice that Scientific Form The last form is called the scientific form of the number. There is one nonzero digit to the left of the decimal point and the absolute value of the exponent on 10 records the number of places the original decimal point was moved to the left. There is one nonzero digit to the left of the decimal point and the absolute value of the exponent of 10 records the number of places the original decimal point was moved to the right. Scientific Notation Numbers written in scientific form are also said to be written using scientific notation. In scientific notation, a number is written as the product of a number between and including 1 and 10 (1 is included,10 is not) and some power of 10. Writing a Number in Scientific Notation To write a number in scientific notation: Move the decimal point so that there is one nonzero digit to its left. Multiply the result by a power of 10 using an exponent whose absolute value is the number of places the decimal point was moved. Make the exponent positive if the decimal point was moved to the left and negative if the decimal point was moved to the right.  || Scientific Form to Standard Form A number written in scientific notation can be converted to standard form by reversing the process shown in Sample Set A. Converting from Scientific Notation To convert a number written in scientific notation to a number in standard form, move the decimal point the number of places prescribed by the exponent on the 10. Positive Exponent Negative Exponent Move the decimal point to the right when you have a positive exponent, and move the decimal point to the left when you have a negative exponent.  || Working with Numbers in Scientific Notation Multiplying Numbers Using Scientific Notation There are many occasions (particularly in the sciences) when it is necessary to find the product of two numbers written in scientific notation. This is accomplished by using two of the basic rules of algebra. Suppose we wish to find (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) . Since the only operation is multiplication, we can use the commutative property of multiplication to rearrange the numbers. (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) = (a × b)( 10 n × 10 m ) Then, by the rules of exponents, 10 n × 10 m = 10 n + m . Thus, (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) = (a × b) × 10 n + m The product of (a × b) may not be between 1 and 10, so (a × b) × 10 n + m may not be in scientific form. The decimal point in (a × b) may have to be moved. An example of this situation is in Sample Set C, problem 2.  || 
book1_ch03_8_2	Standard Form to Scientific Form Very large numbers such as 43,000,000,000,000,000,000 (the number of different possible configurations of Rubik’s cube) and very small numbers such as 0.000000000000000000000340 (the mass of the amino acid tryptophan) are extremely inconvenient to write and read. Such numbers can be expressed more conveniently by writing them as part of a power of 10. To see how this is done, let us start with a somewhat smaller number such as 2480. Notice that Scientific Form The last form is called the scientific form of the number. There is one nonzero digit to the left of the decimal point and the absolute value of the exponent on 10 records the number of places the original decimal point was moved to the left. There is one nonzero digit to the left of the decimal point and the absolute value of the exponent of 10 records the number of places the original decimal point was moved to the right. Scientific Notation Numbers written in scientific form are also said to be written using scientific notation. In scientific notation, a number is written as the product of a number between and including 1 and 10 (1 is included,10 is not) and some power of 10. Writing a Number in Scientific Notation To write a number in scientific notation: Move the decimal point so that there is one nonzero digit to its left. Multiply the result by a power of 10 using an exponent whose absolute value is the number of places the decimal point was moved. Make the exponent positive if the decimal point was moved to the left and negative if the decimal point was moved to the right. Standard Form to Scientific Form Very large numbers such as 43,000,000,000,000,000,000 (the number of different possible configurations of Rubik’s cube) and very small numbers such as 0.000000000000000000000340 (the mass of the amino acid tryptophan) are extremely inconvenient to write and read. Such numbers can be expressed more conveniently by writing them as part of a power of 10. To see how this is done, let us start with a somewhat smaller number such as 2480. Notice that Scientific Form The last form is called the scientific form of the number. There is one nonzero digit to the left of the decimal point and the absolute value of the exponent on 10 records the number of places the original decimal point was moved to the left. There is one nonzero digit to the left of the decimal point and the absolute value of the exponent of 10 records the number of places the original decimal point was moved to the right. Scientific Notation Numbers written in scientific form are also said to be written using scientific notation. In scientific notation, a number is written as the product of a number between and including 1 and 10 (1 is included,10 is not) and some power of 10. Writing a Number in Scientific Notation To write a number in scientific notation: Move the decimal point so that there is one nonzero digit to its left. Multiply the result by a power of 10 using an exponent whose absolute value is the number of places the decimal point was moved. Make the exponent positive if the decimal point was moved to the left and negative if the decimal point was moved to the right.  || 
book1_ch03_8_5	Scientific Form to Standard Form A number written in scientific notation can be converted to standard form by reversing the process shown in Sample Set A. Converting from Scientific Notation To convert a number written in scientific notation to a number in standard form, move the decimal point the number of places prescribed by the exponent on the 10. Positive Exponent Negative Exponent Move the decimal point to the right when you have a positive exponent, and move the decimal point to the left when you have a negative exponent. Scientific Form to Standard Form A number written in scientific notation can be converted to standard form by reversing the process shown in Sample Set A. Converting from Scientific Notation To convert a number written in scientific notation to a number in standard form, move the decimal point the number of places prescribed by the exponent on the 10. Positive Exponent Negative Exponent Move the decimal point to the right when you have a positive exponent, and move the decimal point to the left when you have a negative exponent.  || 
book1_ch03_8_8	Working with Numbers in Scientific Notation Multiplying Numbers Using Scientific Notation There are many occasions (particularly in the sciences) when it is necessary to find the product of two numbers written in scientific notation. This is accomplished by using two of the basic rules of algebra. Suppose we wish to find (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) . Since the only operation is multiplication, we can use the commutative property of multiplication to rearrange the numbers. (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) = (a × b)( 10 n × 10 m ) Then, by the rules of exponents, 10 n × 10 m = 10 n + m . Thus, (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) = (a × b) × 10 n + m The product of (a × b) may not be between 1 and 10, so (a × b) × 10 n + m may not be in scientific form. The decimal point in (a × b) may have to be moved. An example of this situation is in Sample Set C, problem 2. Working with Numbers in Scientific Notation Multiplying Numbers Using Scientific Notation There are many occasions (particularly in the sciences) when it is necessary to find the product of two numbers written in scientific notation. This is accomplished by using two of the basic rules of algebra. Suppose we wish to find (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) . Since the only operation is multiplication, we can use the commutative property of multiplication to rearrange the numbers. (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) = (a × b)( 10 n × 10 m ) Then, by the rules of exponents, 10 n × 10 m = 10 n + m . Thus, (a × 10 n )(b × 10 m ) = (a × b) × 10 n + m The product of (a × b) may not be between 1 and 10, so (a × b) × 10 n + m may not be in scientific form. The decimal point in (a × b) may have to be moved. An example of this situation is in Sample Set C, problem 2.  || 
book1_ch02	 ||  || Variables and Constants A basic characteristic of algebra is the use of symbols (usually letters) to represent numbers. Variable A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. Constant A letter or symbol that represents a specific number, known or unknown is called a constant. In the following examples, the letter x is a variable since it can be any member of the collection of numbers {35, 25, 10} . The letter h is a constant since it can assume only the value 5890. Example 2.1.  Suppose that the streets on your way from home to school have speed limits of 35 mph, 25 mph, and 10 mph. In algebra we can let the letter x represent our speed as we travel from home to school. The maximum value of x depends on what section of street we are on. The letter x can assume any one of the various values 35,25,10. Example 2.2.  Suppose that in writing a term paper for a geography class we need to specify the height of Mount Kilimanjaro. If we do not happen to know the height of the mountain, we can represent it (at least temporarily) on our paper with the letter h . Later, we look up the height in a reference book and find it to be 5890 meters. The letter h can assume only the one value, 5890, and no others. The value of h is constant.  || Symbols of Operation, Equality, and Inequality Binary Operation A binary operation on a collection of numbers is a process that assigns a number to two given numbers in the collection. The binary operations used in algebra are addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Symbols of Operation If we let x and y each represent a number, we have the following notations:  || Grouping Symbols Grouping symbols are used to indicate that a particular collection of numbers and meaningful operations are to be grouped together and considered as one number. The grouping symbols commonly used in algebra are In a computation in which more than one operation is involved, grouping symbols help tell us which operations to perform first. If possible, we perform operations inside grouping symbols first.  || The Order of Operations Suppose we wish to find the value of 16 + 4⋅9 . We could add 16 and 4, then multiply this sum by 9. 16 + 4⋅9 = 20⋅9 = 180 multiply 4 and 9, then add 16 to this product. 16 + 4⋅9 = 16 + 36 = 52 We now have two values for one number. To determine the correct value we must use the standard order of operations. Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols, beginning with the innermost set. Perform all multiplications and divisions, as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all additions and subtractions, as you come to them, moving left-to-right. As we proceed in our study of algebra, we will come upon another operation, exponentiation, that will need to be inserted before multiplication and division. (See Section Section 2.5.)  ||  || The Real Number Line Real Number Line In our study of algebra, we will use several collections of numbers. The real number line allows us to visually display the numbers in which we are interested. A line is composed of infinitely many points. To each point we can associate a unique number, and with each number we can associate a particular point. Coordinate The number associated with a point on the number line is called the coordinate of the point. Graph The point on a line that is associated with a particular number is called the graph of that number. We construct the real number line as follows: Construction of the Real Number Line Draw a horizontal line. Choose any point on the line and label it 0. This point is called the origin. Choose a convenient length. This length is called "1 unit." Starting at 0, mark this length off in both directions, being careful to have the lengths look like they are about the same. We now define a real number. Real Number A real number is any number that is the coordinate of a point on the real number line. Positive and Negative Real Numbers The collection of these infinitely many numbers is called the collection of real numbers. The real numbers whose graphs are to the right of 0 are called the positive real numbers. The real numbers whose graphs appear to the left of 0 are called the negative real numbers. The number 0 is neither positive nor negative.  || The Real Numbers The collection of real numbers has many subcollections. The subcollections that are of most interest to us are listed below along with their notations and graphs. Natural Numbers The natural numbers (N) :   {1, 2,3, …} Whole Numbers The whole numbers (W) :   {0, 1, 2,3, …} Notice that every natural number is a whole number. Integers The integers (Z) :   {…,  − 3, −  2, − 1,0,1, 2, 3, …} Notice that every whole number is an integer. Rational Numbers The rational numbers (Q) : Rational numbers are real numbers that can be written in the form a / b , where a and b are integers, and b ≠ 0 . Fractions Rational numbers are commonly called fractions. Division by 1 Since b can equal 1, every integer is a rational number: . Division by 0 Recall that 10 / 2 = 5 since 2⋅5 = 10 . However, if 10 / 0 = x , then 0⋅x = 10 . But 0⋅x = 0 , not 10. This suggests that no quotient exists. Now consider 0 / 0 = x . If 0 / 0 = x , then 0⋅x = 0 . But this means that x could be any number, that is, 0 / 0 = 4 since 0⋅4 = 0 , or 0 / 0 = 28 since 0⋅28 = 0 . This suggests that the quotient is indeterminant. x / 0 Is Undefined or Indeterminant Division by 0 is undefined or indeterminant.Do not divide by 0. Rational numbers have decimal representations that either terminate or do not terminate but contain a repeating block of digits. Some examples are: Some rational numbers are graphed below. Irrational Numbers The irrational numbers (I r) : Irrational numbers are numbers that cannot be written as the quotient of two integers. They are numbers whose decimal representations are nonterminating and nonrepeating. Some examples are Notice that the collections of rational numbers and irrational numbers have no numbers in common. When graphed on the number line, the rational and irrational numbers account for every point on the number line. Thus each point on the number line has a coordinate that is either a rational or an irrational number. In summary, we have  || Ordering the Real Numbers Ordering the Real Numbers A real number b is said to be greater than a real number a , denoted b > a , if the graph of b is to the right of the graph of a on the number line.  ||  || The Closure Properties The Closure Properties If a and b are real numbers, then a + b is a unique real number, and a⋅b is a unique real number. For example, 3 and 11 are real numbers; 3 + 11 = 14 and 3⋅11 = 33, and both 14 and 33 are real numbers. Although this property seems obvious, some collections are not closed under certain operations. For example, Example 2.34.  The real numbers are not closed under division since, although 5 and 0 are real numbers, 5 / 0 and 0 / 0 are not real numbers. Example 2.35.  The natural numbers are not closed under subtraction since, although 8 is a natural number, 8 − 8 is not. ( 8 − 8 = 0 and 0 is not a natural number.)  || The Commutative Properties Let a and b represent real numbers. The Commutative Properties The commutative properties tell us that two numbers can be added or multiplied in any order without affecting the result.  || The Associative Properties Let a,b, and c represent real numbers. The Associative Properties The associative properties tell us that we may group together the quantities as we please without affecting the result.  || The Distributive Properties When we were first introduced to multiplication we saw that it was developed as a description for repeated addition. 4 + 4 + 4 = 3⋅4 Notice that there are three 4’s, that is, 4 appears 3 times. Hence, 3 times 4.We know that algebra is generalized arithmetic. We can now make an important generalization. When a number a is added repeatedly n times, we have Then, using multiplication as a description for repeated addition, we can replace For example: Example 2.47.  x + x + x + x can be written as 4x since x is repeatedly added 4 times. x + x + x + x = 4x Example 2.48.  r + r can be written as 2r since r is repeatedly added 2 times. r + r = 2r The distributive property involves both multiplication and addition. Let’s rewrite 4(a + b). We proceed by reading 4(a + b) as a multiplication: 4 times the quantity (a + b) . This directs us to write Now we use the commutative property of addition to collect all the a ' s together and all the b ' s together. Now, using multiplication as a description for repeated addition, we have We have distributed the 4 over the sum to both a and b . The Distributive Property The distributive property is useful when we cannot or do not wish to perform operations inside parentheses.  || The Identity Properties Additive Identity The number 0 is called the additive identity since when it is added to any real number, it preserves the identity of that number. Zero is the only additive identity.For example, 6 + 0 = 6 . Multiplicative Identity The number 1 is called the multiplicative identity since when it multiplies any real number, it preserves the identity of that number. One is the only multiplicative identity.For example 6⋅1 = 6 . We summarize the identity properties as follows.  || The Inverse Properties Additive Inverses When two numbers are added together and the result is the additive identity, 0, the numbers are called additive inverses of each other. For example, when 3 is added to − 3 the result is 0, that is, 3 + ( − 3) = 0 . The numbers 3 and − 3 are additive inverses of each other. Multiplicative Inverses When two numbers are multiplied together and the result is the multiplicative identity, 1, the numbers are called multiplicative inverses of each other. For example, when 6 and are multiplied together, the result is 1, that is, . The numbers 6 and are multiplicative inverses of each other. We summarize the inverse properties as follows. The Inverse Properties If a is any real number, then there is a unique real number − a , such that The numbers a and − a are called additive inverses of each other. If a is any nonzero real number, then there is a unique real number such that The numbers a and are called multiplicative inverses of each other. Expanding Quantities When we perform operations such as 6(a + 3) = 6a + 18 , we say we are expanding the quantity 6(a + 3) .  ||  || Exponential Notation In Section Section 2.4 we were reminded that multiplication is a description for repeated addition. A natural question is “Is there a description for repeated multiplication?” The answer is yes. The notation that describes repeated multiplication is exponential notation. Factors In multiplication, the numbers being multiplied together are called factors. In repeated multiplication, all the factors are the same. In nonrepeated multiplication, none of the factors are the same. For example, Example 2.52.  Exponential notation is used to show repeated multiplication of the same factor. The notation consists of using a superscript on the factor that is repeated. The superscript is called an exponent. Exponential Notation If x is any real number and n is a natural number, thenAn exponent records the number of identical factors in a multiplication. Note that the definition for exponential notation only has meaning for natural number exponents. We will extend this notation to include other numbers as exponents later.  || Reading Exponential Notation In x n , Base x is the base Exponent n is the exponent Power The number represented by x n is called a power. x to the n th Power The term x n is read as " x to the n th power," or more simply as " x to the n th." x Squared and x Cubed The symbol x 2 is often read as " x squared," and x 3 is often read as " x cubed." A natural question is "Why are geometric terms appearing in the exponent expression?" The answer for x 3 is this: x 3 means x⋅x⋅x . In geometry, the volume of a rectangular box is found by multiplying the length by the width by the depth. A cube has the same length on each side. If we represent this length by the letter x then the volume of the cube is x⋅x⋅x , which, of course, is described by x 3 . (Can you think of why x 2 is read as x squared?) Cube withlength = x width = x depth = x Volume = x x x = x 3  || The Order of Operations In Section Section 2.2 we were introduced to the order of operations. It was noted that we would insert another operation before multiplication and division. We can do that now. The Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols beginning with the innermost set. Perform all exponential operations as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all multiplications and divisions as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all additions and subtractions as you come to them, moving left-to-right.  ||  || The Product Rule for Exponents The first rule we wish to develop is the rule for multiplying two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. The following examples suggest this rule: Example 2.70.  Example 2.71.  PRODUCT RULE FOR EXPONENTS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers, x n x m = x n + m To multiply two exponential quantities having the same base, add the exponents. Keep in mind that the exponential quantities being multiplied must have the same base for this rule to apply.  || The Quotient Rule for Exponents The second rule we wish to develop is the rule for dividing two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. The following examples suggest a rule for dividing two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. Example 2.83.  Example 2.84.  QUOTIENT RULE FOR EXPONENTS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers,.To divide two exponential quantities having the same nonzero base, subtract the exponent of the denominator from the exponent of the numerator. Keep in mind that the exponential quantities being divided must have the same base for this rule to apply.  || Zero as an Exponent In Sample Set C, the exponents of the numerators were greater than the exponents of the denominators. Let’s study the case when the exponents are the same.When the exponents are the same, say n , the subtraction n − n produces 0.Thus, by the second rule of exponents, .But what real number, if any, does x 0 represent? Let’s think for a moment about our experience with division in arithmetic. We know that any nonzero number divided by itself is one. Since the letter x represents some nonzero real number, so does x n . Thus, represents some nonzero real number divided by itself. Then .But we have also established that if . We now have that and . This implies that x 0 = 1,x ≠ 0 .Exponents can now be natural numbers and zero. We have enlarged our collection of numbers that can be used as exponents from the collection of natural numbers to the collection of whole numbers. ZERO AS AN EXPONENT If Any number, other than 0, raised to the power of 0, is 1. 00 has no meaning (it does not represent a number).  ||  || The Power Rule for Powers The following examples suggest a rule for raising a power to a power: Example 2.95.  (a 2 ) 3 = a 2  ⋅ ​a 2  ⋅ a 2 Using the product rule we get Example 2.96.  POWER RULE FOR POWERS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers, (x n ) m = x n⋅m To raise a power to a power, multiply the exponents.  || The Power Rule for Products The following examples suggest a rule for raising a product to a power: Example 2.101.  Example 2.102.  Example 2.103.  POWER RULE FOR PRODUCTS If x and y are real numbers and n is a natural number, (x y) n = x n y n To raise a product to a power, apply the exponent to each and every factor.  || The Power Rule for Quotients The following example suggests a rule for raising a quotient to a power. Example 2.112.  POWER RULE FOR QUOTIENTS If x and y are real numbers and n is a natural number, To raise a quotient to a power, distribute the exponent to both the numerator and denominator.  || 
book1_ch02_2	 || Variables and Constants A basic characteristic of algebra is the use of symbols (usually letters) to represent numbers. Variable A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. Constant A letter or symbol that represents a specific number, known or unknown is called a constant. In the following examples, the letter x is a variable since it can be any member of the collection of numbers {35, 25, 10} . The letter h is a constant since it can assume only the value 5890. Example 2.1.  Suppose that the streets on your way from home to school have speed limits of 35 mph, 25 mph, and 10 mph. In algebra we can let the letter x represent our speed as we travel from home to school. The maximum value of x depends on what section of street we are on. The letter x can assume any one of the various values 35,25,10. Example 2.2.  Suppose that in writing a term paper for a geography class we need to specify the height of Mount Kilimanjaro. If we do not happen to know the height of the mountain, we can represent it (at least temporarily) on our paper with the letter h . Later, we look up the height in a reference book and find it to be 5890 meters. The letter h can assume only the one value, 5890, and no others. The value of h is constant.  || Symbols of Operation, Equality, and Inequality Binary Operation A binary operation on a collection of numbers is a process that assigns a number to two given numbers in the collection. The binary operations used in algebra are addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Symbols of Operation If we let x and y each represent a number, we have the following notations:  || Grouping Symbols Grouping symbols are used to indicate that a particular collection of numbers and meaningful operations are to be grouped together and considered as one number. The grouping symbols commonly used in algebra are In a computation in which more than one operation is involved, grouping symbols help tell us which operations to perform first. If possible, we perform operations inside grouping symbols first.  || The Order of Operations Suppose we wish to find the value of 16 + 4⋅9 . We could add 16 and 4, then multiply this sum by 9. 16 + 4⋅9 = 20⋅9 = 180 multiply 4 and 9, then add 16 to this product. 16 + 4⋅9 = 16 + 36 = 52 We now have two values for one number. To determine the correct value we must use the standard order of operations. Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols, beginning with the innermost set. Perform all multiplications and divisions, as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all additions and subtractions, as you come to them, moving left-to-right. As we proceed in our study of algebra, we will come upon another operation, exponentiation, that will need to be inserted before multiplication and division. (See Section Section 2.5.)  || 
book1_ch02_2_2	Variables and Constants A basic characteristic of algebra is the use of symbols (usually letters) to represent numbers. Variable A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. Constant A letter or symbol that represents a specific number, known or unknown is called a constant. In the following examples, the letter x is a variable since it can be any member of the collection of numbers {35, 25, 10} . The letter h is a constant since it can assume only the value 5890. Example 2.1.  Suppose that the streets on your way from home to school have speed limits of 35 mph, 25 mph, and 10 mph. In algebra we can let the letter x represent our speed as we travel from home to school. The maximum value of x depends on what section of street we are on. The letter x can assume any one of the various values 35,25,10. Example 2.2.  Suppose that in writing a term paper for a geography class we need to specify the height of Mount Kilimanjaro. If we do not happen to know the height of the mountain, we can represent it (at least temporarily) on our paper with the letter h . Later, we look up the height in a reference book and find it to be 5890 meters. The letter h can assume only the one value, 5890, and no others. The value of h is constant. Variables and Constants A basic characteristic of algebra is the use of symbols (usually letters) to represent numbers. Variable A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. Constant A letter or symbol that represents a specific number, known or unknown is called a constant. In the following examples, the letter x is a variable since it can be any member of the collection of numbers {35, 25, 10} . The letter h is a constant since it can assume only the value 5890. Example 2.1.  Suppose that the streets on your way from home to school have speed limits of 35 mph, 25 mph, and 10 mph. In algebra we can let the letter x represent our speed as we travel from home to school. The maximum value of x depends on what section of street we are on. The letter x can assume any one of the various values 35,25,10. Example 2.2.  Suppose that in writing a term paper for a geography class we need to specify the height of Mount Kilimanjaro. If we do not happen to know the height of the mountain, we can represent it (at least temporarily) on our paper with the letter h . Later, we look up the height in a reference book and find it to be 5890 meters. The letter h can assume only the one value, 5890, and no others. The value of h is constant.  || 
book1_ch02_2_3	Symbols of Operation, Equality, and Inequality Binary Operation A binary operation on a collection of numbers is a process that assigns a number to two given numbers in the collection. The binary operations used in algebra are addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Symbols of Operation If we let x and y each represent a number, we have the following notations: Symbols of Operation, Equality, and Inequality Binary Operation A binary operation on a collection of numbers is a process that assigns a number to two given numbers in the collection. The binary operations used in algebra are addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Symbols of Operation If we let x and y each represent a number, we have the following notations:  || 
book1_ch02_2_6	Grouping Symbols Grouping symbols are used to indicate that a particular collection of numbers and meaningful operations are to be grouped together and considered as one number. The grouping symbols commonly used in algebra are In a computation in which more than one operation is involved, grouping symbols help tell us which operations to perform first. If possible, we perform operations inside grouping symbols first. Grouping Symbols Grouping symbols are used to indicate that a particular collection of numbers and meaningful operations are to be grouped together and considered as one number. The grouping symbols commonly used in algebra are In a computation in which more than one operation is involved, grouping symbols help tell us which operations to perform first. If possible, we perform operations inside grouping symbols first.  || 
book1_ch02_2_9	The Order of Operations Suppose we wish to find the value of 16 + 4⋅9 . We could add 16 and 4, then multiply this sum by 9. 16 + 4⋅9 = 20⋅9 = 180 multiply 4 and 9, then add 16 to this product. 16 + 4⋅9 = 16 + 36 = 52 We now have two values for one number. To determine the correct value we must use the standard order of operations. Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols, beginning with the innermost set. Perform all multiplications and divisions, as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all additions and subtractions, as you come to them, moving left-to-right. As we proceed in our study of algebra, we will come upon another operation, exponentiation, that will need to be inserted before multiplication and division. (See Section Section 2.5.) The Order of Operations Suppose we wish to find the value of 16 + 4⋅9 . We could add 16 and 4, then multiply this sum by 9. 16 + 4⋅9 = 20⋅9 = 180 multiply 4 and 9, then add 16 to this product. 16 + 4⋅9 = 16 + 36 = 52 We now have two values for one number. To determine the correct value we must use the standard order of operations. Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols, beginning with the innermost set. Perform all multiplications and divisions, as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all additions and subtractions, as you come to them, moving left-to-right. As we proceed in our study of algebra, we will come upon another operation, exponentiation, that will need to be inserted before multiplication and division. (See Section Section 2.5.)  || 
book1_ch02_3	 || The Real Number Line Real Number Line In our study of algebra, we will use several collections of numbers. The real number line allows us to visually display the numbers in which we are interested. A line is composed of infinitely many points. To each point we can associate a unique number, and with each number we can associate a particular point. Coordinate The number associated with a point on the number line is called the coordinate of the point. Graph The point on a line that is associated with a particular number is called the graph of that number. We construct the real number line as follows: Construction of the Real Number Line Draw a horizontal line. Choose any point on the line and label it 0. This point is called the origin. Choose a convenient length. This length is called "1 unit." Starting at 0, mark this length off in both directions, being careful to have the lengths look like they are about the same. We now define a real number. Real Number A real number is any number that is the coordinate of a point on the real number line. Positive and Negative Real Numbers The collection of these infinitely many numbers is called the collection of real numbers. The real numbers whose graphs are to the right of 0 are called the positive real numbers. The real numbers whose graphs appear to the left of 0 are called the negative real numbers. The number 0 is neither positive nor negative.  || The Real Numbers The collection of real numbers has many subcollections. The subcollections that are of most interest to us are listed below along with their notations and graphs. Natural Numbers The natural numbers (N) :   {1, 2,3, …} Whole Numbers The whole numbers (W) :   {0, 1, 2,3, …} Notice that every natural number is a whole number. Integers The integers (Z) :   {…,  − 3, −  2, − 1,0,1, 2, 3, …} Notice that every whole number is an integer. Rational Numbers The rational numbers (Q) : Rational numbers are real numbers that can be written in the form a / b , where a and b are integers, and b ≠ 0 . Fractions Rational numbers are commonly called fractions. Division by 1 Since b can equal 1, every integer is a rational number: . Division by 0 Recall that 10 / 2 = 5 since 2⋅5 = 10 . However, if 10 / 0 = x , then 0⋅x = 10 . But 0⋅x = 0 , not 10. This suggests that no quotient exists. Now consider 0 / 0 = x . If 0 / 0 = x , then 0⋅x = 0 . But this means that x could be any number, that is, 0 / 0 = 4 since 0⋅4 = 0 , or 0 / 0 = 28 since 0⋅28 = 0 . This suggests that the quotient is indeterminant. x / 0 Is Undefined or Indeterminant Division by 0 is undefined or indeterminant.Do not divide by 0. Rational numbers have decimal representations that either terminate or do not terminate but contain a repeating block of digits. Some examples are: Some rational numbers are graphed below. Irrational Numbers The irrational numbers (I r) : Irrational numbers are numbers that cannot be written as the quotient of two integers. They are numbers whose decimal representations are nonterminating and nonrepeating. Some examples are Notice that the collections of rational numbers and irrational numbers have no numbers in common. When graphed on the number line, the rational and irrational numbers account for every point on the number line. Thus each point on the number line has a coordinate that is either a rational or an irrational number. In summary, we have  || Ordering the Real Numbers Ordering the Real Numbers A real number b is said to be greater than a real number a , denoted b > a , if the graph of b is to the right of the graph of a on the number line.  || 
book1_ch02_3_2	The Real Number Line Real Number Line In our study of algebra, we will use several collections of numbers. The real number line allows us to visually display the numbers in which we are interested. A line is composed of infinitely many points. To each point we can associate a unique number, and with each number we can associate a particular point. Coordinate The number associated with a point on the number line is called the coordinate of the point. Graph The point on a line that is associated with a particular number is called the graph of that number. We construct the real number line as follows: Construction of the Real Number Line Draw a horizontal line. Choose any point on the line and label it 0. This point is called the origin. Choose a convenient length. This length is called "1 unit." Starting at 0, mark this length off in both directions, being careful to have the lengths look like they are about the same. We now define a real number. Real Number A real number is any number that is the coordinate of a point on the real number line. Positive and Negative Real Numbers The collection of these infinitely many numbers is called the collection of real numbers. The real numbers whose graphs are to the right of 0 are called the positive real numbers. The real numbers whose graphs appear to the left of 0 are called the negative real numbers. The number 0 is neither positive nor negative. The Real Number Line Real Number Line In our study of algebra, we will use several collections of numbers. The real number line allows us to visually display the numbers in which we are interested. A line is composed of infinitely many points. To each point we can associate a unique number, and with each number we can associate a particular point. Coordinate The number associated with a point on the number line is called the coordinate of the point. Graph The point on a line that is associated with a particular number is called the graph of that number. We construct the real number line as follows: Construction of the Real Number Line Draw a horizontal line. Choose any point on the line and label it 0. This point is called the origin. Choose a convenient length. This length is called "1 unit." Starting at 0, mark this length off in both directions, being careful to have the lengths look like they are about the same. We now define a real number. Real Number A real number is any number that is the coordinate of a point on the real number line. Positive and Negative Real Numbers The collection of these infinitely many numbers is called the collection of real numbers. The real numbers whose graphs are to the right of 0 are called the positive real numbers. The real numbers whose graphs appear to the left of 0 are called the negative real numbers. The number 0 is neither positive nor negative.  || 
book1_ch02_3_3	The Real Numbers The collection of real numbers has many subcollections. The subcollections that are of most interest to us are listed below along with their notations and graphs. Natural Numbers The natural numbers (N) :   {1, 2,3, …} Whole Numbers The whole numbers (W) :   {0, 1, 2,3, …} Notice that every natural number is a whole number. Integers The integers (Z) :   {…,  − 3, −  2, − 1,0,1, 2, 3, …} Notice that every whole number is an integer. Rational Numbers The rational numbers (Q) : Rational numbers are real numbers that can be written in the form a / b , where a and b are integers, and b ≠ 0 . Fractions Rational numbers are commonly called fractions. Division by 1 Since b can equal 1, every integer is a rational number: . Division by 0 Recall that 10 / 2 = 5 since 2⋅5 = 10 . However, if 10 / 0 = x , then 0⋅x = 10 . But 0⋅x = 0 , not 10. This suggests that no quotient exists. Now consider 0 / 0 = x . If 0 / 0 = x , then 0⋅x = 0 . But this means that x could be any number, that is, 0 / 0 = 4 since 0⋅4 = 0 , or 0 / 0 = 28 since 0⋅28 = 0 . This suggests that the quotient is indeterminant. x / 0 Is Undefined or Indeterminant Division by 0 is undefined or indeterminant.Do not divide by 0. Rational numbers have decimal representations that either terminate or do not terminate but contain a repeating block of digits. Some examples are: Some rational numbers are graphed below. Irrational Numbers The irrational numbers (I r) : Irrational numbers are numbers that cannot be written as the quotient of two integers. They are numbers whose decimal representations are nonterminating and nonrepeating. Some examples are Notice that the collections of rational numbers and irrational numbers have no numbers in common. When graphed on the number line, the rational and irrational numbers account for every point on the number line. Thus each point on the number line has a coordinate that is either a rational or an irrational number. In summary, we have The Real Numbers The collection of real numbers has many subcollections. The subcollections that are of most interest to us are listed below along with their notations and graphs. Natural Numbers The natural numbers (N) :   {1, 2,3, …} Whole Numbers The whole numbers (W) :   {0, 1, 2,3, …} Notice that every natural number is a whole number. Integers The integers (Z) :   {…,  − 3, −  2, − 1,0,1, 2, 3, …} Notice that every whole number is an integer. Rational Numbers The rational numbers (Q) : Rational numbers are real numbers that can be written in the form a / b , where a and b are integers, and b ≠ 0 . Fractions Rational numbers are commonly called fractions. Division by 1 Since b can equal 1, every integer is a rational number: . Division by 0 Recall that 10 / 2 = 5 since 2⋅5 = 10 . However, if 10 / 0 = x , then 0⋅x = 10 . But 0⋅x = 0 , not 10. This suggests that no quotient exists. Now consider 0 / 0 = x . If 0 / 0 = x , then 0⋅x = 0 . But this means that x could be any number, that is, 0 / 0 = 4 since 0⋅4 = 0 , or 0 / 0 = 28 since 0⋅28 = 0 . This suggests that the quotient is indeterminant. x / 0 Is Undefined or Indeterminant Division by 0 is undefined or indeterminant.Do not divide by 0. Rational numbers have decimal representations that either terminate or do not terminate but contain a repeating block of digits. Some examples are: Some rational numbers are graphed below. Irrational Numbers The irrational numbers (I r) : Irrational numbers are numbers that cannot be written as the quotient of two integers. They are numbers whose decimal representations are nonterminating and nonrepeating. Some examples are Notice that the collections of rational numbers and irrational numbers have no numbers in common. When graphed on the number line, the rational and irrational numbers account for every point on the number line. Thus each point on the number line has a coordinate that is either a rational or an irrational number. In summary, we have  || 
book1_ch02_3_6	Ordering the Real Numbers Ordering the Real Numbers A real number b is said to be greater than a real number a , denoted b > a , if the graph of b is to the right of the graph of a on the number line. Ordering the Real Numbers Ordering the Real Numbers A real number b is said to be greater than a real number a , denoted b > a , if the graph of b is to the right of the graph of a on the number line.  || 
book1_ch02_4	 || The Closure Properties The Closure Properties If a and b are real numbers, then a + b is a unique real number, and a⋅b is a unique real number. For example, 3 and 11 are real numbers; 3 + 11 = 14 and 3⋅11 = 33, and both 14 and 33 are real numbers. Although this property seems obvious, some collections are not closed under certain operations. For example, Example 2.34.  The real numbers are not closed under division since, although 5 and 0 are real numbers, 5 / 0 and 0 / 0 are not real numbers. Example 2.35.  The natural numbers are not closed under subtraction since, although 8 is a natural number, 8 − 8 is not. ( 8 − 8 = 0 and 0 is not a natural number.)  || The Commutative Properties Let a and b represent real numbers. The Commutative Properties The commutative properties tell us that two numbers can be added or multiplied in any order without affecting the result.  || The Associative Properties Let a,b, and c represent real numbers. The Associative Properties The associative properties tell us that we may group together the quantities as we please without affecting the result.  || The Distributive Properties When we were first introduced to multiplication we saw that it was developed as a description for repeated addition. 4 + 4 + 4 = 3⋅4 Notice that there are three 4’s, that is, 4 appears 3 times. Hence, 3 times 4.We know that algebra is generalized arithmetic. We can now make an important generalization. When a number a is added repeatedly n times, we have Then, using multiplication as a description for repeated addition, we can replace For example: Example 2.47.  x + x + x + x can be written as 4x since x is repeatedly added 4 times. x + x + x + x = 4x Example 2.48.  r + r can be written as 2r since r is repeatedly added 2 times. r + r = 2r The distributive property involves both multiplication and addition. Let’s rewrite 4(a + b). We proceed by reading 4(a + b) as a multiplication: 4 times the quantity (a + b) . This directs us to write Now we use the commutative property of addition to collect all the a ' s together and all the b ' s together. Now, using multiplication as a description for repeated addition, we have We have distributed the 4 over the sum to both a and b . The Distributive Property The distributive property is useful when we cannot or do not wish to perform operations inside parentheses.  || The Identity Properties Additive Identity The number 0 is called the additive identity since when it is added to any real number, it preserves the identity of that number. Zero is the only additive identity.For example, 6 + 0 = 6 . Multiplicative Identity The number 1 is called the multiplicative identity since when it multiplies any real number, it preserves the identity of that number. One is the only multiplicative identity.For example 6⋅1 = 6 . We summarize the identity properties as follows.  || The Inverse Properties Additive Inverses When two numbers are added together and the result is the additive identity, 0, the numbers are called additive inverses of each other. For example, when 3 is added to − 3 the result is 0, that is, 3 + ( − 3) = 0 . The numbers 3 and − 3 are additive inverses of each other. Multiplicative Inverses When two numbers are multiplied together and the result is the multiplicative identity, 1, the numbers are called multiplicative inverses of each other. For example, when 6 and are multiplied together, the result is 1, that is, . The numbers 6 and are multiplicative inverses of each other. We summarize the inverse properties as follows. The Inverse Properties If a is any real number, then there is a unique real number − a , such that The numbers a and − a are called additive inverses of each other. If a is any nonzero real number, then there is a unique real number such that The numbers a and are called multiplicative inverses of each other. Expanding Quantities When we perform operations such as 6(a + 3) = 6a + 18 , we say we are expanding the quantity 6(a + 3) .  || 
book1_ch02_4_2	The Closure Properties The Closure Properties If a and b are real numbers, then a + b is a unique real number, and a⋅b is a unique real number. For example, 3 and 11 are real numbers; 3 + 11 = 14 and 3⋅11 = 33, and both 14 and 33 are real numbers. Although this property seems obvious, some collections are not closed under certain operations. For example, Example 2.34.  The real numbers are not closed under division since, although 5 and 0 are real numbers, 5 / 0 and 0 / 0 are not real numbers. Example 2.35.  The natural numbers are not closed under subtraction since, although 8 is a natural number, 8 − 8 is not. ( 8 − 8 = 0 and 0 is not a natural number.) The Closure Properties The Closure Properties If a and b are real numbers, then a + b is a unique real number, and a⋅b is a unique real number. For example, 3 and 11 are real numbers; 3 + 11 = 14 and 3⋅11 = 33, and both 14 and 33 are real numbers. Although this property seems obvious, some collections are not closed under certain operations. For example, Example 2.34.  The real numbers are not closed under division since, although 5 and 0 are real numbers, 5 / 0 and 0 / 0 are not real numbers. Example 2.35.  The natural numbers are not closed under subtraction since, although 8 is a natural number, 8 − 8 is not. ( 8 − 8 = 0 and 0 is not a natural number.)  || 
book1_ch02_4_3	The Commutative Properties Let a and b represent real numbers. The Commutative Properties The commutative properties tell us that two numbers can be added or multiplied in any order without affecting the result. The Commutative Properties Let a and b represent real numbers. The Commutative Properties The commutative properties tell us that two numbers can be added or multiplied in any order without affecting the result.  || 
book1_ch02_4_6	The Associative Properties Let a,b, and c represent real numbers. The Associative Properties The associative properties tell us that we may group together the quantities as we please without affecting the result. The Associative Properties Let a,b, and c represent real numbers. The Associative Properties The associative properties tell us that we may group together the quantities as we please without affecting the result.  || 
book1_ch02_4_11	The Distributive Properties When we were first introduced to multiplication we saw that it was developed as a description for repeated addition. 4 + 4 + 4 = 3⋅4 Notice that there are three 4’s, that is, 4 appears 3 times. Hence, 3 times 4.We know that algebra is generalized arithmetic. We can now make an important generalization. When a number a is added repeatedly n times, we have Then, using multiplication as a description for repeated addition, we can replace For example: Example 2.47.  x + x + x + x can be written as 4x since x is repeatedly added 4 times. x + x + x + x = 4x Example 2.48.  r + r can be written as 2r since r is repeatedly added 2 times. r + r = 2r The distributive property involves both multiplication and addition. Let’s rewrite 4(a + b). We proceed by reading 4(a + b) as a multiplication: 4 times the quantity (a + b) . This directs us to write Now we use the commutative property of addition to collect all the a ' s together and all the b ' s together. Now, using multiplication as a description for repeated addition, we have We have distributed the 4 over the sum to both a and b . The Distributive Property The distributive property is useful when we cannot or do not wish to perform operations inside parentheses. The Distributive Properties When we were first introduced to multiplication we saw that it was developed as a description for repeated addition. 4 + 4 + 4 = 3⋅4 Notice that there are three 4’s, that is, 4 appears 3 times. Hence, 3 times 4.We know that algebra is generalized arithmetic. We can now make an important generalization. When a number a is added repeatedly n times, we have Then, using multiplication as a description for repeated addition, we can replace For example: Example 2.47.  x + x + x + x can be written as 4x since x is repeatedly added 4 times. x + x + x + x = 4x Example 2.48.  r + r can be written as 2r since r is repeatedly added 2 times. r + r = 2r The distributive property involves both multiplication and addition. Let’s rewrite 4(a + b). We proceed by reading 4(a + b) as a multiplication: 4 times the quantity (a + b) . This directs us to write Now we use the commutative property of addition to collect all the a ' s together and all the b ' s together. Now, using multiplication as a description for repeated addition, we have We have distributed the 4 over the sum to both a and b . The Distributive Property The distributive property is useful when we cannot or do not wish to perform operations inside parentheses.  || 
book1_ch02_4_14	The Identity Properties Additive Identity The number 0 is called the additive identity since when it is added to any real number, it preserves the identity of that number. Zero is the only additive identity.For example, 6 + 0 = 6 . Multiplicative Identity The number 1 is called the multiplicative identity since when it multiplies any real number, it preserves the identity of that number. One is the only multiplicative identity.For example 6⋅1 = 6 . We summarize the identity properties as follows. The Identity Properties Additive Identity The number 0 is called the additive identity since when it is added to any real number, it preserves the identity of that number. Zero is the only additive identity.For example, 6 + 0 = 6 . Multiplicative Identity The number 1 is called the multiplicative identity since when it multiplies any real number, it preserves the identity of that number. One is the only multiplicative identity.For example 6⋅1 = 6 . We summarize the identity properties as follows.  || 
book1_ch02_4_15	The Inverse Properties Additive Inverses When two numbers are added together and the result is the additive identity, 0, the numbers are called additive inverses of each other. For example, when 3 is added to − 3 the result is 0, that is, 3 + ( − 3) = 0 . The numbers 3 and − 3 are additive inverses of each other. Multiplicative Inverses When two numbers are multiplied together and the result is the multiplicative identity, 1, the numbers are called multiplicative inverses of each other. For example, when 6 and are multiplied together, the result is 1, that is, . The numbers 6 and are multiplicative inverses of each other. We summarize the inverse properties as follows. The Inverse Properties If a is any real number, then there is a unique real number − a , such that The numbers a and − a are called additive inverses of each other. If a is any nonzero real number, then there is a unique real number such that The numbers a and are called multiplicative inverses of each other. Expanding Quantities When we perform operations such as 6(a + 3) = 6a + 18 , we say we are expanding the quantity 6(a + 3) . The Inverse Properties Additive Inverses When two numbers are added together and the result is the additive identity, 0, the numbers are called additive inverses of each other. For example, when 3 is added to − 3 the result is 0, that is, 3 + ( − 3) = 0 . The numbers 3 and − 3 are additive inverses of each other. Multiplicative Inverses When two numbers are multiplied together and the result is the multiplicative identity, 1, the numbers are called multiplicative inverses of each other. For example, when 6 and are multiplied together, the result is 1, that is, . The numbers 6 and are multiplicative inverses of each other. We summarize the inverse properties as follows. The Inverse Properties If a is any real number, then there is a unique real number − a , such that The numbers a and − a are called additive inverses of each other. If a is any nonzero real number, then there is a unique real number such that The numbers a and are called multiplicative inverses of each other. Expanding Quantities When we perform operations such as 6(a + 3) = 6a + 18 , we say we are expanding the quantity 6(a + 3) .  || 
book1_ch02_5	 || Exponential Notation In Section Section 2.4 we were reminded that multiplication is a description for repeated addition. A natural question is “Is there a description for repeated multiplication?” The answer is yes. The notation that describes repeated multiplication is exponential notation. Factors In multiplication, the numbers being multiplied together are called factors. In repeated multiplication, all the factors are the same. In nonrepeated multiplication, none of the factors are the same. For example, Example 2.52.  Exponential notation is used to show repeated multiplication of the same factor. The notation consists of using a superscript on the factor that is repeated. The superscript is called an exponent. Exponential Notation If x is any real number and n is a natural number, thenAn exponent records the number of identical factors in a multiplication. Note that the definition for exponential notation only has meaning for natural number exponents. We will extend this notation to include other numbers as exponents later.  || Reading Exponential Notation In x n , Base x is the base Exponent n is the exponent Power The number represented by x n is called a power. x to the n th Power The term x n is read as " x to the n th power," or more simply as " x to the n th." x Squared and x Cubed The symbol x 2 is often read as " x squared," and x 3 is often read as " x cubed." A natural question is "Why are geometric terms appearing in the exponent expression?" The answer for x 3 is this: x 3 means x⋅x⋅x . In geometry, the volume of a rectangular box is found by multiplying the length by the width by the depth. A cube has the same length on each side. If we represent this length by the letter x then the volume of the cube is x⋅x⋅x , which, of course, is described by x 3 . (Can you think of why x 2 is read as x squared?) Cube withlength = x width = x depth = x Volume = x x x = x 3  || The Order of Operations In Section Section 2.2 we were introduced to the order of operations. It was noted that we would insert another operation before multiplication and division. We can do that now. The Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols beginning with the innermost set. Perform all exponential operations as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all multiplications and divisions as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all additions and subtractions as you come to them, moving left-to-right.  || 
book1_ch02_5_2	Exponential Notation In Section Section 2.4 we were reminded that multiplication is a description for repeated addition. A natural question is “Is there a description for repeated multiplication?” The answer is yes. The notation that describes repeated multiplication is exponential notation. Factors In multiplication, the numbers being multiplied together are called factors. In repeated multiplication, all the factors are the same. In nonrepeated multiplication, none of the factors are the same. For example, Example 2.52.  Exponential notation is used to show repeated multiplication of the same factor. The notation consists of using a superscript on the factor that is repeated. The superscript is called an exponent. Exponential Notation If x is any real number and n is a natural number, thenAn exponent records the number of identical factors in a multiplication. Note that the definition for exponential notation only has meaning for natural number exponents. We will extend this notation to include other numbers as exponents later. Exponential Notation In Section Section 2.4 we were reminded that multiplication is a description for repeated addition. A natural question is “Is there a description for repeated multiplication?” The answer is yes. The notation that describes repeated multiplication is exponential notation. Factors In multiplication, the numbers being multiplied together are called factors. In repeated multiplication, all the factors are the same. In nonrepeated multiplication, none of the factors are the same. For example, Example 2.52.  Exponential notation is used to show repeated multiplication of the same factor. The notation consists of using a superscript on the factor that is repeated. The superscript is called an exponent. Exponential Notation If x is any real number and n is a natural number, thenAn exponent records the number of identical factors in a multiplication. Note that the definition for exponential notation only has meaning for natural number exponents. We will extend this notation to include other numbers as exponents later.  || 
book1_ch02_5_9	Reading Exponential Notation In x n , Base x is the base Exponent n is the exponent Power The number represented by x n is called a power. x to the n th Power The term x n is read as " x to the n th power," or more simply as " x to the n th." x Squared and x Cubed The symbol x 2 is often read as " x squared," and x 3 is often read as " x cubed." A natural question is "Why are geometric terms appearing in the exponent expression?" The answer for x 3 is this: x 3 means x⋅x⋅x . In geometry, the volume of a rectangular box is found by multiplying the length by the width by the depth. A cube has the same length on each side. If we represent this length by the letter x then the volume of the cube is x⋅x⋅x , which, of course, is described by x 3 . (Can you think of why x 2 is read as x squared?) Cube withlength = x width = x depth = x Volume = x x x = x 3 Reading Exponential Notation In x n , Base x is the base Exponent n is the exponent Power The number represented by x n is called a power. x to the n th Power The term x n is read as " x to the n th power," or more simply as " x to the n th." x Squared and x Cubed The symbol x 2 is often read as " x squared," and x 3 is often read as " x cubed." A natural question is "Why are geometric terms appearing in the exponent expression?" The answer for x 3 is this: x 3 means x⋅x⋅x . In geometry, the volume of a rectangular box is found by multiplying the length by the width by the depth. A cube has the same length on each side. If we represent this length by the letter x then the volume of the cube is x⋅x⋅x , which, of course, is described by x 3 . (Can you think of why x 2 is read as x squared?) Cube withlength = x width = x depth = x Volume = x x x = x 3  || 
book1_ch02_5_10	The Order of Operations In Section Section 2.2 we were introduced to the order of operations. It was noted that we would insert another operation before multiplication and division. We can do that now. The Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols beginning with the innermost set. Perform all exponential operations as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all multiplications and divisions as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all additions and subtractions as you come to them, moving left-to-right. The Order of Operations In Section Section 2.2 we were introduced to the order of operations. It was noted that we would insert another operation before multiplication and division. We can do that now. The Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols beginning with the innermost set. Perform all exponential operations as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all multiplications and divisions as you come to them, moving left-to-right. Perform all additions and subtractions as you come to them, moving left-to-right.  || 
book1_ch02_6	 || The Product Rule for Exponents The first rule we wish to develop is the rule for multiplying two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. The following examples suggest this rule: Example 2.70.  Example 2.71.  PRODUCT RULE FOR EXPONENTS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers, x n x m = x n + m To multiply two exponential quantities having the same base, add the exponents. Keep in mind that the exponential quantities being multiplied must have the same base for this rule to apply.  || The Quotient Rule for Exponents The second rule we wish to develop is the rule for dividing two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. The following examples suggest a rule for dividing two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. Example 2.83.  Example 2.84.  QUOTIENT RULE FOR EXPONENTS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers,.To divide two exponential quantities having the same nonzero base, subtract the exponent of the denominator from the exponent of the numerator. Keep in mind that the exponential quantities being divided must have the same base for this rule to apply.  || Zero as an Exponent In Sample Set C, the exponents of the numerators were greater than the exponents of the denominators. Let’s study the case when the exponents are the same.When the exponents are the same, say n , the subtraction n − n produces 0.Thus, by the second rule of exponents, .But what real number, if any, does x 0 represent? Let’s think for a moment about our experience with division in arithmetic. We know that any nonzero number divided by itself is one. Since the letter x represents some nonzero real number, so does x n . Thus, represents some nonzero real number divided by itself. Then .But we have also established that if . We now have that and . This implies that x 0 = 1,x ≠ 0 .Exponents can now be natural numbers and zero. We have enlarged our collection of numbers that can be used as exponents from the collection of natural numbers to the collection of whole numbers. ZERO AS AN EXPONENT If Any number, other than 0, raised to the power of 0, is 1. 00 has no meaning (it does not represent a number).  || 
book1_ch02_6_2	The Product Rule for Exponents The first rule we wish to develop is the rule for multiplying two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. The following examples suggest this rule: Example 2.70.  Example 2.71.  PRODUCT RULE FOR EXPONENTS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers, x n x m = x n + m To multiply two exponential quantities having the same base, add the exponents. Keep in mind that the exponential quantities being multiplied must have the same base for this rule to apply. The Product Rule for Exponents The first rule we wish to develop is the rule for multiplying two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. The following examples suggest this rule: Example 2.70.  Example 2.71.  PRODUCT RULE FOR EXPONENTS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers, x n x m = x n + m To multiply two exponential quantities having the same base, add the exponents. Keep in mind that the exponential quantities being multiplied must have the same base for this rule to apply.  || 
book1_ch02_6_7	The Quotient Rule for Exponents The second rule we wish to develop is the rule for dividing two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. The following examples suggest a rule for dividing two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. Example 2.83.  Example 2.84.  QUOTIENT RULE FOR EXPONENTS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers,.To divide two exponential quantities having the same nonzero base, subtract the exponent of the denominator from the exponent of the numerator. Keep in mind that the exponential quantities being divided must have the same base for this rule to apply. The Quotient Rule for Exponents The second rule we wish to develop is the rule for dividing two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. The following examples suggest a rule for dividing two exponential quantities having the same base and natural number exponents. Example 2.83.  Example 2.84.  QUOTIENT RULE FOR EXPONENTS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers,.To divide two exponential quantities having the same nonzero base, subtract the exponent of the denominator from the exponent of the numerator. Keep in mind that the exponential quantities being divided must have the same base for this rule to apply.  || 
book1_ch02_6_10	Zero as an Exponent In Sample Set C, the exponents of the numerators were greater than the exponents of the denominators. Let’s study the case when the exponents are the same.When the exponents are the same, say n , the subtraction n − n produces 0.Thus, by the second rule of exponents, .But what real number, if any, does x 0 represent? Let’s think for a moment about our experience with division in arithmetic. We know that any nonzero number divided by itself is one. Since the letter x represents some nonzero real number, so does x n . Thus, represents some nonzero real number divided by itself. Then .But we have also established that if . We now have that and . This implies that x 0 = 1,x ≠ 0 .Exponents can now be natural numbers and zero. We have enlarged our collection of numbers that can be used as exponents from the collection of natural numbers to the collection of whole numbers. ZERO AS AN EXPONENT If Any number, other than 0, raised to the power of 0, is 1. 00 has no meaning (it does not represent a number). Zero as an Exponent In Sample Set C, the exponents of the numerators were greater than the exponents of the denominators. Let’s study the case when the exponents are the same.When the exponents are the same, say n , the subtraction n − n produces 0.Thus, by the second rule of exponents, .But what real number, if any, does x 0 represent? Let’s think for a moment about our experience with division in arithmetic. We know that any nonzero number divided by itself is one. Since the letter x represents some nonzero real number, so does x n . Thus, represents some nonzero real number divided by itself. Then .But we have also established that if . We now have that and . This implies that x 0 = 1,x ≠ 0 .Exponents can now be natural numbers and zero. We have enlarged our collection of numbers that can be used as exponents from the collection of natural numbers to the collection of whole numbers. ZERO AS AN EXPONENT If Any number, other than 0, raised to the power of 0, is 1. 00 has no meaning (it does not represent a number).  || 
book1_ch02_7	 || The Power Rule for Powers The following examples suggest a rule for raising a power to a power: Example 2.95.  (a 2 ) 3 = a 2  ⋅ ​a 2  ⋅ a 2 Using the product rule we get Example 2.96.  POWER RULE FOR POWERS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers, (x n ) m = x n⋅m To raise a power to a power, multiply the exponents.  || The Power Rule for Products The following examples suggest a rule for raising a product to a power: Example 2.101.  Example 2.102.  Example 2.103.  POWER RULE FOR PRODUCTS If x and y are real numbers and n is a natural number, (x y) n = x n y n To raise a product to a power, apply the exponent to each and every factor.  || The Power Rule for Quotients The following example suggests a rule for raising a quotient to a power. Example 2.112.  POWER RULE FOR QUOTIENTS If x and y are real numbers and n is a natural number, To raise a quotient to a power, distribute the exponent to both the numerator and denominator.  || 
book1_ch02_7_2	The Power Rule for Powers The following examples suggest a rule for raising a power to a power: Example 2.95.  (a 2 ) 3 = a 2  ⋅ ​a 2  ⋅ a 2 Using the product rule we get Example 2.96.  POWER RULE FOR POWERS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers, (x n ) m = x n⋅m To raise a power to a power, multiply the exponents. The Power Rule for Powers The following examples suggest a rule for raising a power to a power: Example 2.95.  (a 2 ) 3 = a 2  ⋅ ​a 2  ⋅ a 2 Using the product rule we get Example 2.96.  POWER RULE FOR POWERS If x is a real number and n and m are natural numbers, (x n ) m = x n⋅m To raise a power to a power, multiply the exponents.  || 
book1_ch02_7_5	The Power Rule for Products The following examples suggest a rule for raising a product to a power: Example 2.101.  Example 2.102.  Example 2.103.  POWER RULE FOR PRODUCTS If x and y are real numbers and n is a natural number, (x y) n = x n y n To raise a product to a power, apply the exponent to each and every factor. The Power Rule for Products The following examples suggest a rule for raising a product to a power: Example 2.101.  Example 2.102.  Example 2.103.  POWER RULE FOR PRODUCTS If x and y are real numbers and n is a natural number, (x y) n = x n y n To raise a product to a power, apply the exponent to each and every factor.  || 
book1_ch02_7_8	The Power Rule for Quotients The following example suggests a rule for raising a quotient to a power. Example 2.112.  POWER RULE FOR QUOTIENTS If x and y are real numbers and n is a natural number, To raise a quotient to a power, distribute the exponent to both the numerator and denominator. The Power Rule for Quotients The following example suggests a rule for raising a quotient to a power. Example 2.112.  POWER RULE FOR QUOTIENTS If x and y are real numbers and n is a natural number, To raise a quotient to a power, distribute the exponent to both the numerator and denominator.  || 
book1_ch06	 ||  || Products of Polynomials Previously, we studied multiplication of polynomials (Section Section 4.6). We were given factors and asked to find their product, as shown below. Example 6.1.  Given the factors 4and 8, find the product. 4⋅8 = 32 . The product is 32. Example 6.2.  Given the factors 6x 2 and 2 x − 7 , find the product. 6 x 2 ( 2 x − 7 ) = 12 x 3 − 42 x 2 The product is 12 x 3 − 42 x 2 . Example 6.3.  Given the factors x − 2 y and 3 x + y , find the product. The product is 3x 2 − 5x y − 2y 2 . Example 6.4.  Given the factors a + 8 and a + 8 , find the product. (a + 8) 2 = a 2 + 16a + 64 The product is a 2 + 16a + 64 .  || Factoring Now, let’s reverse the situation. We will be given the product, and we will try to find the factors. This process, which is the reverse of multiplication, is called factoring. Factoring Factoring is the process of determining the factors of a given product.  ||  || The Factorization Process We introduce the process of factoring a monomial from a polynomial by examining a problem: Suppose that 12x 2 + 20x is the product and one of the factors is 4x . To find the other factor we could set up the problem this way: 4x⋅(               ) = 12x 2 + 20x Since the product 12x 2 + 20x consists of two terms, the expression multiplying 4x must consist of two terms, since, by the distributive property Now we see that this problem is simply an extension of finding the factors of a monomial. Thus, 4x⋅( 3x + 5 ) = 12x 2 + 20x . Usually, these divisions can be done mentally and the terms of the factor filled in directly.  ||  || Factoring Method In the last two types of problems (Sections Section 6.2 and Section 6.3), we knew one of the factors and were able to determine the other factor through division. Suppose, now, we’re given the product without any factors. Our problem is to find the factors, if possible. This procedure and the previous two procedures are based on the distributive property. We will use the distributive property in reverse. We notice that in the product, a is common to both terms. (In fact, a is a common factor of both terms.) Since a is common to both terms, we will factor it out and write a(               ) Now we need to determine what to place inside the parentheses. This is the procedure of the previous section. Divide each term of the product by the known factor a. Thus, b and c are the required terms of the other factor. Hence, a b + a c = a(b + c) When factoring a monomial from a polynomial, we seek out factors that are not only common to each term of the polynomial, but factors that have these properties: The numerical coefficients are the largest common numerical coefficients. The variables possess the largest exponents common to all the variables.  || Greatest Common Factor A monomial factor that meets the above two requirements is called the greatest common factor of the polynomial.  ||  || Using Grouping to Factor a Polynomial Sometimes a polynomial will not have a particular factor common to every term. However, we may still be able to produce a factored form for the polynomial. The polynomial x 3 + 3 x 2 − 6 x − 18 has no single factor that is common to every term. However, we notice that if we group together the first two terms and the second two terms, we see that each resulting binomial has a particular factor common to both terms. Factor x 2 out of the first two terms, and factor − 6 out of the second two terms. x 2 (x + 3)  − 6(x + 3) Now look closely at this binomial. Each of the two terms contains the factor (x + 3) . Factor out (x + 3) . (x + 3) (x 2 − 6) is the final factorization. x 3 + 3x 2 − 6x − 18 =  (x + 3) (x 2 − 6)  || Knowing when to Try the Grouping Method We are alerted to the idea of grouping when the polynomial we are considering has either of these qualities: no factor common to all terms an even number of terms When factoring by grouping, the sign ( +  or  − ) of the factor we are taking out will usually (but not always) be the same as the sign of the first term in that group.  ||  || The Difference of Two Squares Recall that when we multiplied together the two binomials ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) , we obtained the product a 2 − b 2 . ( a + b ) ( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 Perfect Square Notice that the terms a 2 and b 2 in the product can be produced by squaring a and b , respectively. A term that is the square of another term is called a perfect square. Thus, both a 2 and b 2 are perfect squares. The minus sign between a 2 and b 2 means that we are taking the difference of the two squares.Since we know that ( a + b ) ( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 , we need only turn the equation around to find the factorization form. a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) The factorization form says that we can factor a 2 − b 2 , the difference of two squares, by finding the terms that produce the perfect squares and substituting these quantities into the factorization form.When using real numbers (as we are), there is no factored form for the sum of two squares. That is, using real numbers, a 2 + b 2 cannot be factored  || Fundamental Rules of Factoring There are two fundamental rules that we follow when factoring: Fundamental Rules of Factoring Factor out all common monomials first. Factor completely.  || Perfect Square Trinomials Recall the process of squaring a binomial. Table 6.1. Our Method Is We Notice Square the first term. The first term of the product should be a perfect square. Take the product of the two terms and double it. The middle term of the product should be divisible by 2 (since it’s multiplied by 2). Square the last term. The last term of the product should be a perfect square. Perfect square trinomials always factor as the square of a binomial. To recognize a perfect square trinomial, look for the following features: The first and last terms are perfect squares. The middle term is divisible by 2, and if we divide the middle term in half (the opposite of doubling it), we will get the product of the terms that when squared produce the first and last terms. In other words, factoring a perfect square trinomial amounts to finding the terms that, when squared, produce the first and last terms of the trinomial, and substituting into one of the formula  ||  || Method Let’s consider the product of the two binomials ( x + 4 ) and ( x + 7 ) . Notice that the first term in the resulting trinomial comes from the product of the first terms in the binomials: x⋅x = x 2 . The last term in the trinomial comes from the product of the last terms in the binomials: 4⋅7 = 28 . The middle term comes from the addition of the outer and inner products: 7 x + 4 x = 11 x . Also, notice that the coefficient of the middle term is exactly the sum of the last terms in the binomials: 4 + 7 = 11 . The problem we’re interested in is that given a trinomial, how can we find the factors? When the leading coefficient (the coefficient of the quadratic term) is 1, the observations we made above lead us to the following method of factoring. Method of Factoring Write two sets of parentheses:. Place a binomial into each set of parentheses. The first term of each binomial is a factor of the first term of the trinomial. Determine the second terms of the binomials by determining the factors of the third term that when added together yield the coefficient of the middle term.  || Factoring Hints Factoring trinomials may take some practice, but with time and experience, you will be able to factor much more quickly. There are some clues that are helpful in determining the factors of the third term that when added yield the coefficient of the middle term. Factoring Hints Look at the sign of the last term: If the sign is positive, we know that the two factors must have the same sign, since ( + ) ( + ) = ( + ) and ( − ) ( − )  =  ( + ) . The two factors will have the same sign as the sign of the middle term. If the sign is negative, we know that two factors must have opposite signs, since ( + ) ( − ) = ( − ) and ( − ) ( + )  =  ( − ) .  ||  || The Method of Factorization In the last section we saw that we could easily factor trinomials of the form x 2 + b x + c by finding the factors of the constant c that add to the coefficient of the linear term b , as shown in the following example: Factor x 2 - 4 x - 21 .The third term of the trinomial is − 21 . We seek two numbers whose (a) product is − 21 and(b) sum is − 4 . The required numbers are − 7 and + 3 . x 2 - 4 x - 21 = ( x - 7 ) ( x + 3 ) The problem of factoring the polynomial a x 2 + b x + c , a≠1 , becomes more involved. We will study two methods of factoring such polynomials. Each method produces the same result, and you should select the method you are most comfortable with. The first method is called the trial and error method and requires some educated guesses. We will examine two examples (Sample Sets A and B). Then, we will study a second method of factoring. The second method is called the collect and discard method, and it requires less guessing than the trial and error method. Sample Set C illustrates the use of the collect and discard method. The Trial and Error Method of Factoring a x 2 + b x + c Trial and Error Method Consider the product Examining the trinomial 20 x 2 + 23 x + 6 , we can immediately see some factors of the first and last terms. Table 6.2. 20x 2 6 20x,  x 6,  1 10x,  2x 3,  2   5x,  4x   Our goal is to choose the proper combination of factors of the first and last terms that yield the middle term 23 x .Notice that the middle term comes from the sum of the outer and inner products in the multiplication of the two binomials. This fact provides us a way to find the proper combination. Look for the combination that when multiplied and then added yields the middle term. The proper combination we're looking for is  || The Trial and Error Method of Factoring a x 2 + b x + c Trial and Error Method Consider the product Examining the trinomial 20 x 2 + 23 x + 6 , we can immediately see some factors of the first and last terms. Table 6.2. 20x 2 6 20x,  x 6,  1 10x,  2x 3,  2   5x,  4x   Our goal is to choose the proper combination of factors of the first and last terms that yield the middle term 23 x .Notice that the middle term comes from the sum of the outer and inner products in the multiplication of the two binomials. This fact provides us a way to find the proper combination. Look for the combination that when multiplied and then added yields the middle term. The proper combination we're looking for is  || The Collect and Discard Method of Factoring a x 2 + b x + c Collect and Discard Method Consider the polynomial 6x 2 + x − 12 . We begin by identifying a and c . In this case, a = 6 and c = − 12 . We start out as we would with a = 1 .Now, compute a⋅c . a⋅c = (6)( − 12) = − 72 Find the factors of − 72 that add to 1, the coefficient of x , the linear term. The factors are 9 and − 8 . Include these factors in the parentheses. 6x 2 + x − 12 :   (6x + 9)(6x − 8) But we have included too much. We must eliminate the surplus. Factor each parentheses. 6x 2 + x − 12 :   3(2x + 3)⋅2(3x − 4) Discard the factors that multiply to a = 6 . In this case, 3 and 2. We are left with the proper factorization. 6x 2 + x − 12 = (2x + 3)(3x − 4)  || 
book1_ch06_2	 || Products of Polynomials Previously, we studied multiplication of polynomials (Section Section 4.6). We were given factors and asked to find their product, as shown below. Example 6.1.  Given the factors 4and 8, find the product. 4⋅8 = 32 . The product is 32. Example 6.2.  Given the factors 6x 2 and 2 x − 7 , find the product. 6 x 2 ( 2 x − 7 ) = 12 x 3 − 42 x 2 The product is 12 x 3 − 42 x 2 . Example 6.3.  Given the factors x − 2 y and 3 x + y , find the product. The product is 3x 2 − 5x y − 2y 2 . Example 6.4.  Given the factors a + 8 and a + 8 , find the product. (a + 8) 2 = a 2 + 16a + 64 The product is a 2 + 16a + 64 .  || Factoring Now, let’s reverse the situation. We will be given the product, and we will try to find the factors. This process, which is the reverse of multiplication, is called factoring. Factoring Factoring is the process of determining the factors of a given product.  || 
book1_ch06_2_2	Products of Polynomials Previously, we studied multiplication of polynomials (Section Section 4.6). We were given factors and asked to find their product, as shown below. Example 6.1.  Given the factors 4and 8, find the product. 4⋅8 = 32 . The product is 32. Example 6.2.  Given the factors 6x 2 and 2 x − 7 , find the product. 6 x 2 ( 2 x − 7 ) = 12 x 3 − 42 x 2 The product is 12 x 3 − 42 x 2 . Example 6.3.  Given the factors x − 2 y and 3 x + y , find the product. The product is 3x 2 − 5x y − 2y 2 . Example 6.4.  Given the factors a + 8 and a + 8 , find the product. (a + 8) 2 = a 2 + 16a + 64 The product is a 2 + 16a + 64 . Products of Polynomials Previously, we studied multiplication of polynomials (Section Section 4.6). We were given factors and asked to find their product, as shown below. Example 6.1.  Given the factors 4and 8, find the product. 4⋅8 = 32 . The product is 32. Example 6.2.  Given the factors 6x 2 and 2 x − 7 , find the product. 6 x 2 ( 2 x − 7 ) = 12 x 3 − 42 x 2 The product is 12 x 3 − 42 x 2 . Example 6.3.  Given the factors x − 2 y and 3 x + y , find the product. The product is 3x 2 − 5x y − 2y 2 . Example 6.4.  Given the factors a + 8 and a + 8 , find the product. (a + 8) 2 = a 2 + 16a + 64 The product is a 2 + 16a + 64 .  || 
book1_ch06_2_3	Factoring Now, let’s reverse the situation. We will be given the product, and we will try to find the factors. This process, which is the reverse of multiplication, is called factoring. Factoring Factoring is the process of determining the factors of a given product. Factoring Now, let’s reverse the situation. We will be given the product, and we will try to find the factors. This process, which is the reverse of multiplication, is called factoring. Factoring Factoring is the process of determining the factors of a given product.  || 
book1_ch06_3	 || The Factorization Process We introduce the process of factoring a monomial from a polynomial by examining a problem: Suppose that 12x 2 + 20x is the product and one of the factors is 4x . To find the other factor we could set up the problem this way: 4x⋅(               ) = 12x 2 + 20x Since the product 12x 2 + 20x consists of two terms, the expression multiplying 4x must consist of two terms, since, by the distributive property Now we see that this problem is simply an extension of finding the factors of a monomial. Thus, 4x⋅( 3x + 5 ) = 12x 2 + 20x . Usually, these divisions can be done mentally and the terms of the factor filled in directly.  || 
book1_ch06_3_2	The Factorization Process We introduce the process of factoring a monomial from a polynomial by examining a problem: Suppose that 12x 2 + 20x is the product and one of the factors is 4x . To find the other factor we could set up the problem this way: 4x⋅(               ) = 12x 2 + 20x Since the product 12x 2 + 20x consists of two terms, the expression multiplying 4x must consist of two terms, since, by the distributive property Now we see that this problem is simply an extension of finding the factors of a monomial. Thus, 4x⋅( 3x + 5 ) = 12x 2 + 20x . Usually, these divisions can be done mentally and the terms of the factor filled in directly. The Factorization Process We introduce the process of factoring a monomial from a polynomial by examining a problem: Suppose that 12x 2 + 20x is the product and one of the factors is 4x . To find the other factor we could set up the problem this way: 4x⋅(               ) = 12x 2 + 20x Since the product 12x 2 + 20x consists of two terms, the expression multiplying 4x must consist of two terms, since, by the distributive property Now we see that this problem is simply an extension of finding the factors of a monomial. Thus, 4x⋅( 3x + 5 ) = 12x 2 + 20x . Usually, these divisions can be done mentally and the terms of the factor filled in directly.  || 
book1_ch06_4	 || Factoring Method In the last two types of problems (Sections Section 6.2 and Section 6.3), we knew one of the factors and were able to determine the other factor through division. Suppose, now, we’re given the product without any factors. Our problem is to find the factors, if possible. This procedure and the previous two procedures are based on the distributive property. We will use the distributive property in reverse. We notice that in the product, a is common to both terms. (In fact, a is a common factor of both terms.) Since a is common to both terms, we will factor it out and write a(               ) Now we need to determine what to place inside the parentheses. This is the procedure of the previous section. Divide each term of the product by the known factor a. Thus, b and c are the required terms of the other factor. Hence, a b + a c = a(b + c) When factoring a monomial from a polynomial, we seek out factors that are not only common to each term of the polynomial, but factors that have these properties: The numerical coefficients are the largest common numerical coefficients. The variables possess the largest exponents common to all the variables.  || Greatest Common Factor A monomial factor that meets the above two requirements is called the greatest common factor of the polynomial.  || 
book1_ch06_4_2	Factoring Method In the last two types of problems (Sections Section 6.2 and Section 6.3), we knew one of the factors and were able to determine the other factor through division. Suppose, now, we’re given the product without any factors. Our problem is to find the factors, if possible. This procedure and the previous two procedures are based on the distributive property. We will use the distributive property in reverse. We notice that in the product, a is common to both terms. (In fact, a is a common factor of both terms.) Since a is common to both terms, we will factor it out and write a(               ) Now we need to determine what to place inside the parentheses. This is the procedure of the previous section. Divide each term of the product by the known factor a. Thus, b and c are the required terms of the other factor. Hence, a b + a c = a(b + c) When factoring a monomial from a polynomial, we seek out factors that are not only common to each term of the polynomial, but factors that have these properties: The numerical coefficients are the largest common numerical coefficients. The variables possess the largest exponents common to all the variables. Factoring Method In the last two types of problems (Sections Section 6.2 and Section 6.3), we knew one of the factors and were able to determine the other factor through division. Suppose, now, we’re given the product without any factors. Our problem is to find the factors, if possible. This procedure and the previous two procedures are based on the distributive property. We will use the distributive property in reverse. We notice that in the product, a is common to both terms. (In fact, a is a common factor of both terms.) Since a is common to both terms, we will factor it out and write a(               ) Now we need to determine what to place inside the parentheses. This is the procedure of the previous section. Divide each term of the product by the known factor a. Thus, b and c are the required terms of the other factor. Hence, a b + a c = a(b + c) When factoring a monomial from a polynomial, we seek out factors that are not only common to each term of the polynomial, but factors that have these properties: The numerical coefficients are the largest common numerical coefficients. The variables possess the largest exponents common to all the variables.  || 
book1_ch06_4_3	Greatest Common Factor A monomial factor that meets the above two requirements is called the greatest common factor of the polynomial. Greatest Common Factor A monomial factor that meets the above two requirements is called the greatest common factor of the polynomial.  || 
book1_ch06_5	 || Using Grouping to Factor a Polynomial Sometimes a polynomial will not have a particular factor common to every term. However, we may still be able to produce a factored form for the polynomial. The polynomial x 3 + 3 x 2 − 6 x − 18 has no single factor that is common to every term. However, we notice that if we group together the first two terms and the second two terms, we see that each resulting binomial has a particular factor common to both terms. Factor x 2 out of the first two terms, and factor − 6 out of the second two terms. x 2 (x + 3)  − 6(x + 3) Now look closely at this binomial. Each of the two terms contains the factor (x + 3) . Factor out (x + 3) . (x + 3) (x 2 − 6) is the final factorization. x 3 + 3x 2 − 6x − 18 =  (x + 3) (x 2 − 6)  || Knowing when to Try the Grouping Method We are alerted to the idea of grouping when the polynomial we are considering has either of these qualities: no factor common to all terms an even number of terms When factoring by grouping, the sign ( +  or  − ) of the factor we are taking out will usually (but not always) be the same as the sign of the first term in that group.  || 
book1_ch06_5_2	Using Grouping to Factor a Polynomial Sometimes a polynomial will not have a particular factor common to every term. However, we may still be able to produce a factored form for the polynomial. The polynomial x 3 + 3 x 2 − 6 x − 18 has no single factor that is common to every term. However, we notice that if we group together the first two terms and the second two terms, we see that each resulting binomial has a particular factor common to both terms. Factor x 2 out of the first two terms, and factor − 6 out of the second two terms. x 2 (x + 3)  − 6(x + 3) Now look closely at this binomial. Each of the two terms contains the factor (x + 3) . Factor out (x + 3) . (x + 3) (x 2 − 6) is the final factorization. x 3 + 3x 2 − 6x − 18 =  (x + 3) (x 2 − 6) Using Grouping to Factor a Polynomial Sometimes a polynomial will not have a particular factor common to every term. However, we may still be able to produce a factored form for the polynomial. The polynomial x 3 + 3 x 2 − 6 x − 18 has no single factor that is common to every term. However, we notice that if we group together the first two terms and the second two terms, we see that each resulting binomial has a particular factor common to both terms. Factor x 2 out of the first two terms, and factor − 6 out of the second two terms. x 2 (x + 3)  − 6(x + 3) Now look closely at this binomial. Each of the two terms contains the factor (x + 3) . Factor out (x + 3) . (x + 3) (x 2 − 6) is the final factorization. x 3 + 3x 2 − 6x − 18 =  (x + 3) (x 2 − 6)  || 
book1_ch06_5_3	Knowing when to Try the Grouping Method We are alerted to the idea of grouping when the polynomial we are considering has either of these qualities: no factor common to all terms an even number of terms When factoring by grouping, the sign ( +  or  − ) of the factor we are taking out will usually (but not always) be the same as the sign of the first term in that group. Knowing when to Try the Grouping Method We are alerted to the idea of grouping when the polynomial we are considering has either of these qualities: no factor common to all terms an even number of terms When factoring by grouping, the sign ( +  or  − ) of the factor we are taking out will usually (but not always) be the same as the sign of the first term in that group.  || 
book1_ch06_6	 || The Difference of Two Squares Recall that when we multiplied together the two binomials ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) , we obtained the product a 2 − b 2 . ( a + b ) ( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 Perfect Square Notice that the terms a 2 and b 2 in the product can be produced by squaring a and b , respectively. A term that is the square of another term is called a perfect square. Thus, both a 2 and b 2 are perfect squares. The minus sign between a 2 and b 2 means that we are taking the difference of the two squares.Since we know that ( a + b ) ( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 , we need only turn the equation around to find the factorization form. a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) The factorization form says that we can factor a 2 − b 2 , the difference of two squares, by finding the terms that produce the perfect squares and substituting these quantities into the factorization form.When using real numbers (as we are), there is no factored form for the sum of two squares. That is, using real numbers, a 2 + b 2 cannot be factored  || Fundamental Rules of Factoring There are two fundamental rules that we follow when factoring: Fundamental Rules of Factoring Factor out all common monomials first. Factor completely.  || Perfect Square Trinomials Recall the process of squaring a binomial. Table 6.1. Our Method Is We Notice Square the first term. The first term of the product should be a perfect square. Take the product of the two terms and double it. The middle term of the product should be divisible by 2 (since it’s multiplied by 2). Square the last term. The last term of the product should be a perfect square. Perfect square trinomials always factor as the square of a binomial. To recognize a perfect square trinomial, look for the following features: The first and last terms are perfect squares. The middle term is divisible by 2, and if we divide the middle term in half (the opposite of doubling it), we will get the product of the terms that when squared produce the first and last terms. In other words, factoring a perfect square trinomial amounts to finding the terms that, when squared, produce the first and last terms of the trinomial, and substituting into one of the formula  || 
book1_ch06_6_2	The Difference of Two Squares Recall that when we multiplied together the two binomials ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) , we obtained the product a 2 − b 2 . ( a + b ) ( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 Perfect Square Notice that the terms a 2 and b 2 in the product can be produced by squaring a and b , respectively. A term that is the square of another term is called a perfect square. Thus, both a 2 and b 2 are perfect squares. The minus sign between a 2 and b 2 means that we are taking the difference of the two squares.Since we know that ( a + b ) ( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 , we need only turn the equation around to find the factorization form. a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) The factorization form says that we can factor a 2 − b 2 , the difference of two squares, by finding the terms that produce the perfect squares and substituting these quantities into the factorization form.When using real numbers (as we are), there is no factored form for the sum of two squares. That is, using real numbers, a 2 + b 2 cannot be factored The Difference of Two Squares Recall that when we multiplied together the two binomials ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) , we obtained the product a 2 − b 2 . ( a + b ) ( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 Perfect Square Notice that the terms a 2 and b 2 in the product can be produced by squaring a and b , respectively. A term that is the square of another term is called a perfect square. Thus, both a 2 and b 2 are perfect squares. The minus sign between a 2 and b 2 means that we are taking the difference of the two squares.Since we know that ( a + b ) ( a − b ) = a 2 − b 2 , we need only turn the equation around to find the factorization form. a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) The factorization form says that we can factor a 2 − b 2 , the difference of two squares, by finding the terms that produce the perfect squares and substituting these quantities into the factorization form.When using real numbers (as we are), there is no factored form for the sum of two squares. That is, using real numbers, a 2 + b 2 cannot be factored  || 
book1_ch06_6_5	Fundamental Rules of Factoring There are two fundamental rules that we follow when factoring: Fundamental Rules of Factoring Factor out all common monomials first. Factor completely. Fundamental Rules of Factoring There are two fundamental rules that we follow when factoring: Fundamental Rules of Factoring Factor out all common monomials first. Factor completely.  || 
book1_ch06_6_8	Perfect Square Trinomials Recall the process of squaring a binomial. Table 6.1. Our Method Is We Notice Square the first term. The first term of the product should be a perfect square. Take the product of the two terms and double it. The middle term of the product should be divisible by 2 (since it’s multiplied by 2). Square the last term. The last term of the product should be a perfect square. Perfect square trinomials always factor as the square of a binomial. To recognize a perfect square trinomial, look for the following features: The first and last terms are perfect squares. The middle term is divisible by 2, and if we divide the middle term in half (the opposite of doubling it), we will get the product of the terms that when squared produce the first and last terms. In other words, factoring a perfect square trinomial amounts to finding the terms that, when squared, produce the first and last terms of the trinomial, and substituting into one of the formula Perfect Square Trinomials Recall the process of squaring a binomial. Table 6.1. Our Method Is We Notice Square the first term. The first term of the product should be a perfect square. Take the product of the two terms and double it. The middle term of the product should be divisible by 2 (since it’s multiplied by 2). Square the last term. The last term of the product should be a perfect square. Perfect square trinomials always factor as the square of a binomial. To recognize a perfect square trinomial, look for the following features: The first and last terms are perfect squares. The middle term is divisible by 2, and if we divide the middle term in half (the opposite of doubling it), we will get the product of the terms that when squared produce the first and last terms. In other words, factoring a perfect square trinomial amounts to finding the terms that, when squared, produce the first and last terms of the trinomial, and substituting into one of the formula  || 
book1_ch06_7	 || Method Let’s consider the product of the two binomials ( x + 4 ) and ( x + 7 ) . Notice that the first term in the resulting trinomial comes from the product of the first terms in the binomials: x⋅x = x 2 . The last term in the trinomial comes from the product of the last terms in the binomials: 4⋅7 = 28 . The middle term comes from the addition of the outer and inner products: 7 x + 4 x = 11 x . Also, notice that the coefficient of the middle term is exactly the sum of the last terms in the binomials: 4 + 7 = 11 . The problem we’re interested in is that given a trinomial, how can we find the factors? When the leading coefficient (the coefficient of the quadratic term) is 1, the observations we made above lead us to the following method of factoring. Method of Factoring Write two sets of parentheses:. Place a binomial into each set of parentheses. The first term of each binomial is a factor of the first term of the trinomial. Determine the second terms of the binomials by determining the factors of the third term that when added together yield the coefficient of the middle term.  || Factoring Hints Factoring trinomials may take some practice, but with time and experience, you will be able to factor much more quickly. There are some clues that are helpful in determining the factors of the third term that when added yield the coefficient of the middle term. Factoring Hints Look at the sign of the last term: If the sign is positive, we know that the two factors must have the same sign, since ( + ) ( + ) = ( + ) and ( − ) ( − )  =  ( + ) . The two factors will have the same sign as the sign of the middle term. If the sign is negative, we know that two factors must have opposite signs, since ( + ) ( − ) = ( − ) and ( − ) ( + )  =  ( − ) .  || 
book1_ch06_7_2	Method Let’s consider the product of the two binomials ( x + 4 ) and ( x + 7 ) . Notice that the first term in the resulting trinomial comes from the product of the first terms in the binomials: x⋅x = x 2 . The last term in the trinomial comes from the product of the last terms in the binomials: 4⋅7 = 28 . The middle term comes from the addition of the outer and inner products: 7 x + 4 x = 11 x . Also, notice that the coefficient of the middle term is exactly the sum of the last terms in the binomials: 4 + 7 = 11 . The problem we’re interested in is that given a trinomial, how can we find the factors? When the leading coefficient (the coefficient of the quadratic term) is 1, the observations we made above lead us to the following method of factoring. Method of Factoring Write two sets of parentheses:. Place a binomial into each set of parentheses. The first term of each binomial is a factor of the first term of the trinomial. Determine the second terms of the binomials by determining the factors of the third term that when added together yield the coefficient of the middle term. Method Let’s consider the product of the two binomials ( x + 4 ) and ( x + 7 ) . Notice that the first term in the resulting trinomial comes from the product of the first terms in the binomials: x⋅x = x 2 . The last term in the trinomial comes from the product of the last terms in the binomials: 4⋅7 = 28 . The middle term comes from the addition of the outer and inner products: 7 x + 4 x = 11 x . Also, notice that the coefficient of the middle term is exactly the sum of the last terms in the binomials: 4 + 7 = 11 . The problem we’re interested in is that given a trinomial, how can we find the factors? When the leading coefficient (the coefficient of the quadratic term) is 1, the observations we made above lead us to the following method of factoring. Method of Factoring Write two sets of parentheses:. Place a binomial into each set of parentheses. The first term of each binomial is a factor of the first term of the trinomial. Determine the second terms of the binomials by determining the factors of the third term that when added together yield the coefficient of the middle term.  || 
book1_ch06_7_5	Factoring Hints Factoring trinomials may take some practice, but with time and experience, you will be able to factor much more quickly. There are some clues that are helpful in determining the factors of the third term that when added yield the coefficient of the middle term. Factoring Hints Look at the sign of the last term: If the sign is positive, we know that the two factors must have the same sign, since ( + ) ( + ) = ( + ) and ( − ) ( − )  =  ( + ) . The two factors will have the same sign as the sign of the middle term. If the sign is negative, we know that two factors must have opposite signs, since ( + ) ( − ) = ( − ) and ( − ) ( + )  =  ( − ) . Factoring Hints Factoring trinomials may take some practice, but with time and experience, you will be able to factor much more quickly. There are some clues that are helpful in determining the factors of the third term that when added yield the coefficient of the middle term. Factoring Hints Look at the sign of the last term: If the sign is positive, we know that the two factors must have the same sign, since ( + ) ( + ) = ( + ) and ( − ) ( − )  =  ( + ) . The two factors will have the same sign as the sign of the middle term. If the sign is negative, we know that two factors must have opposite signs, since ( + ) ( − ) = ( − ) and ( − ) ( + )  =  ( − ) .  || 
book1_ch06_8	 || The Method of Factorization In the last section we saw that we could easily factor trinomials of the form x 2 + b x + c by finding the factors of the constant c that add to the coefficient of the linear term b , as shown in the following example: Factor x 2 - 4 x - 21 .The third term of the trinomial is − 21 . We seek two numbers whose (a) product is − 21 and(b) sum is − 4 . The required numbers are − 7 and + 3 . x 2 - 4 x - 21 = ( x - 7 ) ( x + 3 ) The problem of factoring the polynomial a x 2 + b x + c , a≠1 , becomes more involved. We will study two methods of factoring such polynomials. Each method produces the same result, and you should select the method you are most comfortable with. The first method is called the trial and error method and requires some educated guesses. We will examine two examples (Sample Sets A and B). Then, we will study a second method of factoring. The second method is called the collect and discard method, and it requires less guessing than the trial and error method. Sample Set C illustrates the use of the collect and discard method. The Trial and Error Method of Factoring a x 2 + b x + c Trial and Error Method Consider the product Examining the trinomial 20 x 2 + 23 x + 6 , we can immediately see some factors of the first and last terms. Table 6.2. 20x 2 6 20x,  x 6,  1 10x,  2x 3,  2   5x,  4x   Our goal is to choose the proper combination of factors of the first and last terms that yield the middle term 23 x .Notice that the middle term comes from the sum of the outer and inner products in the multiplication of the two binomials. This fact provides us a way to find the proper combination. Look for the combination that when multiplied and then added yields the middle term. The proper combination we're looking for is  || The Trial and Error Method of Factoring a x 2 + b x + c Trial and Error Method Consider the product Examining the trinomial 20 x 2 + 23 x + 6 , we can immediately see some factors of the first and last terms. Table 6.2. 20x 2 6 20x,  x 6,  1 10x,  2x 3,  2   5x,  4x   Our goal is to choose the proper combination of factors of the first and last terms that yield the middle term 23 x .Notice that the middle term comes from the sum of the outer and inner products in the multiplication of the two binomials. This fact provides us a way to find the proper combination. Look for the combination that when multiplied and then added yields the middle term. The proper combination we're looking for is  || The Collect and Discard Method of Factoring a x 2 + b x + c Collect and Discard Method Consider the polynomial 6x 2 + x − 12 . We begin by identifying a and c . In this case, a = 6 and c = − 12 . We start out as we would with a = 1 .Now, compute a⋅c . a⋅c = (6)( − 12) = − 72 Find the factors of − 72 that add to 1, the coefficient of x , the linear term. The factors are 9 and − 8 . Include these factors in the parentheses. 6x 2 + x − 12 :   (6x + 9)(6x − 8) But we have included too much. We must eliminate the surplus. Factor each parentheses. 6x 2 + x − 12 :   3(2x + 3)⋅2(3x − 4) Discard the factors that multiply to a = 6 . In this case, 3 and 2. We are left with the proper factorization. 6x 2 + x − 12 = (2x + 3)(3x − 4)  || 
book1_ch06_8_2	The Method of Factorization In the last section we saw that we could easily factor trinomials of the form x 2 + b x + c by finding the factors of the constant c that add to the coefficient of the linear term b , as shown in the following example: Factor x 2 - 4 x - 21 .The third term of the trinomial is − 21 . We seek two numbers whose (a) product is − 21 and(b) sum is − 4 . The required numbers are − 7 and + 3 . x 2 - 4 x - 21 = ( x - 7 ) ( x + 3 ) The problem of factoring the polynomial a x 2 + b x + c , a≠1 , becomes more involved. We will study two methods of factoring such polynomials. Each method produces the same result, and you should select the method you are most comfortable with. The first method is called the trial and error method and requires some educated guesses. We will examine two examples (Sample Sets A and B). Then, we will study a second method of factoring. The second method is called the collect and discard method, and it requires less guessing than the trial and error method. Sample Set C illustrates the use of the collect and discard method. The Trial and Error Method of Factoring a x 2 + b x + c Trial and Error Method Consider the product Examining the trinomial 20 x 2 + 23 x + 6 , we can immediately see some factors of the first and last terms. Table 6.2. 20x 2 6 20x,  x 6,  1 10x,  2x 3,  2   5x,  4x   Our goal is to choose the proper combination of factors of the first and last terms that yield the middle term 23 x .Notice that the middle term comes from the sum of the outer and inner products in the multiplication of the two binomials. This fact provides us a way to find the proper combination. Look for the combination that when multiplied and then added yields the middle term. The proper combination we're looking for is The Method of Factorization In the last section we saw that we could easily factor trinomials of the form x 2 + b x + c by finding the factors of the constant c that add to the coefficient of the linear term b , as shown in the following example: Factor x 2 - 4 x - 21 .The third term of the trinomial is − 21 . We seek two numbers whose (a) product is − 21 and(b) sum is − 4 . The required numbers are − 7 and + 3 . x 2 - 4 x - 21 = ( x - 7 ) ( x + 3 ) The problem of factoring the polynomial a x 2 + b x + c , a≠1 , becomes more involved. We will study two methods of factoring such polynomials. Each method produces the same result, and you should select the method you are most comfortable with. The first method is called the trial and error method and requires some educated guesses. We will examine two examples (Sample Sets A and B). Then, we will study a second method of factoring. The second method is called the collect and discard method, and it requires less guessing than the trial and error method. Sample Set C illustrates the use of the collect and discard method. The Trial and Error Method of Factoring a x 2 + b x + c Trial and Error Method Consider the product Examining the trinomial 20 x 2 + 23 x + 6 , we can immediately see some factors of the first and last terms. Table 6.2. 20x 2 6 20x,  x 6,  1 10x,  2x 3,  2   5x,  4x   Our goal is to choose the proper combination of factors of the first and last terms that yield the middle term 23 x .Notice that the middle term comes from the sum of the outer and inner products in the multiplication of the two binomials. This fact provides us a way to find the proper combination. Look for the combination that when multiplied and then added yields the middle term. The proper combination we're looking for is  || 
book1_ch06_8_3	The Trial and Error Method of Factoring a x 2 + b x + c Trial and Error Method Consider the product Examining the trinomial 20 x 2 + 23 x + 6 , we can immediately see some factors of the first and last terms. Table 6.2. 20x 2 6 20x,  x 6,  1 10x,  2x 3,  2   5x,  4x   Our goal is to choose the proper combination of factors of the first and last terms that yield the middle term 23 x .Notice that the middle term comes from the sum of the outer and inner products in the multiplication of the two binomials. This fact provides us a way to find the proper combination. Look for the combination that when multiplied and then added yields the middle term. The proper combination we're looking for is The Trial and Error Method of Factoring a x 2 + b x + c Trial and Error Method Consider the product Examining the trinomial 20 x 2 + 23 x + 6 , we can immediately see some factors of the first and last terms. Table 6.2. 20x 2 6 20x,  x 6,  1 10x,  2x 3,  2   5x,  4x   Our goal is to choose the proper combination of factors of the first and last terms that yield the middle term 23 x .Notice that the middle term comes from the sum of the outer and inner products in the multiplication of the two binomials. This fact provides us a way to find the proper combination. Look for the combination that when multiplied and then added yields the middle term. The proper combination we're looking for is  || 
book1_ch06_8_8	The Collect and Discard Method of Factoring a x 2 + b x + c Collect and Discard Method Consider the polynomial 6x 2 + x − 12 . We begin by identifying a and c . In this case, a = 6 and c = − 12 . We start out as we would with a = 1 .Now, compute a⋅c . a⋅c = (6)( − 12) = − 72 Find the factors of − 72 that add to 1, the coefficient of x , the linear term. The factors are 9 and − 8 . Include these factors in the parentheses. 6x 2 + x − 12 :   (6x + 9)(6x − 8) But we have included too much. We must eliminate the surplus. Factor each parentheses. 6x 2 + x − 12 :   3(2x + 3)⋅2(3x − 4) Discard the factors that multiply to a = 6 . In this case, 3 and 2. We are left with the proper factorization. 6x 2 + x − 12 = (2x + 3)(3x − 4) The Collect and Discard Method of Factoring a x 2 + b x + c Collect and Discard Method Consider the polynomial 6x 2 + x − 12 . We begin by identifying a and c . In this case, a = 6 and c = − 12 . We start out as we would with a = 1 .Now, compute a⋅c . a⋅c = (6)( − 12) = − 72 Find the factors of − 72 that add to 1, the coefficient of x , the linear term. The factors are 9 and − 8 . Include these factors in the parentheses. 6x 2 + x − 12 :   (6x + 9)(6x − 8) But we have included too much. We must eliminate the surplus. Factor each parentheses. 6x 2 + x − 12 :   3(2x + 3)⋅2(3x − 4) Discard the factors that multiply to a = 6 . In this case, 3 and 2. We are left with the proper factorization. 6x 2 + x − 12 = (2x + 3)(3x − 4)  || 
book1_ch05	 ||  || Types of Equations Identity Some equations are always true. These equations are called identities. Identities are equations that are true for all acceptable values of the variable, that is, for all values in the domain of the equation. 5x = 5x is true for all acceptable values of x . y + 1 = y + 1 is true for all acceptable values of y .2 + 5 = 7 is true, and no substitutions are necessary. Contradiction Some equations are never true. These equations are called contradictions. Contradictions are equations that are never true regardless of the value substituted for the variable. x = x + 1 is never true for any acceptable value of x . 0  ·  k = 14 is never true for any acceptable value of k . 2 = 1 is never true. Conditional Equation The truth of some equations is conditional upon the value chosen for the variable. Such equations are called conditional equations. Conditional equations are equations that are true for at least one replacement of the variable and false for at least one replacement of the variable. x + 6 = 11 is true only on the condition that x = 5. y − 7 = − 1 is true only on the condition that y = 6 .  || Solutions and Equivalent Equations Solutions and Solving an Equation The collection of values that make an equation true are called solutions of the equation. An equation is solved when all its solutions have been found. Equivalent Equations Some equations have precisely the same collection of solutions. Such equations are called equivalent equations. The equations are equivalent equations because the only value that makes each one true is 3.  || Literal Equations Literal Equations Some equations involve more than one variable. Such equations are called literal equations. An equation is solved for a particular variable if that variable alone equals an expression that does not contain that particular variable. The following equations are examples of literal equations. y = 2x + 7 . It is solved for y . d = r t . It is solved for d . I = p r t . It is solved for I . . It is solved for z . y + 1 = x + 4 . This equation is not solved for any particular variable since no variable is isolated.  || Solving Equation of the form x + a = b and x − a = b Recall that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. This suggests the following procedures: We can obtain an equivalent equation (an equation having the same solutions as the original equation) by adding the same number to both sides of the equation. We can obtain an equivalent equation by subtracting the same number from both sides of the equation. We can use these results to isolate x , thus solving for x . Example 5.4. Solving x + a = b for x Example 5.5. Solving x − a = b for x Example 5.6. Method for Solving x + a = b and x − a = b for x To solve the equation x + a = b for x , subtract a from both sides of the equation. To solve the equation x − a = b for x , add a to both sides of the equation.  ||  || Equality Property of Division and Multiplication Recalling that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side suggests the equality property of division and multiplication, which states: We can obtain an equivalent equation by dividing both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if c  ≠  0,  then a  =  b is equivalent to . We can obtain an equivalent equation by multiplying both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if c  ≠  0, then a  =  b is equivalent to a c = b c . We can use these results to isolate x, thus solving the equation for x . Example 5.12.  Solving a x = b for x Example 5.13.  Solving for x  || Solving a x = b and for x Example 5.14.  Method for Solving To solve a x = b for x , divide both sides of the equation by a . To solve for x , multiply both sides of the equation by a .  ||  || Combining Techniques in Equation Solving In Sections Section 5.2 and Section 5.3 we worked with techniques that involved the use of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division to solve equations. We can combine these techniques to solve more complicated equations. To do so, it is helpful to recall that an equation is solved for a particular variable when all other numbers and/or letters have been disassociated from it and it is alone on one side of the equal sign. We will also note that To associate numbers and letters we use the order of operations. Multiply/divide Add/subtract To undo an association between numbers and letters we use the order of operations in reverse. Add/subtract Multiply/divide  || Recognizing Identities and Contradictions As we noted in Section Section 5.2, some equations are identities and some are contradictions. As the problems of Sample Set D will suggest, Recognizing an Identity If, when solving an equation, all the variables are eliminated and a true statement results, the equation is an identity. Recognizing a Contradiction If, when solving an equation, all the variables are eliminated and a false statement results, the equation is a contradiction.  ||  || Translating from Verbal to Mathematical Expressions To solve a problem using algebra, we must first express the problem algebraically. To express a problem algebraically, we must scrutinize the wording of the problem to determine the variables and constants that are present and the relationships among them. Then we must translate the verbal phrases and statements to algebraic expressions and equations. To help us translate verbal expressions to mathematics, we can use the following table as a mathematics dictionary. Table 5.1. Mathematics Dictionary Word or Phrase Mathematical Operation Sum, sum of, added to, increased by, more than, plus, and + Difference, minus, subtracted from, decreased by, less, less than − Product, the product of, of, muitiplied by, times ⋅ Quotient, divided by, ratio ÷ Equals, is equal to, is, the result is, becomes = A number, an unknown quantity, an unknown, a quantity x (or any symbol)  ||  || Solving Applied Problems Let’s study some interesting problems that involve linear equations in one variable. In order to solve such problems, we apply the following five-step method: Five-Step Method for Solving Word Problems Let x (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Solve this equation. Ask yourself "Does this result seem reasonable?" Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement of the problem. If the answer doesn’t check, you have either solved the equation incorrectly, or you have developed the wrong equation. Check your method of solution first. If the result does not check, reconsider your equation. Write the conclusion. If it has been your experience that word problems are difficult, then follow the five-step method carefully. Most people have difficulty because they neglect step 1. Always start by INTRODUCING A VARIABLE! Keep in mind what the variable is representing throughout the problem.  ||  || Inequalities Relationships of Inequality We have discovered that an equation is a mathematical way of expressing the relationship of equality between quantities. Not all relationships need be relationships of equality, however. Certainly the number of human beings on earth is greater than 20. Also, the average American consumes less than 10 grams of vitamin C every day. These types of relationships are not relationships of equality, but rather, relationships of inequality.  || Linear Inequalities Linear Inequality A linear inequality is a mathematical statement that one linear expression is greater than or less than another linear expression. Inequality Notation The following notation is used to express relationships of inequality: Note that the expression x > 12 has infinitely many solutions. Any number strictly greater than 12 will satisfy the statement. Some solutions are 13, 15, 90, 12.1, 16.3 and 102.51 .  || The Algebra of Linear Inequalities Inequalities can be solved by basically the same methods as linear equations. There is one important exception that we will discuss in item 3 of the algebra of linear inequalities.  || Compound Inequalities Compound Inequality Another type of inequality is the compound inequality. A compound inequality is of the form: a < x < b There are actually two statements here. The first statement is a < x . The next statement is x < b . When we read this statement we say " a is less than x ," then continue saying "and x is less than b ." Just by looking at the inequality we can see that the number x is between the numbers a and b . The compound inequality a < x < b indicates "betweenness." Without changing the meaning, the statement a < x can be read x > a . (Surely, if the number a is less than the number x , the number x must be greater than the number a .) Thus, we can read a < x < b as " x is greater than a and at the same time is less than b ." For example: 4 < x < 9 .The letter x is some number strictly between 4 and 9. Hence, x is greater than 4 and, at the same time, less than 9. The numbers 4 and 9 are not included so we use open circles at these points. − 2 < z < 0 .The z stands for some number between − 2 and 0. Hence, z is greater than − 2 but also less than 0. 1 < x + 6 < 8 .The expression x + 6 represents some number strictly between 1 and 8. Hence, x + 6 represents some number strictly greater than 1, but less than 8. .The term represents some number between and including and . Hence, represents some number greater than or equal to to but less than or equal to . Consider problem 3 above, 1 < x + 6 < 8 . The statement says that the quantity x + 6 is between 1 and 8. This statement will be true for only certain values of x . For example, if x = 1 , the statement is true since 1 < 1 + 6 < 8 . However, if x = 4.9 , the statement is false since 1 < 4.9 + 6 < 8 is clearly not true. The first of the inequalities is satisfied since 1 is less than 10.9 , but the second inequality is not satisfied since 10.9 is not less than 8. We would like to know for exactly which values of x the statement 1 < x + 6 < 8 is true. We proceed by using the properties discussed earlier in this section, but now we must apply the rules to all three parts rather than just the two parts in a regular inequality.  ||  || Solutions to Linear Equations in Two Variables Solution to an Equation in Two Variables We have discovered that an equation is a mathematical way of expressing the relationship of equality between quantities. If the relationship is between two quantities, the equation will contain two variables. We say that an equation in two variables has a solution if an ordered pair of values can be found such that when these two values are substituted into the equation a true statement results. This is illustrated when we observe some solutions to the equation y = 2x + 5 . x = 4, y = 13;          since 13 = 2(4) + 5 is true . x = 1, y = 7;          since 7 = 2(1) + 5 is true . x = 0, y = 5;          since 5 = 2(0) + 5 is true . x = − 6, y = − 7;          since -7 = 2( − 6) + 5 is true .  || Ordered Pairs as Solutions It is important to keep in mind that a solution to a linear equation in two variables is an ordered pair of values, one value for each variable. A solution is not completely known until the values of both variables are specified. Independent and Dependent Variables Recall that, in an equation, any variable whose value can be freely assigned is said to be an independent variable. Any variable whose value is determined once the other value or values have been assigned is said to be a dependent variable. If, in a linear equation, the independent variable is x and the dependent variable is y , and a solution to the equation is x = a and y = b , the solution is written as the ORDERED PAIR      (a, b) Ordered Pair In an ordered pair, (a, b) , the first component, a , gives the value of the independent variable, and the second component, b , gives the value of the dependent variable. We can use ordered pairs to show some solutions to the equation y = 6x − 7 . Example 5.60.  (0, − 7) .If x = 0 and y = − 7 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. Example 5.61.  (8, 41) .If x = 8 and y = 41 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. Example 5.62.  ( − 4,  − 31) .If x = − 4 and y = − 31 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. These are only three of the infintely many solutions to this equation.  || Calculator Problems Exercise 5.8.44. (Go to Solution) An examination of the winning speeds in the Indianapolis 500 automobile race from 1961 to 1970 produces the equation y = 1.93x + 137.60 , where x is the number of years from 1960 and y is the winning speed. Statistical methods were used to obtain the equation, and, for a given year, the equation gives only the approximate winning speed. Use the equation y = 1.93x + 137.60 to find the approximate winning speed in 1965 1970 1986 1990 Exercise 5.8.45. In electricity theory, Ohm’s law relates electrical current to voltage by the equation y = 0.00082x , where x is the voltage in volts and y is the current in amperes. This equation was found by statistical methods and for a given voltage yields only an approximate value for the current. Use the equation y = 0.00082x to find the approximate current for a voltage of 6 volts 10 volts Exercise 5.8.46. (Go to Solution) Statistical methods have been used to obtain a relationship between the actual and reported number of German submarines sunk each month by the U.S. Navy in World War II. The equation expressing the approximate number of actual sinkings, y , for a given number of reported sinkings, x , is y = 1.04x + 0.76 . Find the approximate number of actual sinkings of German submarines if the reported number of sinkings is 4 9 10 Exercise 5.8.47. Statistical methods have been used to obtain a relationship between the heart weight (in milligrams) and the body weight (in milligrams) of 10-month-old diabetic offspring of crossbred male mice. The equation expressing the approximate body weight for a given heart weight is y = 0.213x – 4.44 . Find the approximate body weight for a heart weight of 210 mg 245 mg Exercise 5.8.48. (Go to Solution) Statistical methods have been used to produce the equation y = 0.176x − 0.64 . This equation gives the approximate red blood cell count (in millions) of a dog’s blood, y , for a given packed cell volume (in millimeters), x . Find the approximate red blood cell count for a packed cell volume of 40 mm 42 mm Exercise 5.8.49. An industrial machine can run at different speeds. The machine also produces defective items, and the number of defective items it produces appears to be related to the speed at which the machine is running. Statistical methods found that the equation y = 0.73x − 0.86 is able to give the approximate number of defective items, y , for a given machine speed, x . Use this equation to find the approximate number of defective items for a machine speed of 9 12 Exercise 5.8.50. (Go to Solution) A computer company has found, using statistical techniques, that there is a relationship between the aptitude test scores of assembly line workers and their productivity. Using data accumulated over a period of time, the equation y = 0.89x − 41.78 was derived. The x represents an aptitude test score and y the approximate corresponding number of items assembled per hour. Estimate the number of items produced by a worker with an aptitude score of 80 95 Exercise 5.8.51. Chemists, making use of statistical techniques, have been able to express the approximate weight of potassium bromide, W , that will dissolve in 100 grams of water at T degrees centigrade. The equation expressing this relationship is W = 0.52T + 54.2 . Use this equation to predict the potassium bromide weight that will dissolve in 100 grams of water that is heated to a temperature of 70 degrees centigrade 95 degrees centigrade Exercise 5.8.52. (Go to Solution) The marketing department at a large company has been able to express the relationship between the demand for a product and its price by using statistical techniques. The department found, by analyzing studies done in six different market areas, that the equation giving the approximate demand for a product (in thousands of units) for a particular price (in cents) is y = − 14.15x + 257.11 . Find the approximate number of units demanded when the price is $0.12 $0.15 Exercise 5.8.53. The management of a speed-reading program claims that the approximate speed gain (in words per minute), G , is related to the number of weeks spent in its program, W , is given by the equation G = 26.68W − 7.44 . Predict the approximate speed gain for a student who has spent 3 weeks in the program 10 weeks in the program  || 
book1_ch05_2	 || Types of Equations Identity Some equations are always true. These equations are called identities. Identities are equations that are true for all acceptable values of the variable, that is, for all values in the domain of the equation. 5x = 5x is true for all acceptable values of x . y + 1 = y + 1 is true for all acceptable values of y .2 + 5 = 7 is true, and no substitutions are necessary. Contradiction Some equations are never true. These equations are called contradictions. Contradictions are equations that are never true regardless of the value substituted for the variable. x = x + 1 is never true for any acceptable value of x . 0  ·  k = 14 is never true for any acceptable value of k . 2 = 1 is never true. Conditional Equation The truth of some equations is conditional upon the value chosen for the variable. Such equations are called conditional equations. Conditional equations are equations that are true for at least one replacement of the variable and false for at least one replacement of the variable. x + 6 = 11 is true only on the condition that x = 5. y − 7 = − 1 is true only on the condition that y = 6 .  || Solutions and Equivalent Equations Solutions and Solving an Equation The collection of values that make an equation true are called solutions of the equation. An equation is solved when all its solutions have been found. Equivalent Equations Some equations have precisely the same collection of solutions. Such equations are called equivalent equations. The equations are equivalent equations because the only value that makes each one true is 3.  || Literal Equations Literal Equations Some equations involve more than one variable. Such equations are called literal equations. An equation is solved for a particular variable if that variable alone equals an expression that does not contain that particular variable. The following equations are examples of literal equations. y = 2x + 7 . It is solved for y . d = r t . It is solved for d . I = p r t . It is solved for I . . It is solved for z . y + 1 = x + 4 . This equation is not solved for any particular variable since no variable is isolated.  || Solving Equation of the form x + a = b and x − a = b Recall that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. This suggests the following procedures: We can obtain an equivalent equation (an equation having the same solutions as the original equation) by adding the same number to both sides of the equation. We can obtain an equivalent equation by subtracting the same number from both sides of the equation. We can use these results to isolate x , thus solving for x . Example 5.4. Solving x + a = b for x Example 5.5. Solving x − a = b for x Example 5.6. Method for Solving x + a = b and x − a = b for x To solve the equation x + a = b for x , subtract a from both sides of the equation. To solve the equation x − a = b for x , add a to both sides of the equation.  || 
book1_ch05_2_2	Types of Equations Identity Some equations are always true. These equations are called identities. Identities are equations that are true for all acceptable values of the variable, that is, for all values in the domain of the equation. 5x = 5x is true for all acceptable values of x . y + 1 = y + 1 is true for all acceptable values of y .2 + 5 = 7 is true, and no substitutions are necessary. Contradiction Some equations are never true. These equations are called contradictions. Contradictions are equations that are never true regardless of the value substituted for the variable. x = x + 1 is never true for any acceptable value of x . 0  ·  k = 14 is never true for any acceptable value of k . 2 = 1 is never true. Conditional Equation The truth of some equations is conditional upon the value chosen for the variable. Such equations are called conditional equations. Conditional equations are equations that are true for at least one replacement of the variable and false for at least one replacement of the variable. x + 6 = 11 is true only on the condition that x = 5. y − 7 = − 1 is true only on the condition that y = 6 . Types of Equations Identity Some equations are always true. These equations are called identities. Identities are equations that are true for all acceptable values of the variable, that is, for all values in the domain of the equation. 5x = 5x is true for all acceptable values of x . y + 1 = y + 1 is true for all acceptable values of y .2 + 5 = 7 is true, and no substitutions are necessary. Contradiction Some equations are never true. These equations are called contradictions. Contradictions are equations that are never true regardless of the value substituted for the variable. x = x + 1 is never true for any acceptable value of x . 0  ·  k = 14 is never true for any acceptable value of k . 2 = 1 is never true. Conditional Equation The truth of some equations is conditional upon the value chosen for the variable. Such equations are called conditional equations. Conditional equations are equations that are true for at least one replacement of the variable and false for at least one replacement of the variable. x + 6 = 11 is true only on the condition that x = 5. y − 7 = − 1 is true only on the condition that y = 6 .  || 
book1_ch05_2_3	Solutions and Equivalent Equations Solutions and Solving an Equation The collection of values that make an equation true are called solutions of the equation. An equation is solved when all its solutions have been found. Equivalent Equations Some equations have precisely the same collection of solutions. Such equations are called equivalent equations. The equations are equivalent equations because the only value that makes each one true is 3. Solutions and Equivalent Equations Solutions and Solving an Equation The collection of values that make an equation true are called solutions of the equation. An equation is solved when all its solutions have been found. Equivalent Equations Some equations have precisely the same collection of solutions. Such equations are called equivalent equations. The equations are equivalent equations because the only value that makes each one true is 3.  || 
book1_ch05_2_6	Literal Equations Literal Equations Some equations involve more than one variable. Such equations are called literal equations. An equation is solved for a particular variable if that variable alone equals an expression that does not contain that particular variable. The following equations are examples of literal equations. y = 2x + 7 . It is solved for y . d = r t . It is solved for d . I = p r t . It is solved for I . . It is solved for z . y + 1 = x + 4 . This equation is not solved for any particular variable since no variable is isolated. Literal Equations Literal Equations Some equations involve more than one variable. Such equations are called literal equations. An equation is solved for a particular variable if that variable alone equals an expression that does not contain that particular variable. The following equations are examples of literal equations. y = 2x + 7 . It is solved for y . d = r t . It is solved for d . I = p r t . It is solved for I . . It is solved for z . y + 1 = x + 4 . This equation is not solved for any particular variable since no variable is isolated.  || 
book1_ch05_2_7	Solving Equation of the form x + a = b and x − a = b Recall that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. This suggests the following procedures: We can obtain an equivalent equation (an equation having the same solutions as the original equation) by adding the same number to both sides of the equation. We can obtain an equivalent equation by subtracting the same number from both sides of the equation. We can use these results to isolate x , thus solving for x . Example 5.4. Solving x + a = b for x Example 5.5. Solving x − a = b for x Example 5.6. Method for Solving x + a = b and x − a = b for x To solve the equation x + a = b for x , subtract a from both sides of the equation. To solve the equation x − a = b for x , add a to both sides of the equation. Solving Equation of the form x + a = b and x − a = b Recall that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. This suggests the following procedures: We can obtain an equivalent equation (an equation having the same solutions as the original equation) by adding the same number to both sides of the equation. We can obtain an equivalent equation by subtracting the same number from both sides of the equation. We can use these results to isolate x , thus solving for x . Example 5.4. Solving x + a = b for x Example 5.5. Solving x − a = b for x Example 5.6. Method for Solving x + a = b and x − a = b for x To solve the equation x + a = b for x , subtract a from both sides of the equation. To solve the equation x − a = b for x , add a to both sides of the equation.  || 
book1_ch05_3	 || Equality Property of Division and Multiplication Recalling that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side suggests the equality property of division and multiplication, which states: We can obtain an equivalent equation by dividing both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if c  ≠  0,  then a  =  b is equivalent to . We can obtain an equivalent equation by multiplying both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if c  ≠  0, then a  =  b is equivalent to a c = b c . We can use these results to isolate x, thus solving the equation for x . Example 5.12.  Solving a x = b for x Example 5.13.  Solving for x  || Solving a x = b and for x Example 5.14.  Method for Solving To solve a x = b for x , divide both sides of the equation by a . To solve for x , multiply both sides of the equation by a .  || 
book1_ch05_3_2	Equality Property of Division and Multiplication Recalling that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side suggests the equality property of division and multiplication, which states: We can obtain an equivalent equation by dividing both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if c  ≠  0,  then a  =  b is equivalent to . We can obtain an equivalent equation by multiplying both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if c  ≠  0, then a  =  b is equivalent to a c = b c . We can use these results to isolate x, thus solving the equation for x . Example 5.12.  Solving a x = b for x Example 5.13.  Solving for x Equality Property of Division and Multiplication Recalling that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side suggests the equality property of division and multiplication, which states: We can obtain an equivalent equation by dividing both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if c  ≠  0,  then a  =  b is equivalent to . We can obtain an equivalent equation by multiplying both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if c  ≠  0, then a  =  b is equivalent to a c = b c . We can use these results to isolate x, thus solving the equation for x . Example 5.12.  Solving a x = b for x Example 5.13.  Solving for x  || 
book1_ch05_3_3	Solving a x = b and for x Example 5.14.  Method for Solving To solve a x = b for x , divide both sides of the equation by a . To solve for x , multiply both sides of the equation by a . Solving a x = b and for x Example 5.14.  Method for Solving To solve a x = b for x , divide both sides of the equation by a . To solve for x , multiply both sides of the equation by a .  || 
book1_ch05_4	 || Combining Techniques in Equation Solving In Sections Section 5.2 and Section 5.3 we worked with techniques that involved the use of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division to solve equations. We can combine these techniques to solve more complicated equations. To do so, it is helpful to recall that an equation is solved for a particular variable when all other numbers and/or letters have been disassociated from it and it is alone on one side of the equal sign. We will also note that To associate numbers and letters we use the order of operations. Multiply/divide Add/subtract To undo an association between numbers and letters we use the order of operations in reverse. Add/subtract Multiply/divide  || Recognizing Identities and Contradictions As we noted in Section Section 5.2, some equations are identities and some are contradictions. As the problems of Sample Set D will suggest, Recognizing an Identity If, when solving an equation, all the variables are eliminated and a true statement results, the equation is an identity. Recognizing a Contradiction If, when solving an equation, all the variables are eliminated and a false statement results, the equation is a contradiction.  || 
book1_ch05_4_2	Combining Techniques in Equation Solving In Sections Section 5.2 and Section 5.3 we worked with techniques that involved the use of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division to solve equations. We can combine these techniques to solve more complicated equations. To do so, it is helpful to recall that an equation is solved for a particular variable when all other numbers and/or letters have been disassociated from it and it is alone on one side of the equal sign. We will also note that To associate numbers and letters we use the order of operations. Multiply/divide Add/subtract To undo an association between numbers and letters we use the order of operations in reverse. Add/subtract Multiply/divide Combining Techniques in Equation Solving In Sections Section 5.2 and Section 5.3 we worked with techniques that involved the use of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division to solve equations. We can combine these techniques to solve more complicated equations. To do so, it is helpful to recall that an equation is solved for a particular variable when all other numbers and/or letters have been disassociated from it and it is alone on one side of the equal sign. We will also note that To associate numbers and letters we use the order of operations. Multiply/divide Add/subtract To undo an association between numbers and letters we use the order of operations in reverse. Add/subtract Multiply/divide  || 
book1_ch05_4_9	Recognizing Identities and Contradictions As we noted in Section Section 5.2, some equations are identities and some are contradictions. As the problems of Sample Set D will suggest, Recognizing an Identity If, when solving an equation, all the variables are eliminated and a true statement results, the equation is an identity. Recognizing a Contradiction If, when solving an equation, all the variables are eliminated and a false statement results, the equation is a contradiction. Recognizing Identities and Contradictions As we noted in Section Section 5.2, some equations are identities and some are contradictions. As the problems of Sample Set D will suggest, Recognizing an Identity If, when solving an equation, all the variables are eliminated and a true statement results, the equation is an identity. Recognizing a Contradiction If, when solving an equation, all the variables are eliminated and a false statement results, the equation is a contradiction.  || 
book1_ch05_5	 || Translating from Verbal to Mathematical Expressions To solve a problem using algebra, we must first express the problem algebraically. To express a problem algebraically, we must scrutinize the wording of the problem to determine the variables and constants that are present and the relationships among them. Then we must translate the verbal phrases and statements to algebraic expressions and equations. To help us translate verbal expressions to mathematics, we can use the following table as a mathematics dictionary. Table 5.1. Mathematics Dictionary Word or Phrase Mathematical Operation Sum, sum of, added to, increased by, more than, plus, and + Difference, minus, subtracted from, decreased by, less, less than − Product, the product of, of, muitiplied by, times ⋅ Quotient, divided by, ratio ÷ Equals, is equal to, is, the result is, becomes = A number, an unknown quantity, an unknown, a quantity x (or any symbol)  || 
book1_ch05_5_2	Translating from Verbal to Mathematical Expressions To solve a problem using algebra, we must first express the problem algebraically. To express a problem algebraically, we must scrutinize the wording of the problem to determine the variables and constants that are present and the relationships among them. Then we must translate the verbal phrases and statements to algebraic expressions and equations. To help us translate verbal expressions to mathematics, we can use the following table as a mathematics dictionary. Table 5.1. Mathematics Dictionary Word or Phrase Mathematical Operation Sum, sum of, added to, increased by, more than, plus, and + Difference, minus, subtracted from, decreased by, less, less than − Product, the product of, of, muitiplied by, times ⋅ Quotient, divided by, ratio ÷ Equals, is equal to, is, the result is, becomes = A number, an unknown quantity, an unknown, a quantity x (or any symbol) Translating from Verbal to Mathematical Expressions To solve a problem using algebra, we must first express the problem algebraically. To express a problem algebraically, we must scrutinize the wording of the problem to determine the variables and constants that are present and the relationships among them. Then we must translate the verbal phrases and statements to algebraic expressions and equations. To help us translate verbal expressions to mathematics, we can use the following table as a mathematics dictionary. Table 5.1. Mathematics Dictionary Word or Phrase Mathematical Operation Sum, sum of, added to, increased by, more than, plus, and + Difference, minus, subtracted from, decreased by, less, less than − Product, the product of, of, muitiplied by, times ⋅ Quotient, divided by, ratio ÷ Equals, is equal to, is, the result is, becomes = A number, an unknown quantity, an unknown, a quantity x (or any symbol)  || 
book1_ch05_6	 || Solving Applied Problems Let’s study some interesting problems that involve linear equations in one variable. In order to solve such problems, we apply the following five-step method: Five-Step Method for Solving Word Problems Let x (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Solve this equation. Ask yourself "Does this result seem reasonable?" Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement of the problem. If the answer doesn’t check, you have either solved the equation incorrectly, or you have developed the wrong equation. Check your method of solution first. If the result does not check, reconsider your equation. Write the conclusion. If it has been your experience that word problems are difficult, then follow the five-step method carefully. Most people have difficulty because they neglect step 1. Always start by INTRODUCING A VARIABLE! Keep in mind what the variable is representing throughout the problem.  || 
book1_ch05_6_2	Solving Applied Problems Let’s study some interesting problems that involve linear equations in one variable. In order to solve such problems, we apply the following five-step method: Five-Step Method for Solving Word Problems Let x (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Solve this equation. Ask yourself "Does this result seem reasonable?" Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement of the problem. If the answer doesn’t check, you have either solved the equation incorrectly, or you have developed the wrong equation. Check your method of solution first. If the result does not check, reconsider your equation. Write the conclusion. If it has been your experience that word problems are difficult, then follow the five-step method carefully. Most people have difficulty because they neglect step 1. Always start by INTRODUCING A VARIABLE! Keep in mind what the variable is representing throughout the problem. Solving Applied Problems Let’s study some interesting problems that involve linear equations in one variable. In order to solve such problems, we apply the following five-step method: Five-Step Method for Solving Word Problems Let x (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Solve this equation. Ask yourself "Does this result seem reasonable?" Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement of the problem. If the answer doesn’t check, you have either solved the equation incorrectly, or you have developed the wrong equation. Check your method of solution first. If the result does not check, reconsider your equation. Write the conclusion. If it has been your experience that word problems are difficult, then follow the five-step method carefully. Most people have difficulty because they neglect step 1. Always start by INTRODUCING A VARIABLE! Keep in mind what the variable is representing throughout the problem.  || 
book1_ch05_7	 || Inequalities Relationships of Inequality We have discovered that an equation is a mathematical way of expressing the relationship of equality between quantities. Not all relationships need be relationships of equality, however. Certainly the number of human beings on earth is greater than 20. Also, the average American consumes less than 10 grams of vitamin C every day. These types of relationships are not relationships of equality, but rather, relationships of inequality.  || Linear Inequalities Linear Inequality A linear inequality is a mathematical statement that one linear expression is greater than or less than another linear expression. Inequality Notation The following notation is used to express relationships of inequality: Note that the expression x > 12 has infinitely many solutions. Any number strictly greater than 12 will satisfy the statement. Some solutions are 13, 15, 90, 12.1, 16.3 and 102.51 .  || The Algebra of Linear Inequalities Inequalities can be solved by basically the same methods as linear equations. There is one important exception that we will discuss in item 3 of the algebra of linear inequalities.  || Compound Inequalities Compound Inequality Another type of inequality is the compound inequality. A compound inequality is of the form: a < x < b There are actually two statements here. The first statement is a < x . The next statement is x < b . When we read this statement we say " a is less than x ," then continue saying "and x is less than b ." Just by looking at the inequality we can see that the number x is between the numbers a and b . The compound inequality a < x < b indicates "betweenness." Without changing the meaning, the statement a < x can be read x > a . (Surely, if the number a is less than the number x , the number x must be greater than the number a .) Thus, we can read a < x < b as " x is greater than a and at the same time is less than b ." For example: 4 < x < 9 .The letter x is some number strictly between 4 and 9. Hence, x is greater than 4 and, at the same time, less than 9. The numbers 4 and 9 are not included so we use open circles at these points. − 2 < z < 0 .The z stands for some number between − 2 and 0. Hence, z is greater than − 2 but also less than 0. 1 < x + 6 < 8 .The expression x + 6 represents some number strictly between 1 and 8. Hence, x + 6 represents some number strictly greater than 1, but less than 8. .The term represents some number between and including and . Hence, represents some number greater than or equal to to but less than or equal to . Consider problem 3 above, 1 < x + 6 < 8 . The statement says that the quantity x + 6 is between 1 and 8. This statement will be true for only certain values of x . For example, if x = 1 , the statement is true since 1 < 1 + 6 < 8 . However, if x = 4.9 , the statement is false since 1 < 4.9 + 6 < 8 is clearly not true. The first of the inequalities is satisfied since 1 is less than 10.9 , but the second inequality is not satisfied since 10.9 is not less than 8. We would like to know for exactly which values of x the statement 1 < x + 6 < 8 is true. We proceed by using the properties discussed earlier in this section, but now we must apply the rules to all three parts rather than just the two parts in a regular inequality.  || 
book1_ch05_7_2	Inequalities Relationships of Inequality We have discovered that an equation is a mathematical way of expressing the relationship of equality between quantities. Not all relationships need be relationships of equality, however. Certainly the number of human beings on earth is greater than 20. Also, the average American consumes less than 10 grams of vitamin C every day. These types of relationships are not relationships of equality, but rather, relationships of inequality. Inequalities Relationships of Inequality We have discovered that an equation is a mathematical way of expressing the relationship of equality between quantities. Not all relationships need be relationships of equality, however. Certainly the number of human beings on earth is greater than 20. Also, the average American consumes less than 10 grams of vitamin C every day. These types of relationships are not relationships of equality, but rather, relationships of inequality.  || 
book1_ch05_7_3	Linear Inequalities Linear Inequality A linear inequality is a mathematical statement that one linear expression is greater than or less than another linear expression. Inequality Notation The following notation is used to express relationships of inequality: Note that the expression x > 12 has infinitely many solutions. Any number strictly greater than 12 will satisfy the statement. Some solutions are 13, 15, 90, 12.1, 16.3 and 102.51 . Linear Inequalities Linear Inequality A linear inequality is a mathematical statement that one linear expression is greater than or less than another linear expression. Inequality Notation The following notation is used to express relationships of inequality: Note that the expression x > 12 has infinitely many solutions. Any number strictly greater than 12 will satisfy the statement. Some solutions are 13, 15, 90, 12.1, 16.3 and 102.51 .  || 
book1_ch05_7_6	The Algebra of Linear Inequalities Inequalities can be solved by basically the same methods as linear equations. There is one important exception that we will discuss in item 3 of the algebra of linear inequalities. The Algebra of Linear Inequalities Inequalities can be solved by basically the same methods as linear equations. There is one important exception that we will discuss in item 3 of the algebra of linear inequalities.  || 
book1_ch05_7_9	Compound Inequalities Compound Inequality Another type of inequality is the compound inequality. A compound inequality is of the form: a < x < b There are actually two statements here. The first statement is a < x . The next statement is x < b . When we read this statement we say " a is less than x ," then continue saying "and x is less than b ." Just by looking at the inequality we can see that the number x is between the numbers a and b . The compound inequality a < x < b indicates "betweenness." Without changing the meaning, the statement a < x can be read x > a . (Surely, if the number a is less than the number x , the number x must be greater than the number a .) Thus, we can read a < x < b as " x is greater than a and at the same time is less than b ." For example: 4 < x < 9 .The letter x is some number strictly between 4 and 9. Hence, x is greater than 4 and, at the same time, less than 9. The numbers 4 and 9 are not included so we use open circles at these points. − 2 < z < 0 .The z stands for some number between − 2 and 0. Hence, z is greater than − 2 but also less than 0. 1 < x + 6 < 8 .The expression x + 6 represents some number strictly between 1 and 8. Hence, x + 6 represents some number strictly greater than 1, but less than 8. .The term represents some number between and including and . Hence, represents some number greater than or equal to to but less than or equal to . Consider problem 3 above, 1 < x + 6 < 8 . The statement says that the quantity x + 6 is between 1 and 8. This statement will be true for only certain values of x . For example, if x = 1 , the statement is true since 1 < 1 + 6 < 8 . However, if x = 4.9 , the statement is false since 1 < 4.9 + 6 < 8 is clearly not true. The first of the inequalities is satisfied since 1 is less than 10.9 , but the second inequality is not satisfied since 10.9 is not less than 8. We would like to know for exactly which values of x the statement 1 < x + 6 < 8 is true. We proceed by using the properties discussed earlier in this section, but now we must apply the rules to all three parts rather than just the two parts in a regular inequality. Compound Inequalities Compound Inequality Another type of inequality is the compound inequality. A compound inequality is of the form: a < x < b There are actually two statements here. The first statement is a < x . The next statement is x < b . When we read this statement we say " a is less than x ," then continue saying "and x is less than b ." Just by looking at the inequality we can see that the number x is between the numbers a and b . The compound inequality a < x < b indicates "betweenness." Without changing the meaning, the statement a < x can be read x > a . (Surely, if the number a is less than the number x , the number x must be greater than the number a .) Thus, we can read a < x < b as " x is greater than a and at the same time is less than b ." For example: 4 < x < 9 .The letter x is some number strictly between 4 and 9. Hence, x is greater than 4 and, at the same time, less than 9. The numbers 4 and 9 are not included so we use open circles at these points. − 2 < z < 0 .The z stands for some number between − 2 and 0. Hence, z is greater than − 2 but also less than 0. 1 < x + 6 < 8 .The expression x + 6 represents some number strictly between 1 and 8. Hence, x + 6 represents some number strictly greater than 1, but less than 8. .The term represents some number between and including and . Hence, represents some number greater than or equal to to but less than or equal to . Consider problem 3 above, 1 < x + 6 < 8 . The statement says that the quantity x + 6 is between 1 and 8. This statement will be true for only certain values of x . For example, if x = 1 , the statement is true since 1 < 1 + 6 < 8 . However, if x = 4.9 , the statement is false since 1 < 4.9 + 6 < 8 is clearly not true. The first of the inequalities is satisfied since 1 is less than 10.9 , but the second inequality is not satisfied since 10.9 is not less than 8. We would like to know for exactly which values of x the statement 1 < x + 6 < 8 is true. We proceed by using the properties discussed earlier in this section, but now we must apply the rules to all three parts rather than just the two parts in a regular inequality.  || 
book1_ch05_8	 || Solutions to Linear Equations in Two Variables Solution to an Equation in Two Variables We have discovered that an equation is a mathematical way of expressing the relationship of equality between quantities. If the relationship is between two quantities, the equation will contain two variables. We say that an equation in two variables has a solution if an ordered pair of values can be found such that when these two values are substituted into the equation a true statement results. This is illustrated when we observe some solutions to the equation y = 2x + 5 . x = 4, y = 13;          since 13 = 2(4) + 5 is true . x = 1, y = 7;          since 7 = 2(1) + 5 is true . x = 0, y = 5;          since 5 = 2(0) + 5 is true . x = − 6, y = − 7;          since -7 = 2( − 6) + 5 is true .  || Ordered Pairs as Solutions It is important to keep in mind that a solution to a linear equation in two variables is an ordered pair of values, one value for each variable. A solution is not completely known until the values of both variables are specified. Independent and Dependent Variables Recall that, in an equation, any variable whose value can be freely assigned is said to be an independent variable. Any variable whose value is determined once the other value or values have been assigned is said to be a dependent variable. If, in a linear equation, the independent variable is x and the dependent variable is y , and a solution to the equation is x = a and y = b , the solution is written as the ORDERED PAIR      (a, b) Ordered Pair In an ordered pair, (a, b) , the first component, a , gives the value of the independent variable, and the second component, b , gives the value of the dependent variable. We can use ordered pairs to show some solutions to the equation y = 6x − 7 . Example 5.60.  (0, − 7) .If x = 0 and y = − 7 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. Example 5.61.  (8, 41) .If x = 8 and y = 41 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. Example 5.62.  ( − 4,  − 31) .If x = − 4 and y = − 31 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. These are only three of the infintely many solutions to this equation.  || Calculator Problems Exercise 5.8.44. (Go to Solution) An examination of the winning speeds in the Indianapolis 500 automobile race from 1961 to 1970 produces the equation y = 1.93x + 137.60 , where x is the number of years from 1960 and y is the winning speed. Statistical methods were used to obtain the equation, and, for a given year, the equation gives only the approximate winning speed. Use the equation y = 1.93x + 137.60 to find the approximate winning speed in 1965 1970 1986 1990 Exercise 5.8.45. In electricity theory, Ohm’s law relates electrical current to voltage by the equation y = 0.00082x , where x is the voltage in volts and y is the current in amperes. This equation was found by statistical methods and for a given voltage yields only an approximate value for the current. Use the equation y = 0.00082x to find the approximate current for a voltage of 6 volts 10 volts Exercise 5.8.46. (Go to Solution) Statistical methods have been used to obtain a relationship between the actual and reported number of German submarines sunk each month by the U.S. Navy in World War II. The equation expressing the approximate number of actual sinkings, y , for a given number of reported sinkings, x , is y = 1.04x + 0.76 . Find the approximate number of actual sinkings of German submarines if the reported number of sinkings is 4 9 10 Exercise 5.8.47. Statistical methods have been used to obtain a relationship between the heart weight (in milligrams) and the body weight (in milligrams) of 10-month-old diabetic offspring of crossbred male mice. The equation expressing the approximate body weight for a given heart weight is y = 0.213x – 4.44 . Find the approximate body weight for a heart weight of 210 mg 245 mg Exercise 5.8.48. (Go to Solution) Statistical methods have been used to produce the equation y = 0.176x − 0.64 . This equation gives the approximate red blood cell count (in millions) of a dog’s blood, y , for a given packed cell volume (in millimeters), x . Find the approximate red blood cell count for a packed cell volume of 40 mm 42 mm Exercise 5.8.49. An industrial machine can run at different speeds. The machine also produces defective items, and the number of defective items it produces appears to be related to the speed at which the machine is running. Statistical methods found that the equation y = 0.73x − 0.86 is able to give the approximate number of defective items, y , for a given machine speed, x . Use this equation to find the approximate number of defective items for a machine speed of 9 12 Exercise 5.8.50. (Go to Solution) A computer company has found, using statistical techniques, that there is a relationship between the aptitude test scores of assembly line workers and their productivity. Using data accumulated over a period of time, the equation y = 0.89x − 41.78 was derived. The x represents an aptitude test score and y the approximate corresponding number of items assembled per hour. Estimate the number of items produced by a worker with an aptitude score of 80 95 Exercise 5.8.51. Chemists, making use of statistical techniques, have been able to express the approximate weight of potassium bromide, W , that will dissolve in 100 grams of water at T degrees centigrade. The equation expressing this relationship is W = 0.52T + 54.2 . Use this equation to predict the potassium bromide weight that will dissolve in 100 grams of water that is heated to a temperature of 70 degrees centigrade 95 degrees centigrade Exercise 5.8.52. (Go to Solution) The marketing department at a large company has been able to express the relationship between the demand for a product and its price by using statistical techniques. The department found, by analyzing studies done in six different market areas, that the equation giving the approximate demand for a product (in thousands of units) for a particular price (in cents) is y = − 14.15x + 257.11 . Find the approximate number of units demanded when the price is $0.12 $0.15 Exercise 5.8.53. The management of a speed-reading program claims that the approximate speed gain (in words per minute), G , is related to the number of weeks spent in its program, W , is given by the equation G = 26.68W − 7.44 . Predict the approximate speed gain for a student who has spent 3 weeks in the program 10 weeks in the program  || 
book1_ch05_8_2	Solutions to Linear Equations in Two Variables Solution to an Equation in Two Variables We have discovered that an equation is a mathematical way of expressing the relationship of equality between quantities. If the relationship is between two quantities, the equation will contain two variables. We say that an equation in two variables has a solution if an ordered pair of values can be found such that when these two values are substituted into the equation a true statement results. This is illustrated when we observe some solutions to the equation y = 2x + 5 . x = 4, y = 13;          since 13 = 2(4) + 5 is true . x = 1, y = 7;          since 7 = 2(1) + 5 is true . x = 0, y = 5;          since 5 = 2(0) + 5 is true . x = − 6, y = − 7;          since -7 = 2( − 6) + 5 is true . Solutions to Linear Equations in Two Variables Solution to an Equation in Two Variables We have discovered that an equation is a mathematical way of expressing the relationship of equality between quantities. If the relationship is between two quantities, the equation will contain two variables. We say that an equation in two variables has a solution if an ordered pair of values can be found such that when these two values are substituted into the equation a true statement results. This is illustrated when we observe some solutions to the equation y = 2x + 5 . x = 4, y = 13;          since 13 = 2(4) + 5 is true . x = 1, y = 7;          since 7 = 2(1) + 5 is true . x = 0, y = 5;          since 5 = 2(0) + 5 is true . x = − 6, y = − 7;          since -7 = 2( − 6) + 5 is true .  || 
book1_ch05_8_3	Ordered Pairs as Solutions It is important to keep in mind that a solution to a linear equation in two variables is an ordered pair of values, one value for each variable. A solution is not completely known until the values of both variables are specified. Independent and Dependent Variables Recall that, in an equation, any variable whose value can be freely assigned is said to be an independent variable. Any variable whose value is determined once the other value or values have been assigned is said to be a dependent variable. If, in a linear equation, the independent variable is x and the dependent variable is y , and a solution to the equation is x = a and y = b , the solution is written as the ORDERED PAIR      (a, b) Ordered Pair In an ordered pair, (a, b) , the first component, a , gives the value of the independent variable, and the second component, b , gives the value of the dependent variable. We can use ordered pairs to show some solutions to the equation y = 6x − 7 . Example 5.60.  (0, − 7) .If x = 0 and y = − 7 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. Example 5.61.  (8, 41) .If x = 8 and y = 41 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. Example 5.62.  ( − 4,  − 31) .If x = − 4 and y = − 31 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. These are only three of the infintely many solutions to this equation. Ordered Pairs as Solutions It is important to keep in mind that a solution to a linear equation in two variables is an ordered pair of values, one value for each variable. A solution is not completely known until the values of both variables are specified. Independent and Dependent Variables Recall that, in an equation, any variable whose value can be freely assigned is said to be an independent variable. Any variable whose value is determined once the other value or values have been assigned is said to be a dependent variable. If, in a linear equation, the independent variable is x and the dependent variable is y , and a solution to the equation is x = a and y = b , the solution is written as the ORDERED PAIR      (a, b) Ordered Pair In an ordered pair, (a, b) , the first component, a , gives the value of the independent variable, and the second component, b , gives the value of the dependent variable. We can use ordered pairs to show some solutions to the equation y = 6x − 7 . Example 5.60.  (0, − 7) .If x = 0 and y = − 7 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. Example 5.61.  (8, 41) .If x = 8 and y = 41 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. Example 5.62.  ( − 4,  − 31) .If x = − 4 and y = − 31 , we get a true statement upon substitution and computataion. These are only three of the infintely many solutions to this equation.  || 
book1_ch05_8_7	Calculator Problems Exercise 5.8.44. (Go to Solution) An examination of the winning speeds in the Indianapolis 500 automobile race from 1961 to 1970 produces the equation y = 1.93x + 137.60 , where x is the number of years from 1960 and y is the winning speed. Statistical methods were used to obtain the equation, and, for a given year, the equation gives only the approximate winning speed. Use the equation y = 1.93x + 137.60 to find the approximate winning speed in 1965 1970 1986 1990 Exercise 5.8.45. In electricity theory, Ohm’s law relates electrical current to voltage by the equation y = 0.00082x , where x is the voltage in volts and y is the current in amperes. This equation was found by statistical methods and for a given voltage yields only an approximate value for the current. Use the equation y = 0.00082x to find the approximate current for a voltage of 6 volts 10 volts Exercise 5.8.46. (Go to Solution) Statistical methods have been used to obtain a relationship between the actual and reported number of German submarines sunk each month by the U.S. Navy in World War II. The equation expressing the approximate number of actual sinkings, y , for a given number of reported sinkings, x , is y = 1.04x + 0.76 . Find the approximate number of actual sinkings of German submarines if the reported number of sinkings is 4 9 10 Exercise 5.8.47. Statistical methods have been used to obtain a relationship between the heart weight (in milligrams) and the body weight (in milligrams) of 10-month-old diabetic offspring of crossbred male mice. The equation expressing the approximate body weight for a given heart weight is y = 0.213x – 4.44 . Find the approximate body weight for a heart weight of 210 mg 245 mg Exercise 5.8.48. (Go to Solution) Statistical methods have been used to produce the equation y = 0.176x − 0.64 . This equation gives the approximate red blood cell count (in millions) of a dog’s blood, y , for a given packed cell volume (in millimeters), x . Find the approximate red blood cell count for a packed cell volume of 40 mm 42 mm Exercise 5.8.49. An industrial machine can run at different speeds. The machine also produces defective items, and the number of defective items it produces appears to be related to the speed at which the machine is running. Statistical methods found that the equation y = 0.73x − 0.86 is able to give the approximate number of defective items, y , for a given machine speed, x . Use this equation to find the approximate number of defective items for a machine speed of 9 12 Exercise 5.8.50. (Go to Solution) A computer company has found, using statistical techniques, that there is a relationship between the aptitude test scores of assembly line workers and their productivity. Using data accumulated over a period of time, the equation y = 0.89x − 41.78 was derived. The x represents an aptitude test score and y the approximate corresponding number of items assembled per hour. Estimate the number of items produced by a worker with an aptitude score of 80 95 Exercise 5.8.51. Chemists, making use of statistical techniques, have been able to express the approximate weight of potassium bromide, W , that will dissolve in 100 grams of water at T degrees centigrade. The equation expressing this relationship is W = 0.52T + 54.2 . Use this equation to predict the potassium bromide weight that will dissolve in 100 grams of water that is heated to a temperature of 70 degrees centigrade 95 degrees centigrade Exercise 5.8.52. (Go to Solution) The marketing department at a large company has been able to express the relationship between the demand for a product and its price by using statistical techniques. The department found, by analyzing studies done in six different market areas, that the equation giving the approximate demand for a product (in thousands of units) for a particular price (in cents) is y = − 14.15x + 257.11 . Find the approximate number of units demanded when the price is $0.12 $0.15 Exercise 5.8.53. The management of a speed-reading program claims that the approximate speed gain (in words per minute), G , is related to the number of weeks spent in its program, W , is given by the equation G = 26.68W − 7.44 . Predict the approximate speed gain for a student who has spent 3 weeks in the program 10 weeks in the program Calculator Problems Exercise 5.8.44. (Go to Solution) An examination of the winning speeds in the Indianapolis 500 automobile race from 1961 to 1970 produces the equation y = 1.93x + 137.60 , where x is the number of years from 1960 and y is the winning speed. Statistical methods were used to obtain the equation, and, for a given year, the equation gives only the approximate winning speed. Use the equation y = 1.93x + 137.60 to find the approximate winning speed in 1965 1970 1986 1990 Exercise 5.8.45. In electricity theory, Ohm’s law relates electrical current to voltage by the equation y = 0.00082x , where x is the voltage in volts and y is the current in amperes. This equation was found by statistical methods and for a given voltage yields only an approximate value for the current. Use the equation y = 0.00082x to find the approximate current for a voltage of 6 volts 10 volts Exercise 5.8.46. (Go to Solution) Statistical methods have been used to obtain a relationship between the actual and reported number of German submarines sunk each month by the U.S. Navy in World War II. The equation expressing the approximate number of actual sinkings, y , for a given number of reported sinkings, x , is y = 1.04x + 0.76 . Find the approximate number of actual sinkings of German submarines if the reported number of sinkings is 4 9 10 Exercise 5.8.47. Statistical methods have been used to obtain a relationship between the heart weight (in milligrams) and the body weight (in milligrams) of 10-month-old diabetic offspring of crossbred male mice. The equation expressing the approximate body weight for a given heart weight is y = 0.213x – 4.44 . Find the approximate body weight for a heart weight of 210 mg 245 mg Exercise 5.8.48. (Go to Solution) Statistical methods have been used to produce the equation y = 0.176x − 0.64 . This equation gives the approximate red blood cell count (in millions) of a dog’s blood, y , for a given packed cell volume (in millimeters), x . Find the approximate red blood cell count for a packed cell volume of 40 mm 42 mm Exercise 5.8.49. An industrial machine can run at different speeds. The machine also produces defective items, and the number of defective items it produces appears to be related to the speed at which the machine is running. Statistical methods found that the equation y = 0.73x − 0.86 is able to give the approximate number of defective items, y , for a given machine speed, x . Use this equation to find the approximate number of defective items for a machine speed of 9 12 Exercise 5.8.50. (Go to Solution) A computer company has found, using statistical techniques, that there is a relationship between the aptitude test scores of assembly line workers and their productivity. Using data accumulated over a period of time, the equation y = 0.89x − 41.78 was derived. The x represents an aptitude test score and y the approximate corresponding number of items assembled per hour. Estimate the number of items produced by a worker with an aptitude score of 80 95 Exercise 5.8.51. Chemists, making use of statistical techniques, have been able to express the approximate weight of potassium bromide, W , that will dissolve in 100 grams of water at T degrees centigrade. The equation expressing this relationship is W = 0.52T + 54.2 . Use this equation to predict the potassium bromide weight that will dissolve in 100 grams of water that is heated to a temperature of 70 degrees centigrade 95 degrees centigrade Exercise 5.8.52. (Go to Solution) The marketing department at a large company has been able to express the relationship between the demand for a product and its price by using statistical techniques. The department found, by analyzing studies done in six different market areas, that the equation giving the approximate demand for a product (in thousands of units) for a particular price (in cents) is y = − 14.15x + 257.11 . Find the approximate number of units demanded when the price is $0.12 $0.15 Exercise 5.8.53. The management of a speed-reading program claims that the approximate speed gain (in words per minute), G , is related to the number of weeks spent in its program, W , is given by the equation G = 26.68W − 7.44 . Predict the approximate speed gain for a student who has spent 3 weeks in the program 10 weeks in the program  || 
book2_chapter2	 ||  || Preliminary Definitions In algebra, letters are used to represent numbers. The letters used to represent these numbers are called variables Letters or symbols used in algebra to represent numbers. . Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations form algebraic expressions Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations used to generalize specific arithmetic operations. , or just expressions. The following are some examples of expressions with one variable, x: Terms Components of an algebraic expression separated by addition operators. in an algebraic expression are separated by addition operators, and factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. are separated by multiplication operators. The numerical factor of a term is called the coefficient The numerical factor of a term. . For example, the algebraic expression 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 can be thought of as 3 x 2 + 2 x + ( − 1 ) and has three terms. The first term, 3 x 2 , represents the quantity 3 ⋅ x ⋅ x , where 3 is the coefficient and x is the variable. All of the variable factors, with their exponents, form the variable part of a term All the variable factors with their exponents. . If a term is written without a variable factor, then it is called a constant term A term written without a variable factor. . Consider the components of 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 , Terms Coefficient Variable Part 3 x 2 3 x 2 2 x 2 x −1 −1 The third term in this expression, −1, is a constant term because it is written without a variable factor. While a variable represents an unknown quantity and may change, the constant term does not change.   Example 1: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: 5 x 2 − 4 x y − y 2 . Solution: Think of the third term in this example, − y 2 , as − 1 y 2 . Terms Coefficient Variable Part 5 x 2 5 x 2 − 4 x y −4 x y − y 2 −1 y 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 4 ,   − 1 ,   5 } ; variable parts: { x 2 ,   x y ,   y 2 }   Some terms, such as y 2 and − y 2 , appear not to have a coefficient. The multiplicative identity property states that 1 times anything is itself and occurs so often that it is customary to omit this factor and write Therefore, the coefficient of y 2 is actually 1 and the coefficient of − y 2 is −1. In addition, you will encounter terms that have variable parts composed of algebraic expressions as factors.   Example 2: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: − 3 ( x + y ) 3 + ( x + y ) 2 . Solution: This is an expression with two terms: Terms Coefficient Variable Part − 3 ( x + y ) 3 −3 ( x + y ) 3 ( x + y ) 2 1 ( x + y ) 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 3 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { ( x + y ) 3 ,   ( x + y ) 2 }   In our study of algebra, we will encounter a wide variety of algebraic expressions. Typically, expressions use the two most common variables, x and y. However, expressions may use any letter (or symbol) for a variable, even Greek letters, such as alpha ( α ) and beta ( β ). Some letters and symbols are reserved for constants, such as π ≈ 3.14159 and e ≈ 2.71828 . Since there is only a limited number of letters, you will also use subscripts, x 1 ,   x 2 ,   x 3 ,   x 4 , … , to indicate different variables.   Try this! List all coefficients and variable parts of the expression: − 5 a 2 + a b − 2 b 2 − 3 . Answer: Coefficients: { − 5 ,   − 3 ,   − 2 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { a 2 ,   a b ,   b 2 } Video Solution  || Evaluating Algebraic Expressions Think of an algebraic expression as a generalization of particular arithmetic operations. Performing these operations after substituting given values for variables is called evaluating The process of performing the operations of an algebraic expression for given values of the variables. . In algebra, a variable represents an unknown value. However, if the problem specifically assigns a value to a variable, then you can replace that letter with the given number and evaluate using the order of operations.   Example 3: Evaluate: a. 2 x + 3 , where x = − 4 b. 2 3 y , where y = 9 Solution: To avoid common errors, it is a best practice to first replace all variables with parentheses and then replace, or substitute The act of replacing a variable with an equivalent quantity. , the given value. a. b. Answers: a. −5; b. 6   If parentheses are not used in part (a) of the previous example, the result is quite different: 2 x + 3 = 2 − 4 + 4 . Without parentheses, the first operation is subtraction, which leads to an incorrect result.   Example 4: Evaluate: − 2 x − y , where x = − 5 and y = − 3 . Solution: After substituting the given values for the variables, simplify using the order of operations. Answer: 13   Example 5: Evaluate: 9 a 2 − b 2 , where a = 2 and b = − 5 . Solution: Answer: 11   Example 6: Evaluate: − x 2 − 4 x + 1 , where x = − 1 2 . Solution: Answer: 11/4   The answer to the previous example is 11 4 , which can be written as a mixed number 2 3 4 . In algebra, improper fractions are generally preferred. Unless the original problem has mixed numbers in it, or it is an answer to a real-world application, solutions will be expressed as reduced improper fractions.   Example 7: Evaluate: ( 3 x − 2 ) ( x − 7 ) , where x = 2 3 . Solution: The order of operations requires us to perform the operations within the parentheses first. Answer: 0   Example 8: Evaluate: b 2 − 4 a c , where a = − 1 , b = − 3 , and c = 2 . Solution: The expression b 2 − 4 a c is called the discriminant The algebraic expression b 2 − 4 a c . ; it is an essential quantity seen later in our study of algebra. Answer: 17   Try this! Evaluate a 3 − b 3 , where a = 2 and b = − 3 . Answer: 35 Video Solution  || Using Formulas The main difference between algebra and arithmetic is the organized use of variables. This idea leads to reusable formulas A reusable mathematical model using algebraic expressions to describe a common application. , which are mathematical models using algebraic expressions to describe common applications. For example, the area of a rectangle is modeled by the formula: In this equation, variables are used to describe the relationship between the area of a rectangle and the length of its sides. The area is the product of the length and width of the rectangle. If the length of a rectangle measures 3 meters and the width measures 2 meters, then the area can be calculated using the formula as follows:   Example 9: The cost of a daily truck rental is $48.00 plus an additional $0.45 for every mile driven. This cost in dollars can be modeled by the formula c o s t = 0.45 x + 48 , where x represents the number of miles driven in one day. Use this formula to calculate the cost to rent the truck for a day and drive it 120 miles. Solution: Use the formula to find the cost when the number of miles x = 120 . Substitute 120 into the given formula for x and then simplify. Answer: The rental costs $102.   Uniform motion Described by the formula D = r t , where the distance D is given as the product of the average rate r and the time t traveled at that rate. is modeled by the formula D = r t , which expresses distance D in terms of the average rate r, or speed, and the time t traveled at that rate. This formula, D = r t , is used often and is read “distance equals rate times time.”   Example 10: Jim’s road trip takes 2 1 2 hours at an average speed of 66 miles per hour. How far does he travel? Solution: Substitute the appropriate values into the formula and then simplify. Answer: Jim travels 165 miles.   The volume in cubic units of a rectangular box is given by the formula V = l w h , where l represents the length, w represents the width, and h represents the height.   Example 11: A wooden box is 1 foot in length, 5 inches wide, and 6 inches high. Find the volume of the box in cubic inches. Solution: Take care to ensure that all the units are consistent and use 12 inches for the length instead of 1 foot. Answer: The volume of the box is 360 cubic inches.   Simple interest Modeled by the formula I = p r t , where p represents the principal amount invested at an annual interest rate r for t years. I is given by the formula I = p r t , where p represents the principal amount invested at an annual interest rate r for t years.   Example 12: Calculate the simple interest earned on a 2-year investment of $1,250 at an annual interest rate of 3 3 4 % . Solution: Convert 3 3 4 % to a decimal number before using it in the formula. Use this value for r and the fact that p = $1,250 and t = 2 years to calculate the simple interest. Answer: The simple interest earned is $93.75.   Try this! The perimeter of a rectangle is given by the formula P = 2 l + 2 w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. Use the formula to calculate the perimeter of a rectangle with a length of 5 feet and a width of 2 1 2 feet. Answer: 15 feet Video Solution  ||  || Distributive Property The properties of real numbers are important in our study of algebra because a variable is simply a letter that represents a real number. In particular, the distributive property Given any real numbers a, b, and c, a ( b + c ) = a b + a c or ( b + c ) a = b a + c a . states that given any real numbers a, b, and c, This property is applied when simplifying algebraic expressions. To demonstrate how it is used, we simplify 2 ( 5 − 3 ) in two ways, and observe the same correct result. Certainly, if the contents of the parentheses can be simplified, do that first. On the other hand, when the contents of parentheses cannot be simplified, multiply every term within the parentheses by the factor outside of the parentheses using the distributive property. Applying the distributive property allows you to multiply and remove the parentheses.   Example 1: Simplify: 5 ( 7 y + 2 ) . Solution: Multiply 5 times each term inside the parentheses. Answer: 35 y + 10   Example 2: Simplify: − 3 ( 2 x 2 + 5 x + 1 ) . Solution: Multiply −3 times each of the coefficients of the terms inside the parentheses. Answer: − 6 x 2 − 15 x − 3   Example 3: Simplify: 5 ( − 2 a + 5 b ) − 2 c . Solution: Apply the distributive property by multiplying only the terms grouped within the parentheses by 5. Answer: − 10 a + 25 b − 2 c   Because multiplication is commutative, we can also write the distributive property in the following manner: ( b + c ) a = b a + c a .   Example 4: Simplify: ( 3 x − 4 y + 1 ) ⋅ 3 . Solution: Multiply each term within the parentheses by 3. Answer: 9 x − 12 y + 3   Division in algebra is often indicated using the fraction bar rather than with the symbol (÷). And sometimes it is useful to rewrite expressions involving division as products: Rewriting algebraic expressions as products allows us to apply the distributive property.   Example 5: Divide: 25 x 2 − 5 x + 10 5 . Solution: First, treat this as 1 5 times the expression in the numerator and then distribute. Alternate Solution: Think of 5 as a common denominator and divide each of the terms in the numerator by 5: Answer: 5 x 2 − x + 2   We will discuss the division of algebraic expressions in more detail as we progress through the course.   Try this! Simplify: 1 3 ( − 9 x + 27 y − 3 ) . Answer: − 3 x + 9 y − 1 Video Solution  || Combining Like Terms Terms with the same variable parts are called like terms Constant terms or terms with the same variable parts. , or similar terms Used when referring to like terms. . Furthermore, constant terms are considered to be like terms. If an algebraic expression contains like terms, apply the distributive property as follows: In other words, if the variable parts of terms are exactly the same, then we may add or subtract the coefficients to obtain the coefficient of a single term with the same variable part. This process is called combining like terms Adding or subtracting like terms within an algebraic expression to obtain a single term with the same variable part. . For example, Notice that the variable factors and their exponents do not change. Combining like terms in this manner, so that the expression contains no other similar terms, is called simplifying the expression The process of combining like terms until the expression contains no more similar terms. . Use this idea to simplify algebraic expressions with multiple like terms.   Example 6: Simplify: 3 a + 2 b − 4 a + 9 b . Solution: Identify the like terms and combine them. Answer: − a + 11 b   In the previous example, rearranging the terms is typically performed mentally and is not shown in the presentation of the solution.   Example 7: Simplify: x 2 + 3 x + 2 + 4 x 2 − 5 x − 7 . Solution: Identify the like terms and add the corresponding coefficients. Answer: 5 x 2 − 2 x − 5   Example 8: Simplify: 5 x 2 y − 3 x y 2 + 4 x 2 y − 2 x y 2 . Solution: Remember to leave the variable factors and their exponents unchanged in the resulting combined term. Answer: 9 x 2 y − 5 x y 2   Example 9: Simplify: 1 2 a − 1 3 b + 3 4 a + b . Solution: To add the fractional coefficients, use equivalent coefficients with common denominators for each like term. Answer: 5 4 a + 2 3 b   Example 10: Simplify: − 12 x ( x + y ) 3 + 26 x ( x + y ) 3 . Solution: Consider the variable part to be x ( x + y ) 3 . Then this expression has two like terms with coefficients −12 and 26. Answer: 14 x ( x + y ) 3   Try this! Simplify: − 7 x + 8 y − 2 x − 3 y . Answer: − 9 x + 5 y Video Solution  || Distributive Property and Like Terms When simplifying, we will often have to combine like terms after we apply the distributive property. This step is consistent with the order of operations: multiplication before addition.   Example 11: Simplify: 2 ( 3 a − b ) − 7 ( − 2 a + 3 b ) . Solution: Distribute 2 and −7 and then combine like terms. Answer: 20 a − 23 b   In the example above, it is important to point out that you can remove the parentheses and collect like terms because you multiply the second quantity by −7, not just by 7. To correctly apply the distributive property, think of this as adding −7 times the given quantity, 2 ( 3 a − b ) + ( − 7 ) ( − 2 a + 3 b ) .   Try this! Simplify: − 5 ( 2 x − 3 ) + 7 x . Answer: − 3 x + 15 Video Solution Often we will encounter algebraic expressions like + ( a + b ) or − ( a + b ) . As we have seen, the coefficients are actually implied to be +1 and −1, respectively, and therefore, the distributive property applies using +1 or –1 as the factor. Multiply each term within the parentheses by these factors: This leads to two useful properties,   Example 12: Simplify: 5 x − ( − 2 x 2 + 3 x − 1 ) . Solution: Multiply each term within the parentheses by −1 and then combine like terms. Answer: 2 x 2 + 2 x + 1   When distributing a negative number, all of the signs within the parentheses will change. Note that 5 x in the example above is a separate term; hence the distributive property does not apply to it.   Example 13: Simplify: 5 − 2 ( x 2 − 4 x − 3 ) . Solution: The order of operations requires that we multiply before subtracting. Therefore, distribute −2 and then combine the constant terms. Subtracting 5 − 2 first leads to an incorrect result, as illustrated below: Answer: −2x2 + 8x + 11 Caution It is worth repeating that you must follow the order of operations: multiply and divide before adding and subtracting! Try this! Simplify: 8 − 3 ( − x 2 + 2 x − 7 ) . Answer: 3 x 2 − 6 x + 29 Video Solution   Example 14: Subtract 3 x − 2 from twice the quantity − 4 x 2 + 2 x − 8 . Solution: First, group each expression and treat each as a quantity: Next, identify the key words and translate them into a mathematical expression. Finally, simplify the resulting expression. Answer: − 8 x 2 + x − 14  ||  || Linear Equations with One Variable and Their Solutions Learning how to solve various algebraic equations is one of the main goals in algebra. This section introduces the basic techniques used for solving linear equations with one variable. An equation Statement indicating that two algebraic expressions are equal. is a statement indicating that two algebraic expressions are equal. A linear equation with one variable An equation that can be written in the general form a x + b = 0 , where a and b are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . , x, is an equation that can be written in the general form a x + b = 0 , where a and b are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . Here are some examples of linear equations, all of which are solved in this section: A solution Any value that can replace the variable in an equation to produce a true statement. to a linear equation is any value that can replace the variable to produce a true statement. The variable in the linear equation 2 x + 3 = 13 is x, and the solution is x = 5 . To verify this, substitute the value 5 for x and check that you obtain a true statement. Alternatively, when an equation is equal to a constant, we can verify a solution by substituting the value for the variable and show that the result is equal to that constant. In this sense, we say that solutions satisfy the equation After replacing the variable with a solution and simplifying, it produces a true statement. .   Example 1: Is x = 3 a solution to − 2 x − 3 = − 9 ? Answer: Yes, it is a solution, because x = 3 satisfies the equation.   Example 2: Is a = − 1 2 a solution to − 10 a + 5 = 25 ? Answer: No, it is not a solution, because a = − 1 2 does not satisfy the equation.   Recall that when evaluating expressions, it is a good practice to first replace all variables with parentheses, then substitute the appropriate values. By making use of parentheses we avoid some common errors when working the order of operations.   Example 3: Is y = − 3 a solution to 2 y − 5 = − y − 14 ? Solution: Answer: Yes, it is a solution, because y = − 3 produces a true statement.   Try this! Is x = − 3 a solution to − 2 x + 5 = − 1 ? Answer: No Video Solution  || Solving Basic Linear Equations We begin by defining equivalent equations Equations with the same solution set. as equations with the same solution set. Consider the following two linear equations and check to see if the solution is x = 7 . Here we can see that the two linear equations 3 x − 5 = 16 and 3 x = 21 are equivalent because they share the same solution set, namely, {7}. The goal is to develop a systematic process to find equivalent equations until the variable is isolated: To do this, use the properties of equality Properties that allow us to obtain equivalent equations by adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing both sides of an equation by nonzero real numbers. . Given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a real number, we have the following: Note Multiplying or dividing both sides of an equation by 0 is carefully avoided. Dividing by 0 is undefined and multiplying both sides by 0 results in the equation 0 = 0. To summarize, equality is retained and you obtain an equivalent equation if you add, subtract, multiply, or divide both sides of an equation by any nonzero real number. The technique for solving linear equations involves applying these properties in order to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. If the linear equation has a constant term, then we add to or subtract it from both sides of the equation to obtain an equivalent equation where the variable term is isolated.   Example 4: Solve: x + 3 = − 5 . Solution: To isolate the variable x on the left side, subtract 3 from both sides. Answer: The solution is x = − 8 . To check that this is true, substitute −8 into the original equation and simplify to see that it is satisfied: x + 3 = − 8 + 3 = − 5 ✓.   In the previous example, after subtracting 3 from both sides, you get x + 0 = − 8 . By the additive identity property of real numbers, this is equivalent to x = − 8 . This step is often left out in the presentation of the solution. If the variable term of the equation (including the coefficient) is isolated, then apply the multiplication or division property of equality to obtain an equivalent equation with the variable isolated. In other words, our goal is to obtain an equivalent equation with x or 1x isolated on one side of the equal sign.   Example 5: Solve: − 5 x = − 35 . Solution: The coefficient of x is –5, so divide both sides by −5. Answer: The solution is x = 7 . Perform the check mentally by substituting 7 for x in the original equation.   In the previous example, after dividing both sides by −5, x is left with a coefficient of 1, because − 5 − 5 = 1 . In fact, when we say “isolate the variable,” we mean to change the coefficient of the variable to 1, because 1 x = 7 is equivalent to x = 7 . This step is often left out of the instructional examples even though its omission is sometimes a source of confusion. Another important property is the symmetric property Allows you to solve for the variable on either side of the equal sign, because 5 = x is equivalent to x = 5 . : for any algebraic expressions A and B, The equation 2 = x is equivalent to x = 2 . It does not matter on which side we choose to isolate the variable.   Example 6: Solve: 2 = 5 + x . Solution: Isolate the variable x by subtracting 5 from both sides of the equation. Answer: The solution is −3, and checking the solution shows that 2 = 5 − 3.   Try this! Solve: 6 = x − 4 . Answer: x = 10 Video Solution  || Isolating the Variable in Two Steps A linear equation of the form a x + b = c takes two steps to solve. First, use the appropriate equality property of addition or subtraction to isolate the variable term. Next, isolate the variable using the equality property of multiplication or division. Checking solutions in the following examples is left to the reader.   Example 7: Solve: 2 x − 5 = 15 . Solution: Answer: The solution is 10.   Example 8: Solve: − 3 x − 2 = 9 . Solution: Answer: The solution is − 11 3 .   Example 9: Solve: 6 − 5 y = − 14 . Solution: When no sign precedes the term, it is understood to be positive. In other words, think of this as + 6 − 5 y = − 14 . Begin by subtracting 6 from both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is 4.   Example 10: Solve: 3 x + 1 2 = 2 3 . Solution: Answer: The solution is 1 18 .   Example 11: Solve: 3 − y = 1 . Solution: Recall that − y is equivalent to − 1 y ; divide both sides of the equation by −1. Alternatively, multiply both sides of − y = − 2 by −1 and achieve the same result: Answer: The solution is 2.   In summary, to retain equivalent equations, we must perform the same operation on both sides of the equation. First, apply the addition or subtraction property of equality to isolate the variable term and then apply the multiplication or division property of equality to isolate the variable on one side of the equation.   Try this! Solve: − 7 x + 6 = 27 . Answer: x = − 3 Video Solution  || Multiplying by the Reciprocal To solve an equation like 3 4 x = 1 , we can isolate the variable by dividing both sides by the coefficient. For example, On the left side of the equal sign, the fraction cancels. On the right side, we have a complex fraction and multiply by the reciprocal of the coefficient. You can save a step by recognizing this and start by multiplying both sides of the equation by the reciprocal of the coefficient. Recall that the product of reciprocals is 1, in this case , leaving the variable isolated.   Example 12: Solve: . Solution: Isolate the variable term using the addition property of equality and then multiply both sides of the equation by the reciprocal of the coefficient . Answer: The solution is −6.   Example 13: Solve: . Solution: The reciprocal of is because . Therefore, to isolate the variable x, multiply both sides by . Answer: The solution is −25.   Try this! Solve: . Answer: Video Solution  ||  || Combining Like Terms and Simplifying Linear equations typically are not given in standard form, so solving them requires additional steps. These additional steps include simplifying expressions on each side of the equal sign using the order of operations. Same-Side Like Terms We will often encounter linear equations where the expressions on each side of the equal sign can be simplified. Typically, this involves combining same-side like terms Like terms of an equation on the same side of the equal sign. . If this is the case, then it is best to simplify each side first before solving.   Example 1: Solve: − 4 a + 2 − a = 3 − 2 . Solution: First, combine the like terms on each side of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is 1 5 . Opposite-Side Like Terms Given a linear equation in the form a x + b = c x + d , we begin by combining like terms on opposite sides of the equal sign. To combine opposite-side like terms Like terms of an equation on opposite sides of the equal sign. , use the addition or subtraction property of equality to effectively “move terms” from one side to the other so that they can be combined.   Example 2: Solve: − 2 y − 3 = 5 y + 11 . Solution: To “move” the term 5 y to the left side, subtract it on both sides. From here, solve using the techniques developed previously. Always check to see that the solution is correct by substituting the solution back into the original equation and simplifying to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is −2. General Guidelines for Solving Linear Equations When solving linear equations, the goal is to determine what value, if any, will produce a true statement when substituted in the original equation. Do this by isolating the variable using the following steps: Step 1: Simplify both sides of the equation using the order of operations and combine all same-side like terms. Step 2: Use the appropriate properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms with the variable term on one side of the equation and the constant term on the other. Step 3: Divide or multiply as needed to isolate the variable. Step 4: Check to see if the answer solves the original equation.   Example 3: Solve: − 1 2 ( 10 y − 2 ) + 3 = 14 . Solution: Simplify the linear expression on the left side before solving. To check, Answer: The solution is −2.   Example 4: Solve: 5 ( 3 x + 2 ) − 2 = − 2 ( 1 − 7 x ) . Solution: First, simplify the expressions on both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is −10. The check is left as an exercise.   Try this! Solve: 6 − 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) = 4 x − 7 . Answer: x = 1 Video Solution  || Opposite-Side Like Terms Given a linear equation in the form a x + b = c x + d , we begin by combining like terms on opposite sides of the equal sign. To combine opposite-side like terms Like terms of an equation on opposite sides of the equal sign. , use the addition or subtraction property of equality to effectively “move terms” from one side to the other so that they can be combined.   Example 2: Solve: − 2 y − 3 = 5 y + 11 . Solution: To “move” the term 5 y to the left side, subtract it on both sides. From here, solve using the techniques developed previously. Always check to see that the solution is correct by substituting the solution back into the original equation and simplifying to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is −2.  || General Guidelines for Solving Linear Equations When solving linear equations, the goal is to determine what value, if any, will produce a true statement when substituted in the original equation. Do this by isolating the variable using the following steps: Step 1: Simplify both sides of the equation using the order of operations and combine all same-side like terms. Step 2: Use the appropriate properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms with the variable term on one side of the equation and the constant term on the other. Step 3: Divide or multiply as needed to isolate the variable. Step 4: Check to see if the answer solves the original equation.   Example 3: Solve: − 1 2 ( 10 y − 2 ) + 3 = 14 . Solution: Simplify the linear expression on the left side before solving. To check, Answer: The solution is −2.   Example 4: Solve: 5 ( 3 x + 2 ) − 2 = − 2 ( 1 − 7 x ) . Solution: First, simplify the expressions on both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is −10. The check is left as an exercise.   Try this! Solve: 6 − 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) = 4 x − 7 . Answer: x = 1 Video Solution  || Conditional Equations, Identities, and Contradictions There are three different types of equations. Up to this point, we have been solving conditional equations Equations that are true for particular values. . These are equations that are true for particular values. An identity An equation that is true for all possible values. is an equation that is true for all possible values of the variable. For example, has a solution set consisting of all real numbers, R. A contradiction An equation that is never true and has no solution. is an equation that is never true and thus has no solutions. For example, has no solution. We use the empty set, ∅ , to indicate that there are no solutions. If the end result of solving an equation is a true statement, like 0 = 0, then the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution. If solving results in a false statement, like 0 = 1, then the equation is a contradiction and there is no solution.   Example 5: Solve: 4 ( x + 5 ) + 6 = 2 ( 2 x + 3 ) . Solution: Answer: ∅ . Solving leads to a false statement; therefore, the equation is a contradiction and there is no solution.   Example 6: Solve: 3 ( 3 y + 5 ) + 5 = 10 ( y + 2 ) − y . Solution: Answer: R. Solving leads to a true statement; therefore, the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution.   If it is hard to believe that any real number is a solution to the equation in the previous example, then choose your favorite real number, and substitute it in the equation to see that it leads to a true statement. Choose x = 7 and check:   Try this! Solve: − 2 ( 3 x + 1 ) − ( x − 3 ) = − 7 x + 1 . Answer: R Video Solution  || Clearing Decimals and Fractions The coefficients of linear equations may be any real number, even decimals and fractions. When decimals and fractions are used, it is possible to use the multiplication property of equality to clear the coefficients in a single step. If given decimal coefficients, then multiply by an appropriate power of 10 to clear the decimals. If given fractional coefficients, then multiply both sides of the equation by the least common multiple of the denominators (LCD).   Example 7: Solve: 2.3 x + 2.8 = − 1.2 x + 9.8 . Solution: Notice that all decimal coefficients are expressed with digits in the tenths place; this suggests that we can clear the decimals by multiplying both sides by 10. Take care to distribute 10 to each term on both sides of the equation. Answer: The solution is 2.   Example 8: Solve: 1 3 x + 1 5 = 1 5 x − 1 . Solution: Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides by the least common multiple of the given denominators. In this case, the LCM ( 3, 5 ) = 15 . Answer: The solution is −9.   It is important to know that these techniques only work for equations. Do not try to clear fractions when simplifying expressions. As a reminder, Solve equations and simplify expressions. If you multiply an expression by 6, you will change the problem. However, if you multiply both sides of an equation by 6, you obtain an equivalent equation.  || Literal Equations (Linear Formulas) Algebra lets us solve whole classes of applications using literal equations A formula that summarizes whole classes of problems. , or formulas. Formulas often have more than one variable and describe, or model, a particular real-world problem. For example, the familiar formula D = r t describes the distance traveled in terms of the average rate and time; given any two of these quantities, we can determine the third. Using algebra, we can solve the equation for any one of the variables and derive two more formulas. If we divide both sides by r, we obtain the formula t = D r . Use this formula to find the time, given the distance and the rate. If we divide both sides by t, we obtain the formula r = D t . Use this formula to find the rate, given the distance traveled and the time it takes to travel that distance. Using the techniques learned up to this point, we now have three equivalent formulas relating distance, average rate, and time: When given a literal equation, it is often necessary to solve for one of the variables in terms of the others. Use the properties of equality to isolate the indicated variable.   Example 9: Solve for a:    P = 2 a + b . Solution: The goal is to isolate the variable a. Answer: a = P − b 2   Example 10: Solve for y:    z = x + y 2 . Solution: The goal is to isolate the variable y. Answer: y = 2 z − x   Try this! Solve for b:    2 a − 3 b = c . Answer: b = 2 a − c 3 Video Solution  ||  || Key Words, Translation, and Strategy Algebra simplifies the process of solving real-world problems. This is done by using letters to represent unknowns, restating problems in the form of equations, and offering systematic techniques for solving those equations. To solve problems using algebra, first translate the wording of the problem into mathematical statements that describe the relationships between the given information and the unknowns. Usually, this translation to mathematical statements is the difficult step in the process. The key to the translation is to carefully read the problem and identify certain key words and phrases. Key Words Translation Sum, increased by, more than, plus, added to, total + Difference, decreased by, subtracted from, less, minus − Product, multiplied by, of, times, twice * Quotient, divided by, ratio, per / Is, total, result = Here are some examples of translated key phrases. Key Phrases Translation The sum of a number and 7. x + 7 Seven more than a number. The difference of a number and 7. x − 7 Seven less than a number. Seven subtracted from a number. The product of 2 and a number. 2 x Twice a number. One-half of a number. 1 2 x The quotient of a number and 7. x / 7 When translating sentences into mathematical statements, be sure to read the sentence several times and identify the key words and phrases.   Example 1: Translate: Four less than twice some number is 16. Solution: First, choose a variable for the unknown number and identify the key words and phrases. Let x represent the unknown indicated by “some number.” Remember that subtraction is not commutative. For this reason, take care when setting up differences. In this example, 4 − 2 x = 16 is an incorrect translation. Answer: 2 x − 4 = 16   It is important to first identify the variable—let x represent…—and state in words what the unknown quantity is. This step not only makes your work more readable but also forces you to think about what you are looking for. Usually, if you know what you are asked to find, then the task of finding it is achievable.   Example 2: Translate: When 7 is subtracted from 3 times the sum of a number and 12, the result is 20. Solution: Let n represent the unknown number. Answer: 3 ( n + 12 ) − 7 = 20   To understand why parentheses are needed, study the structures of the following two sentences and their translations: “3 times the sum of a number and 12” 3 ( n + 12 ) “the sum of 3 times a number and 12” 3 n + 12 The key is to focus on the phrase “3 times the sum.” This prompts us to group the sum within parentheses and then multiply by 3. Once an application is translated into an algebraic equation, solve it using the techniques you have learned. Guidelines for Setting Up and Solving Word Problems Step 1: Read the problem several times, identify the key words and phrases, and organize the given information. Step 2: Identify the variables by assigning a letter or expression to the unknown quantities. Step 3: Translate and set up an algebraic equation that models the problem. Step 4: Solve the resulting algebraic equation. Step 5: Finally, answer the question in sentence form and make sure it makes sense (check it). For now, set up all of your equations using only one variable. Avoid two variables by looking for a relationship between the unknowns.  || Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We classify applications involving relationships between real numbers broadly as number problems. These problems can sometimes be solved using some creative arithmetic, guessing, and checking. Solving in this manner is not a good practice and should be avoided. Begin by working through the basic steps outlined in the general guidelines for solving word problems.   Example 3: A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller integer. The sum of the two integers is 18. Find the integers. Solution: Identify variables: Begin by assigning a variable to the smaller integer. Use the first sentence to identify the larger integer in terms of the variable x: “A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller.” Set up an equation: Add the expressions that represent the two integers, and set the resulting expression equal to 18 as indicated in the second sentence: “The sum of the two integers is 18.” Solve: Solve the equation to obtain the smaller integer x. Back substitute: Use the expression 3 x − 2 to find the larger integer—this is called back substituting The process of finding the answers to other unknowns after one has been found. . Answer the question: The two integers are 5 and 13. Check: 5 + 13 = 18. The answer makes sense.   Example 4: The difference between two integers is 2. The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller. Find the integers. Solution: Use the relationship between the two integers in the second sentence, “The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller,” to identify the unknowns in terms of one variable. Since the difference is positive, subtract the smaller integer from the larger. Solve. Use 2x − 6 to find the larger integer. Answer: The two integers are 8 and 10. These integers clearly solve the problem.   It is worth mentioning again that you can often find solutions to simple problems by guessing and checking. This is so because the numbers are chosen to simplify the process of solving, so that the algebraic steps are not too tedious. You learn how to set up algebraic equations with easier problems, so that you can use these ideas to solve more difficult problems later.   Example 5: The sum of two consecutive even integers is 46. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive even integers.” Add the even integers and set them equal to 46. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next even integer. Answer: The consecutive even integers are 22 and 24.   It should be clear that consecutive even integers are separated by two units. However, it may not be so clear that odd integers are as well.   Example 6: The sum of two consecutive odd integers is 36. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive odd integers.” Add the two odd integers and set the expression equal to 36. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next odd integer. Answer: The consecutive odd integers are 17 and 19.   The algebraic setup for even and odd integer problems is the same. A common mistake is to use x and x + 3 when identifying the variables for consecutive odd integers. This is incorrect because adding 3 to an odd number yields an even number: for example, 5 + 3 = 8. An incorrect setup is very likely to lead to a decimal answer, which may be an indication that the problem was set up incorrectly.   Example 7: The sum of three consecutive integers is 24. Find the integers. Solution: Consecutive integers are separated by one unit. Add the integers and set the sum equal to 24. Solve. Back substitute to find the other two integers. Answer: The three consecutive integers are 7, 8 and 9, where 7 + 8 + 9 = 24.   Try this! The sum of three consecutive odd integers is 87. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 27, 29, and 31. Video Solution  || Geometry Problems (Perimeter) Recall that the perimeter The sum of the lengths of all the outside edges of a polygon. of a polygon is the sum of the lengths of all the outside edges. In addition, it is helpful to review the following perimeter formulas ( π ≈ 3.14159 ). Perimeter of a rectangle P = 2 l + 2 w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. : P = 2 l + 2 w Perimeter of a square P = 4 s , where s represents the length of a side. : P = 4 s Perimeter of a triangle P = a + b + c , where a, b, and c each represents the length of a different side. : P = a + b + c Perimeter of a circle ( circumference The perimeter of a circle given by C = 2 π r , where r represents the radius of the circle and π ≈ 3.14159 . ): C = 2 π r Keep in mind that you are looking for a relationship between the unknowns so that you can set up algebraic equations using only one variable. When working with geometry problems, it is often helpful to draw a picture.   Example 8: A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet. The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width. Find the dimensions of the rectangle. Solution: The sentence “The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width” gives the relationship between the two variables. The sentence “A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet” suggests an algebraic setup. Substitute 64 for the perimeter and the expression for the length into the appropriate formula as follows: Once you have set up an algebraic equation with one variable, solve for the width, w. Use 3w + 4 to find the length. Answer: The rectangle measures 7 feet by 25 feet. To check, add all of the sides:   Example 9: Two sides of a triangle are 5 and 7 inches longer than the third side. If the perimeter measures 21 inches, find the length of each side. Solution: The first sentence describes the relationships between the unknowns. Substitute these expressions into the appropriate formula and use 21 for the perimeter P. You now have an equation with one variable to solve. Back substitute. Answer: The three sides of the triangle measure 3 inches, 8 inches, and 10 inches. The check is left to the reader.   Try this! The length of a rectangle is 1 foot less than twice its width. If the perimeter is 46 feet, find the dimensions. Answer: Width: 8 feet; length: 15 feet Video Solution  || Problems Involving Money and Percents Whenever setting up an equation involving a percentage, we usually need to convert the percentage to a decimal or fraction. If the question asks for a percentage, then do not forget to convert your answer to a percent at the end. Also, when money is involved, be sure to round off to two decimal places.   Example 10: If a pair of shoes costs $52.50 including a 7 1 4 % tax, what is the original cost of the item before taxes are added? Solution: Begin by converting 7 1 4 % to a decimal. The amount of tax is this rate times the original cost of the item. The original cost of the item is what you are asked to find. Use this equation to solve for c, the original cost of the item. Answer: The cost of the item before taxes is $48.95. Check this by multiplying $48.95 by 0.0725 to obtain the tax and add it to this cost.   Example 11: Given a 5 1 8 % annual interest rate, how long will it take $1,200 to yield $307.50 in simple interest? Solution: Organize the data needed to use the simple interest formula I = p r t . Given interest for the time period: I = $ 307.50 Given principal: p = $ 1200 Given rate: r = 5 1 8 % = 5.125 % = 0.05125 Next, substitute all of the known quantities into the formula and then solve for the only unknown, t. Answer: It takes 5 years for $1,200 invested at 5 1 8 % to earn $307.50 in simple interest.   Example 12: Mary invested her total savings of $3,400 in two accounts. Her mutual fund account earned 8% last year and her CD earned 5%. If her total interest for the year was $245, how much was in each account? Solution: The relationship between the two unknowns is that they total $3,400. When a total is involved, a common technique used to avoid two variables is to represent the second unknown as the difference of the total and the first unknown. The total interest is the sum of the interest earned from each account. Interest earned in the mutual fund: I = P r t = x ⋅ 0.08 ⋅ 1 = 0.08 x Interest earned in the CD: I = P r t = ( 3,400 − x ) ⋅ 0.05 ⋅ 1 = 0.05 ( 3,400 − x ) This equation models the problem with one variable. Solve for x. Back substitute. Answer: Mary invested $2,500 at 8% in a mutual fund and $900 at 5% in a CD.   Example 13: Joe has a handful of dimes and quarters that values $5.30. He has one fewer than twice as many dimes than quarters. How many of each coin does he have? Solution: Begin by identifying the variables. To determine the total value of a number of coins, multiply the number of coins by the value of each coin. For example, 5 quarters have a value $0.25 ⋅ 5 = $1.25. Solve for the number of quarters, q. Back substitute into 2q − 1 to find the number of dimes. Answer: Joe has 12 quarters and 23 dimes. Check by multiplying $0.25 ⋅ 12 = $3.00 and $0.10 ⋅ 23 = $2.30. Then add to obtain the correct amount: $3.00 + $2.30 = $5.30.   Try this! A total amount of $5,900 is invested in two accounts. One account earns 3.5% interest and another earns 4.5%. If the interest for 1 year is $229.50, then how much is invested in each account? Answer: $3,600 is invested at 3.5% and $2,300 at 4.5%. Video Solution  || Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Uniform motion refers to movement at a speed, or rate, that does not change. We can determine the distance traveled by multiplying the average rate by the time traveled at that rate with the formula D = r ⋅ t . Applications involving uniform motion usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize the data in a chart and then set up an algebraic equation that models the problem.   Example 14: Two trains leave the station at the same time traveling in opposite directions. One travels at 70 miles per hour and the other at 60 miles per hour. How long does it take for the distance between them to reach 390 miles? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in on the following chart. The time for each train is equal. To avoid introducing two more variables, use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances traveled by each train. We can now completely fill in the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the distance column. The problem asks for the time it takes for the total distance to reach 390 miles. Solve for t. Answer: It takes 3 hours for the distance between the trains to reach 390 miles.   Example 15: A train traveling nonstop to its destination is able to make the trip at an average speed of 72 miles per hour. On the return trip, the train makes several stops and is only able to average 48 miles per hour. If the return trip takes 2 hours longer than the initial trip to the destination, then what is the travel time each way? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in the following chart: Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is again defined by the distance column. In this case, the distance to the destination and back is the same, and the equation is Solve for t. The return trip takes t + 2 = 4 + 2 = 6 hours. Answer: It takes 4 hours to arrive at the destination and 6 hours to return.   Try this! Mary departs for school on a bicycle at an average rate of 6 miles per hour. Her sister Kate, running late, leaves 15 minutes later and cycles at twice that speed. How long will it take Kate to catch up to Mary? Be careful! Pay attention to the units given in the problem. Answer: It takes 15 minutes for Kate to catch up. Video Solution  ||  || Definitions A ratio Relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. is a relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. Ratios are typically expressed using the following notation: All of the above are equivalent forms used to express a ratio. However, the most familiar way to express a ratio is in the form of a fraction. When writing ratios, it is important to pay attention to the units. If the units are the same, then the ratio can be written without them.   Example 1: Express the ratio 12 feet to 48 feet in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 1 to 4   If the units are different, then we must be sure to include them because the ratio represents a rate A ratio where the units for the numerator and the denominator are different. .   Example 2: Express the ratio 220 miles to 4 hours in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 55 miles to 1 hour (or 55 miles per hour)   Rates are useful when determining unit cost The price of each unit. , or the price of each unit. We use the unit cost to compare values when the quantities are not the same. To determine the unit cost, divide the cost by the number of units.   Example 3: A local supermarket offers a pack of 12 sodas for $3.48 on sale, and the local discount warehouse offers the soda in a 36-can case for $11.52. Which is the better value? Solution: Divide the cost by the number of cans to obtain the unit price. Supermarket Discount warehouse $ 3.48 12     cans = $ 0.29 / can $ 11.52 36     cans = $ 0.32 / can Answer: The supermarket sale price of $3.48 for a 12-pack is a better value at $0.29 per can.   A proportion A statement of the equality of two ratios. is a statement of equality of two ratios. This proportion is often read “a is to b as c is to d.” Here is an example of a simple proportion, If we clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the proportion by the product of the denominators, 8, then we obtain the following true statement: Given any nonzero real numbers a, b, c, and d that satisfy a proportion, multiply both sides by the product of the denominators to obtain the following: This shows that cross products are equal, and is commonly referred to as cross multiplication If a b = c d , then a d = b c . .  || Solving Proportions Cross multiply to solve proportions where terms are unknown.   Example 4: Solve: 5 8 = n 4 . Solution: Cross multiply and then solve for n. Answer: n = 5 2   Example 5: Solve: 15 x = 5 6 . Solution: Cross multiply then solve for x. Answer: x = 18   Example 6: Solve: n + 3 5 = 7 2 . Solution: When cross multiplying, be sure to group n + 3 . Apply the distributive property in the next step. Answer: n = 29 2   Try this! Solve: 5 3 = 3 n − 1 2 . Answer: n = 13 9 Video Solution  || Applications When setting up proportions, consistency with the units of each ratio is critical. Units for the numerators should be the same and units for the denominators should also be the same.   Example 7: It is claimed that 2 out of 3 dentists prefer a certain brand of toothpaste. If 600 dentists are surveyed, then how many will say they prefer that brand? Solution: First, identify the unknown and assign it a variable. Since you are looking for the number of dentists who prefer the brand name out of a total of 600 surveyed, construct the ratios with the number of dentists who prefer the brand in the numerator and the total number surveyed in the denominator. Cross multiply and solve for n, Answer: The claim suggests that 400 out of 600 dentists surveyed prefer the brand name.   Example 8: In Tulare County, 3 out of every 7 voters said yes to Proposition 40. If 42,000 people voted, how many said no to Proposition 40? Solution: The problem gives the ratio of voters who said yes, but it asks for the number who said no. If 3 out of 7 said yes, then we can assume 4 out of 7 said no. Set up the ratios with the number of voters who said no in the numerator and the total number of voters in the denominator. Cross multiply and solve for n. Answer: 24,000 voters out of 42,000 said no.   Example 9: The sum of two integers in the ratio of 4 to 5 is 27. Find the integers. Solution: The sum of two integers is 27; use this relationship to avoid two variables. The integers are given to be in the ratio of 4 to 5. Set up the following proportion: Use 27 − n to determine the other integer. Answer: The integers are 12 and 15.   Try this! A recipe calls for 5 tablespoons of sugar for every 8 cups of flour. How many tablespoons of sugar are required for 32 cups of flour? Answer: 20 tablespoons of sugar Video Solution  || Similar Triangles We will often encounter proportion problems in geometry and trigonometry. One application involves similar triangles Triangles with the same shape but not necessarily the same size. The measures of corresponding angles are equal and the corresponding sides are proportional. , which have the same shape, but not necessarily the same size. The measures of the corresponding angles of similar triangles are equal, and the measures of the corresponding sides are proportional. Given similar triangles ABC and RST, We may write A B C   ~   R S T and conclude that all of the corresponding angles are equal. The notation indicates that angle A corresponds to angle R and that the measures of these angles are equal: A = R. In addition, the measures of other pairs of corresponding angles are equal: B = S and C = T. Use uppercase letters for angles and a lowercase letter to denote the side opposite of the given angle. Denote the proportionality of the sides as follows:   Example 10: If triangle ABC is similar to RST, where a = 3 , b = 4 , c = 5 , and r = 9 , then find the remaining two sides. Solution: Draw a picture and identify the variables pictorially. Represent the remaining unknown sides by s and t. Set up proportions and solve for the missing sides. Answer: The two remaining sides measure 12 units and 15 units.   The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles is called the scale factor The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles. . In the previous example, the ratio of the two given sides a and r is Therefore, triangle ABC is similar to triangle RST with a scale factor of 1/3. This means that each leg of triangle ABC is 1/3 of the measure of the corresponding legs of triangle RST. Also, another interesting fact is that the perimeters of similar triangles are in the same proportion as their sides and share the same scale factor.   Example 11: If a triangle ABC has a perimeter of 12 units and is similar to RST with a scale factor of 1/3, then find the perimeter of triangle RST. Solution: Scale factor 1/3 implies that the perimeters are in proportion to this ratio. Set up a proportion as follows: Cross multiply and solve for x. Answer: The perimeter of triangle RST is 36 units.  ||  || Unbounded Intervals An algebraic inequality Expressions related with the symbols ≤ , <, ≥ , and >. , such as x ≥ 2 , is read “x is greater than or equal to 2.” This inequality has infinitely many solutions for x. Some of the solutions are 2, 3, 3.5, 5, 20, and 20.001. Since it is impossible to list all of the solutions, a system is needed that allows a clear communication of this infinite set. Two common ways of expressing solutions to an inequality are by graphing them on a number line Solutions to an algebraic inequality expressed by shading the solution on a number line. and using interval notation A textual system of expressing solutions to an algebraic inequality. . To express the solution graphically, draw a number line and shade in all the values that are solutions to the inequality. Interval notation is textual and uses specific notation as follows: Determine the interval notation after graphing the solution set on a number line. The numbers in interval notation should be written in the same order as they appear on the number line, with smaller numbers in the set appearing first. In this example, there is an inclusive inequality An inequality that includes the boundary point indicated by the “or equal” part of the symbols ≤ and ≥ and a closed dot on the number line. , which means that the lower-bound 2 is included in the solution. Denote this with a closed dot on the number line and a square bracket in interval notation. The symbol (∞) is read as infinity The symbol (∞) indicates the interval is unbounded to the right. and indicates that the set is unbounded to the right on a number line. Interval notation requires a parenthesis to enclose infinity. The square bracket indicates the boundary is included in the solution. The parentheses indicate the boundary is not included. Infinity is an upper bound to the real numbers, but is not itself a real number: it cannot be included in the solution set. Now compare the interval notation in the previous example to that of the strict, or noninclusive, inequality that follows: Strict inequalities Express ordering relationships using the symbol < for “less than” and > for “greater than.” imply that solutions may get very close to the boundary point, in this case 2, but not actually include it. Denote this idea with an open dot on the number line and a round parenthesis in interval notation.   Example 1: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3 . Solution: Use an open dot at 3 and shade all real numbers strictly less than 3. Use negative infinity The symbol (−∞) indicates the interval is unbounded to the left. (−∞) to indicate that the solution set is unbounded to the left on a number line. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   Example 2: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x ≤ 5 . Solution: Use a closed dot and shade all numbers less than and including 5. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   5 ]   It is important to see that 5 ≥ x is the same as x ≤ 5 . Both require values of x to be smaller than or equal to 5. To avoid confusion, it is good practice to rewrite all inequalities with the variable on the left. Also, when using text, use “inf” as a shortened form of infinity. For example, ( − ∞ ,   5 ] can be expressed textually as (−inf, 5]. A compound inequality Two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” is actually two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” Compound inequalities with the logical “or” require that either condition must be satisfied. Therefore, the solution set of this type of compound inequality consists of all the elements of the solution sets of each inequality. When we join these individual solution sets it is called the union The set formed by joining the individual solution sets indicated by the logical use of the word “or” and denoted with the symbol ∪ . , denoted ∪ . For example, the solutions to the compound inequality x < 3   o r   x ≥ 6 can be graphed as follows: Sometimes we encounter compound inequalities where the separate solution sets overlap. In the case where the compound inequality contains the word “or,” we combine all the elements of both sets to create one set containing all the elements of each.   Example 3: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x ≤ − 1   or   x < 3 . Solution: Combine all solutions of both inequalities. The solutions to each inequality are sketched above the number line as a means to determine the union, which is graphed on the number line below. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   Any real number less than 3 in the shaded region on the number line will satisfy at least one of the two given inequalities.   Example 4: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3   or   x ≥ − 1 . Solution: Both solution sets are graphed above the union, which is graphed below. Answer: Interval notation: R = (−∞, ∞)   When you combine both solution sets and form the union, you can see that all real numbers satisfy the original compound inequality. In summary, and  || Bounded Intervals An inequality such as reads “−1 one is less than or equal to x and x is less than three.” This is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: The logical “and” requires that both conditions must be true. Both inequalities are satisfied by all the elements in the intersection The set formed by the shared values of the individual solution sets that is indicated by the logical use of the word “and,” denoted with the symbol ∩ . , denoted ∩ , of the solution sets of each.   Example 5: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3   and   x ≥ − 1 . Solution: Determine the intersection, or overlap, of the two solution sets. The solutions to each inequality are sketched above the number line as a means to determine the intersection, which is graphed on the number line below. Here x = 3 is not a solution because it solves only one of the inequalities. Answer: Interval notation: [ − 1 ,   3 )   Alternatively, we may interpret − 1 ≤ x < 3 as all possible values for x between or bounded by −1 and 3 on a number line. For example, one such solution is x = 1 . Notice that 1 is between −1 and 3 on a number line, or that −1 < 1 < 3. Similarly, we can see that other possible solutions are −1, −0.99, 0, 0.0056, 1.8, and 2.99. Since there are infinitely many real numbers between −1 and 3, we must express the solution graphically and/or with interval notation, in this case [ − 1 ,   3 ) .   Example 6: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: − 3 2 < x < 2 . Solution: Shade all real numbers bounded by, or strictly between, − 3 2 = − 1 1 2 and 2. Answer: Interval notation: ( − 3 2 ,   2 )   Example 7: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: − 5 < x ≤ 15 . Solution: Shade all real numbers between −5 and 15, and indicate that the upper bound, 15, is included in the solution set by using a closed dot. Answer: Interval notation: ( − 5 ,   15 ]   In the previous two examples, we did not decompose the inequalities; instead we chose to think of all real numbers between the two given bounds. In summary,  || Set-Builder Notation In this text, we use interval notation. However, other resources that you are likely to encounter use an alternate method for describing sets called set-builder notation A system for describing sets using familiar mathematical notation. . We have used set notation to list the elements such as the integers The braces group the elements of the set and the ellipsis marks indicate that the integers continue forever. In this section, we wish to describe intervals of real numbers—for example, the real numbers greater than or equal to 2. Since the set is too large to list, set-builder notation allows us to describe it using familiar mathematical notation. An example of set-builder notation follows: Here x∈R describes the type of number, where the symbol (∈) is read “element of.” This implies that the variable x represents a real number. The vertical bar (|) is read “such that.” Finally, the statement x ≥ 2 is the condition that describes the set using mathematical notation. At this point in our study of algebra, it is assumed that all variables represent real numbers. For this reason, you can omit the “∈R” and write { x | x ≥ 2 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal to 2.” To describe compound inequalities such as x < 3   or   x ≥ 6 , write { x | x < 3   or   x ≥ 6 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is less than 3 or x is greater than or equal to 6.” Write bounded intervals, such as − 1 ≤ x < 3 , as { x | − 1 ≤ x < 3 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal to −1 and less than 3.”  ||  || Definition of a Linear Inequality A linear inequality A mathematical statement relating a linear expression as either less than or greater than another. is a mathematical statement that relates a linear expression as either less than or greater than another. The following are some examples of linear inequalities, all of which are solved in this section: A solution to a linear inequality A real number that produces a true statement when its value is substituted for the variable. is a real number that will produce a true statement when substituted for the variable. Linear inequalities have either infinitely many solutions or no solution. If there are infinitely many solutions, graph the solution set on a number line and/or express the solution using interval notation.   Example 1: Are x = − 2 and x = 4 solutions to 3 x + 7 < 16 ? Solution: Substitute the values for x, simplify, and check to see if we obtain a true statement. Answer: x = − 2 is a solution and x = 4 is not.  || Algebra of Linear Inequalities All but one of the techniques learned for solving linear equations apply to solving linear inequalities. You may add or subtract any real number to both sides of an inequality, and you may multiply or divide both sides by any positive real number to create equivalent inequalities. For example, Both subtracting 7 from each side and dividing each side by +5 results in an equivalent inequality that is true.   Example 2: Solve and graph the solution set: 3 x + 7 < 16 . Solution: It is helpful to take a minute and choose a few values in and out of the solution set, substitute them into the original inequality, and then verify the results. As indicated, you should expect x = 0 to solve the original inequality, but x = 5 should not. Checking in this manner gives a good indication that the inequality is solved correctly. This can be done mentally. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   When working with linear inequalities, a different rule applies when multiplying or dividing by a negative number. To illustrate the problem, consider the true statement 10 > − 5 and divide both sides by −5. Dividing by −5 results in a false statement. To retain a true statement, the inequality must be reversed. The same problem occurs when multiplying by a negative number. This leads to the following new rule: when multiplying or dividing by a negative number, reverse the inequality. It is easy to forget to do this so take special care to watch for negative coefficients. In general, given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a positive nonzero real number, we have the following properties of inequalities Properties used to obtain equivalent inequalities and used as a means to solve them. : We use these properties to obtain an equivalent inequality Inequalities that share the same solution set. , one with the same solution set, where the variable is isolated. The process is similar to solving linear equations.   Example 3: Solve: − 2 x + 1 ≥ 21 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   − 10 ]   Example 4: Solve: − 7 ( 2 x + 1 ) < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4 7 ,   ∞ )   Example 5: Solve: 5 x − 3 ( 2 x − 1 ) ≥ 2 ( x − 3 ) . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ]   Try this! Solve: 3 − 5 ( x − 1 ) ≤ 28 . Answer: [ − 4 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution  || Compound Inequalities Following are some examples of compound linear inequalities: These compound inequalities Two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” are actually two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” For example, is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: Solve each inequality individually, and the intersection of the two solution sets solves the original compound inequality. While this method works, there is another method that usually requires fewer steps. Apply the properties of this section to all three parts of the compound inequality with the goal of isolating the variable in the middle of the statement to determine the bounds of the solution set.   Example 6: Solve: − 3 < 2 x + 5 < 17 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4, 6 )   Example 7: Solve: − 1 ≤ 1 2 x − 3 < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: [ 4, 8 )   It is important to note that when multiplying or dividing all three parts of a compound inequality by a negative number, you must reverse all of the inequalities in the statement. For example, The answer above can be written in an equivalent form, where smaller numbers lie to the left and the larger numbers lie to the right, as they appear on a number line. Using interval notation, write ( − 10 ,   5 ) .   Try this! Solve: − 8 ≤ 2 ( − 3 x + 5 ) < 34 . Answer: ( − 4 ,   3 ] Video Solution For compound inequalities with the word “or” you must work both inequalities separately and then consider the union of the solution sets. Values in this union solve either inequality.   Example 8: Solve: 3 x + 1 < 10   or   2 x − 1 ≥ 11 Solution: Solve each inequality and form the union by combining the solution sets. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ) ∪ [ 6 ,   ∞ )   Try this! Solve: 4 x − 1 < − 5   or   4 x − 1 > 5 . Answer: ( − ∞ , − 1 ) ∪ ( 3 2 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution  || Applications of Linear Inequalities Some of the key words and phrases that indicate inequalities are summarized below: Key Phrases Translation A number is at least 5. x ≥ 5 A number is 5 or more inclusive. A number is at most 3. x ≤ 3 A number is 3 or less inclusive. A number is strictly less than 4. x < 4 A number is less than 4, noninclusive. A number is greater than 7. x > 7 A number is more than 7, noninclusive. A number is in between 2 and 10. 2 < x < 10 A number is at least 5 and at most 15. 5 ≤ x ≤ 15 A number may range from 5 to 15. As with all applications, carefully read the problem several times and look for key words and phrases. Identify the unknowns and assign variables. Next, translate the wording into a mathematical inequality. Finally, use the properties you have learned to solve the inequality and express the solution graphically or in interval notation.   Example 9: Translate: Five less than twice a number is at most 25. Solution: First, choose a variable for the unknown number and identify the key words and phrases. Answer: 2 n − 5 ≤ 25 . The key phrase “is at most” indicates that the quantity has a maximum value of 25 or smaller.   Example 10: The temperature in the desert can range from 10°C to 45°C in one 24-hour period. Find the equivalent range in degrees Fahrenheit, F, given that C = 5 9 ( F − 32 ) . Solution: Set up a compound inequality where the temperature in Celsius is inclusively between 10°C and 45°C. Then substitute the expression equivalent to the Celsius temperature in the inequality and solve for F. Answer: The equivalent Fahrenheit range is from 50°F to 113°F.   Example 11: In the first four events of a meet, a gymnast scores 7.5, 8.2, 8.5, and 9.0. What must she score on the fifth event to average at least 8.5? Solution: The average must be at least 8.5; this means that the average must be greater than or equal to 8.5. Answer: She must score at least 9.3 on the fifth event.  || 
book2_chapter2_1	 || Preliminary Definitions In algebra, letters are used to represent numbers. The letters used to represent these numbers are called variables Letters or symbols used in algebra to represent numbers. . Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations form algebraic expressions Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations used to generalize specific arithmetic operations. , or just expressions. The following are some examples of expressions with one variable, x: Terms Components of an algebraic expression separated by addition operators. in an algebraic expression are separated by addition operators, and factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. are separated by multiplication operators. The numerical factor of a term is called the coefficient The numerical factor of a term. . For example, the algebraic expression 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 can be thought of as 3 x 2 + 2 x + ( − 1 ) and has three terms. The first term, 3 x 2 , represents the quantity 3 ⋅ x ⋅ x , where 3 is the coefficient and x is the variable. All of the variable factors, with their exponents, form the variable part of a term All the variable factors with their exponents. . If a term is written without a variable factor, then it is called a constant term A term written without a variable factor. . Consider the components of 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 , Terms Coefficient Variable Part 3 x 2 3 x 2 2 x 2 x −1 −1 The third term in this expression, −1, is a constant term because it is written without a variable factor. While a variable represents an unknown quantity and may change, the constant term does not change.   Example 1: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: 5 x 2 − 4 x y − y 2 . Solution: Think of the third term in this example, − y 2 , as − 1 y 2 . Terms Coefficient Variable Part 5 x 2 5 x 2 − 4 x y −4 x y − y 2 −1 y 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 4 ,   − 1 ,   5 } ; variable parts: { x 2 ,   x y ,   y 2 }   Some terms, such as y 2 and − y 2 , appear not to have a coefficient. The multiplicative identity property states that 1 times anything is itself and occurs so often that it is customary to omit this factor and write Therefore, the coefficient of y 2 is actually 1 and the coefficient of − y 2 is −1. In addition, you will encounter terms that have variable parts composed of algebraic expressions as factors.   Example 2: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: − 3 ( x + y ) 3 + ( x + y ) 2 . Solution: This is an expression with two terms: Terms Coefficient Variable Part − 3 ( x + y ) 3 −3 ( x + y ) 3 ( x + y ) 2 1 ( x + y ) 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 3 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { ( x + y ) 3 ,   ( x + y ) 2 }   In our study of algebra, we will encounter a wide variety of algebraic expressions. Typically, expressions use the two most common variables, x and y. However, expressions may use any letter (or symbol) for a variable, even Greek letters, such as alpha ( α ) and beta ( β ). Some letters and symbols are reserved for constants, such as π ≈ 3.14159 and e ≈ 2.71828 . Since there is only a limited number of letters, you will also use subscripts, x 1 ,   x 2 ,   x 3 ,   x 4 , … , to indicate different variables.   Try this! List all coefficients and variable parts of the expression: − 5 a 2 + a b − 2 b 2 − 3 . Answer: Coefficients: { − 5 ,   − 3 ,   − 2 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { a 2 ,   a b ,   b 2 } Video Solution  || Evaluating Algebraic Expressions Think of an algebraic expression as a generalization of particular arithmetic operations. Performing these operations after substituting given values for variables is called evaluating The process of performing the operations of an algebraic expression for given values of the variables. . In algebra, a variable represents an unknown value. However, if the problem specifically assigns a value to a variable, then you can replace that letter with the given number and evaluate using the order of operations.   Example 3: Evaluate: a. 2 x + 3 , where x = − 4 b. 2 3 y , where y = 9 Solution: To avoid common errors, it is a best practice to first replace all variables with parentheses and then replace, or substitute The act of replacing a variable with an equivalent quantity. , the given value. a. b. Answers: a. −5; b. 6   If parentheses are not used in part (a) of the previous example, the result is quite different: 2 x + 3 = 2 − 4 + 4 . Without parentheses, the first operation is subtraction, which leads to an incorrect result.   Example 4: Evaluate: − 2 x − y , where x = − 5 and y = − 3 . Solution: After substituting the given values for the variables, simplify using the order of operations. Answer: 13   Example 5: Evaluate: 9 a 2 − b 2 , where a = 2 and b = − 5 . Solution: Answer: 11   Example 6: Evaluate: − x 2 − 4 x + 1 , where x = − 1 2 . Solution: Answer: 11/4   The answer to the previous example is 11 4 , which can be written as a mixed number 2 3 4 . In algebra, improper fractions are generally preferred. Unless the original problem has mixed numbers in it, or it is an answer to a real-world application, solutions will be expressed as reduced improper fractions.   Example 7: Evaluate: ( 3 x − 2 ) ( x − 7 ) , where x = 2 3 . Solution: The order of operations requires us to perform the operations within the parentheses first. Answer: 0   Example 8: Evaluate: b 2 − 4 a c , where a = − 1 , b = − 3 , and c = 2 . Solution: The expression b 2 − 4 a c is called the discriminant The algebraic expression b 2 − 4 a c . ; it is an essential quantity seen later in our study of algebra. Answer: 17   Try this! Evaluate a 3 − b 3 , where a = 2 and b = − 3 . Answer: 35 Video Solution  || Using Formulas The main difference between algebra and arithmetic is the organized use of variables. This idea leads to reusable formulas A reusable mathematical model using algebraic expressions to describe a common application. , which are mathematical models using algebraic expressions to describe common applications. For example, the area of a rectangle is modeled by the formula: In this equation, variables are used to describe the relationship between the area of a rectangle and the length of its sides. The area is the product of the length and width of the rectangle. If the length of a rectangle measures 3 meters and the width measures 2 meters, then the area can be calculated using the formula as follows:   Example 9: The cost of a daily truck rental is $48.00 plus an additional $0.45 for every mile driven. This cost in dollars can be modeled by the formula c o s t = 0.45 x + 48 , where x represents the number of miles driven in one day. Use this formula to calculate the cost to rent the truck for a day and drive it 120 miles. Solution: Use the formula to find the cost when the number of miles x = 120 . Substitute 120 into the given formula for x and then simplify. Answer: The rental costs $102.   Uniform motion Described by the formula D = r t , where the distance D is given as the product of the average rate r and the time t traveled at that rate. is modeled by the formula D = r t , which expresses distance D in terms of the average rate r, or speed, and the time t traveled at that rate. This formula, D = r t , is used often and is read “distance equals rate times time.”   Example 10: Jim’s road trip takes 2 1 2 hours at an average speed of 66 miles per hour. How far does he travel? Solution: Substitute the appropriate values into the formula and then simplify. Answer: Jim travels 165 miles.   The volume in cubic units of a rectangular box is given by the formula V = l w h , where l represents the length, w represents the width, and h represents the height.   Example 11: A wooden box is 1 foot in length, 5 inches wide, and 6 inches high. Find the volume of the box in cubic inches. Solution: Take care to ensure that all the units are consistent and use 12 inches for the length instead of 1 foot. Answer: The volume of the box is 360 cubic inches.   Simple interest Modeled by the formula I = p r t , where p represents the principal amount invested at an annual interest rate r for t years. I is given by the formula I = p r t , where p represents the principal amount invested at an annual interest rate r for t years.   Example 12: Calculate the simple interest earned on a 2-year investment of $1,250 at an annual interest rate of 3 3 4 % . Solution: Convert 3 3 4 % to a decimal number before using it in the formula. Use this value for r and the fact that p = $1,250 and t = 2 years to calculate the simple interest. Answer: The simple interest earned is $93.75.   Try this! The perimeter of a rectangle is given by the formula P = 2 l + 2 w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. Use the formula to calculate the perimeter of a rectangle with a length of 5 feet and a width of 2 1 2 feet. Answer: 15 feet Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_1_1	Preliminary Definitions In algebra, letters are used to represent numbers. The letters used to represent these numbers are called variables Letters or symbols used in algebra to represent numbers. . Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations form algebraic expressions Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations used to generalize specific arithmetic operations. , or just expressions. The following are some examples of expressions with one variable, x: Terms Components of an algebraic expression separated by addition operators. in an algebraic expression are separated by addition operators, and factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. are separated by multiplication operators. The numerical factor of a term is called the coefficient The numerical factor of a term. . For example, the algebraic expression 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 can be thought of as 3 x 2 + 2 x + ( − 1 ) and has three terms. The first term, 3 x 2 , represents the quantity 3 ⋅ x ⋅ x , where 3 is the coefficient and x is the variable. All of the variable factors, with their exponents, form the variable part of a term All the variable factors with their exponents. . If a term is written without a variable factor, then it is called a constant term A term written without a variable factor. . Consider the components of 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 , Terms Coefficient Variable Part 3 x 2 3 x 2 2 x 2 x −1 −1 The third term in this expression, −1, is a constant term because it is written without a variable factor. While a variable represents an unknown quantity and may change, the constant term does not change.   Example 1: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: 5 x 2 − 4 x y − y 2 . Solution: Think of the third term in this example, − y 2 , as − 1 y 2 . Terms Coefficient Variable Part 5 x 2 5 x 2 − 4 x y −4 x y − y 2 −1 y 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 4 ,   − 1 ,   5 } ; variable parts: { x 2 ,   x y ,   y 2 }   Some terms, such as y 2 and − y 2 , appear not to have a coefficient. The multiplicative identity property states that 1 times anything is itself and occurs so often that it is customary to omit this factor and write Therefore, the coefficient of y 2 is actually 1 and the coefficient of − y 2 is −1. In addition, you will encounter terms that have variable parts composed of algebraic expressions as factors.   Example 2: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: − 3 ( x + y ) 3 + ( x + y ) 2 . Solution: This is an expression with two terms: Terms Coefficient Variable Part − 3 ( x + y ) 3 −3 ( x + y ) 3 ( x + y ) 2 1 ( x + y ) 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 3 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { ( x + y ) 3 ,   ( x + y ) 2 }   In our study of algebra, we will encounter a wide variety of algebraic expressions. Typically, expressions use the two most common variables, x and y. However, expressions may use any letter (or symbol) for a variable, even Greek letters, such as alpha ( α ) and beta ( β ). Some letters and symbols are reserved for constants, such as π ≈ 3.14159 and e ≈ 2.71828 . Since there is only a limited number of letters, you will also use subscripts, x 1 ,   x 2 ,   x 3 ,   x 4 , … , to indicate different variables.   Try this! List all coefficients and variable parts of the expression: − 5 a 2 + a b − 2 b 2 − 3 . Answer: Coefficients: { − 5 ,   − 3 ,   − 2 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { a 2 ,   a b ,   b 2 } Video Solution Preliminary Definitions In algebra, letters are used to represent numbers. The letters used to represent these numbers are called variables Letters or symbols used in algebra to represent numbers. . Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations form algebraic expressions Combinations of variables and numbers along with mathematical operations used to generalize specific arithmetic operations. , or just expressions. The following are some examples of expressions with one variable, x: Terms Components of an algebraic expression separated by addition operators. in an algebraic expression are separated by addition operators, and factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. are separated by multiplication operators. The numerical factor of a term is called the coefficient The numerical factor of a term. . For example, the algebraic expression 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 can be thought of as 3 x 2 + 2 x + ( − 1 ) and has three terms. The first term, 3 x 2 , represents the quantity 3 ⋅ x ⋅ x , where 3 is the coefficient and x is the variable. All of the variable factors, with their exponents, form the variable part of a term All the variable factors with their exponents. . If a term is written without a variable factor, then it is called a constant term A term written without a variable factor. . Consider the components of 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 , Terms Coefficient Variable Part 3 x 2 3 x 2 2 x 2 x −1 −1 The third term in this expression, −1, is a constant term because it is written without a variable factor. While a variable represents an unknown quantity and may change, the constant term does not change.   Example 1: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: 5 x 2 − 4 x y − y 2 . Solution: Think of the third term in this example, − y 2 , as − 1 y 2 . Terms Coefficient Variable Part 5 x 2 5 x 2 − 4 x y −4 x y − y 2 −1 y 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 4 ,   − 1 ,   5 } ; variable parts: { x 2 ,   x y ,   y 2 }   Some terms, such as y 2 and − y 2 , appear not to have a coefficient. The multiplicative identity property states that 1 times anything is itself and occurs so often that it is customary to omit this factor and write Therefore, the coefficient of y 2 is actually 1 and the coefficient of − y 2 is −1. In addition, you will encounter terms that have variable parts composed of algebraic expressions as factors.   Example 2: List all coefficients and variable parts of each term: − 3 ( x + y ) 3 + ( x + y ) 2 . Solution: This is an expression with two terms: Terms Coefficient Variable Part − 3 ( x + y ) 3 −3 ( x + y ) 3 ( x + y ) 2 1 ( x + y ) 2 Answer: Coefficients: { − 3 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { ( x + y ) 3 ,   ( x + y ) 2 }   In our study of algebra, we will encounter a wide variety of algebraic expressions. Typically, expressions use the two most common variables, x and y. However, expressions may use any letter (or symbol) for a variable, even Greek letters, such as alpha ( α ) and beta ( β ). Some letters and symbols are reserved for constants, such as π ≈ 3.14159 and e ≈ 2.71828 . Since there is only a limited number of letters, you will also use subscripts, x 1 ,   x 2 ,   x 3 ,   x 4 , … , to indicate different variables.   Try this! List all coefficients and variable parts of the expression: − 5 a 2 + a b − 2 b 2 − 3 . Answer: Coefficients: { − 5 ,   − 3 ,   − 2 ,   1 } ; variable parts: { a 2 ,   a b ,   b 2 } Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_1_2	Evaluating Algebraic Expressions Think of an algebraic expression as a generalization of particular arithmetic operations. Performing these operations after substituting given values for variables is called evaluating The process of performing the operations of an algebraic expression for given values of the variables. . In algebra, a variable represents an unknown value. However, if the problem specifically assigns a value to a variable, then you can replace that letter with the given number and evaluate using the order of operations.   Example 3: Evaluate: a. 2 x + 3 , where x = − 4 b. 2 3 y , where y = 9 Solution: To avoid common errors, it is a best practice to first replace all variables with parentheses and then replace, or substitute The act of replacing a variable with an equivalent quantity. , the given value. a. b. Answers: a. −5; b. 6   If parentheses are not used in part (a) of the previous example, the result is quite different: 2 x + 3 = 2 − 4 + 4 . Without parentheses, the first operation is subtraction, which leads to an incorrect result.   Example 4: Evaluate: − 2 x − y , where x = − 5 and y = − 3 . Solution: After substituting the given values for the variables, simplify using the order of operations. Answer: 13   Example 5: Evaluate: 9 a 2 − b 2 , where a = 2 and b = − 5 . Solution: Answer: 11   Example 6: Evaluate: − x 2 − 4 x + 1 , where x = − 1 2 . Solution: Answer: 11/4   The answer to the previous example is 11 4 , which can be written as a mixed number 2 3 4 . In algebra, improper fractions are generally preferred. Unless the original problem has mixed numbers in it, or it is an answer to a real-world application, solutions will be expressed as reduced improper fractions.   Example 7: Evaluate: ( 3 x − 2 ) ( x − 7 ) , where x = 2 3 . Solution: The order of operations requires us to perform the operations within the parentheses first. Answer: 0   Example 8: Evaluate: b 2 − 4 a c , where a = − 1 , b = − 3 , and c = 2 . Solution: The expression b 2 − 4 a c is called the discriminant The algebraic expression b 2 − 4 a c . ; it is an essential quantity seen later in our study of algebra. Answer: 17   Try this! Evaluate a 3 − b 3 , where a = 2 and b = − 3 . Answer: 35 Video Solution Evaluating Algebraic Expressions Think of an algebraic expression as a generalization of particular arithmetic operations. Performing these operations after substituting given values for variables is called evaluating The process of performing the operations of an algebraic expression for given values of the variables. . In algebra, a variable represents an unknown value. However, if the problem specifically assigns a value to a variable, then you can replace that letter with the given number and evaluate using the order of operations.   Example 3: Evaluate: a. 2 x + 3 , where x = − 4 b. 2 3 y , where y = 9 Solution: To avoid common errors, it is a best practice to first replace all variables with parentheses and then replace, or substitute The act of replacing a variable with an equivalent quantity. , the given value. a. b. Answers: a. −5; b. 6   If parentheses are not used in part (a) of the previous example, the result is quite different: 2 x + 3 = 2 − 4 + 4 . Without parentheses, the first operation is subtraction, which leads to an incorrect result.   Example 4: Evaluate: − 2 x − y , where x = − 5 and y = − 3 . Solution: After substituting the given values for the variables, simplify using the order of operations. Answer: 13   Example 5: Evaluate: 9 a 2 − b 2 , where a = 2 and b = − 5 . Solution: Answer: 11   Example 6: Evaluate: − x 2 − 4 x + 1 , where x = − 1 2 . Solution: Answer: 11/4   The answer to the previous example is 11 4 , which can be written as a mixed number 2 3 4 . In algebra, improper fractions are generally preferred. Unless the original problem has mixed numbers in it, or it is an answer to a real-world application, solutions will be expressed as reduced improper fractions.   Example 7: Evaluate: ( 3 x − 2 ) ( x − 7 ) , where x = 2 3 . Solution: The order of operations requires us to perform the operations within the parentheses first. Answer: 0   Example 8: Evaluate: b 2 − 4 a c , where a = − 1 , b = − 3 , and c = 2 . Solution: The expression b 2 − 4 a c is called the discriminant The algebraic expression b 2 − 4 a c . ; it is an essential quantity seen later in our study of algebra. Answer: 17   Try this! Evaluate a 3 − b 3 , where a = 2 and b = − 3 . Answer: 35 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_1_3	Using Formulas The main difference between algebra and arithmetic is the organized use of variables. This idea leads to reusable formulas A reusable mathematical model using algebraic expressions to describe a common application. , which are mathematical models using algebraic expressions to describe common applications. For example, the area of a rectangle is modeled by the formula: In this equation, variables are used to describe the relationship between the area of a rectangle and the length of its sides. The area is the product of the length and width of the rectangle. If the length of a rectangle measures 3 meters and the width measures 2 meters, then the area can be calculated using the formula as follows:   Example 9: The cost of a daily truck rental is $48.00 plus an additional $0.45 for every mile driven. This cost in dollars can be modeled by the formula c o s t = 0.45 x + 48 , where x represents the number of miles driven in one day. Use this formula to calculate the cost to rent the truck for a day and drive it 120 miles. Solution: Use the formula to find the cost when the number of miles x = 120 . Substitute 120 into the given formula for x and then simplify. Answer: The rental costs $102.   Uniform motion Described by the formula D = r t , where the distance D is given as the product of the average rate r and the time t traveled at that rate. is modeled by the formula D = r t , which expresses distance D in terms of the average rate r, or speed, and the time t traveled at that rate. This formula, D = r t , is used often and is read “distance equals rate times time.”   Example 10: Jim’s road trip takes 2 1 2 hours at an average speed of 66 miles per hour. How far does he travel? Solution: Substitute the appropriate values into the formula and then simplify. Answer: Jim travels 165 miles.   The volume in cubic units of a rectangular box is given by the formula V = l w h , where l represents the length, w represents the width, and h represents the height.   Example 11: A wooden box is 1 foot in length, 5 inches wide, and 6 inches high. Find the volume of the box in cubic inches. Solution: Take care to ensure that all the units are consistent and use 12 inches for the length instead of 1 foot. Answer: The volume of the box is 360 cubic inches.   Simple interest Modeled by the formula I = p r t , where p represents the principal amount invested at an annual interest rate r for t years. I is given by the formula I = p r t , where p represents the principal amount invested at an annual interest rate r for t years.   Example 12: Calculate the simple interest earned on a 2-year investment of $1,250 at an annual interest rate of 3 3 4 % . Solution: Convert 3 3 4 % to a decimal number before using it in the formula. Use this value for r and the fact that p = $1,250 and t = 2 years to calculate the simple interest. Answer: The simple interest earned is $93.75.   Try this! The perimeter of a rectangle is given by the formula P = 2 l + 2 w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. Use the formula to calculate the perimeter of a rectangle with a length of 5 feet and a width of 2 1 2 feet. Answer: 15 feet Video Solution Using Formulas The main difference between algebra and arithmetic is the organized use of variables. This idea leads to reusable formulas A reusable mathematical model using algebraic expressions to describe a common application. , which are mathematical models using algebraic expressions to describe common applications. For example, the area of a rectangle is modeled by the formula: In this equation, variables are used to describe the relationship between the area of a rectangle and the length of its sides. The area is the product of the length and width of the rectangle. If the length of a rectangle measures 3 meters and the width measures 2 meters, then the area can be calculated using the formula as follows:   Example 9: The cost of a daily truck rental is $48.00 plus an additional $0.45 for every mile driven. This cost in dollars can be modeled by the formula c o s t = 0.45 x + 48 , where x represents the number of miles driven in one day. Use this formula to calculate the cost to rent the truck for a day and drive it 120 miles. Solution: Use the formula to find the cost when the number of miles x = 120 . Substitute 120 into the given formula for x and then simplify. Answer: The rental costs $102.   Uniform motion Described by the formula D = r t , where the distance D is given as the product of the average rate r and the time t traveled at that rate. is modeled by the formula D = r t , which expresses distance D in terms of the average rate r, or speed, and the time t traveled at that rate. This formula, D = r t , is used often and is read “distance equals rate times time.”   Example 10: Jim’s road trip takes 2 1 2 hours at an average speed of 66 miles per hour. How far does he travel? Solution: Substitute the appropriate values into the formula and then simplify. Answer: Jim travels 165 miles.   The volume in cubic units of a rectangular box is given by the formula V = l w h , where l represents the length, w represents the width, and h represents the height.   Example 11: A wooden box is 1 foot in length, 5 inches wide, and 6 inches high. Find the volume of the box in cubic inches. Solution: Take care to ensure that all the units are consistent and use 12 inches for the length instead of 1 foot. Answer: The volume of the box is 360 cubic inches.   Simple interest Modeled by the formula I = p r t , where p represents the principal amount invested at an annual interest rate r for t years. I is given by the formula I = p r t , where p represents the principal amount invested at an annual interest rate r for t years.   Example 12: Calculate the simple interest earned on a 2-year investment of $1,250 at an annual interest rate of 3 3 4 % . Solution: Convert 3 3 4 % to a decimal number before using it in the formula. Use this value for r and the fact that p = $1,250 and t = 2 years to calculate the simple interest. Answer: The simple interest earned is $93.75.   Try this! The perimeter of a rectangle is given by the formula P = 2 l + 2 w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. Use the formula to calculate the perimeter of a rectangle with a length of 5 feet and a width of 2 1 2 feet. Answer: 15 feet Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_2	 || Distributive Property The properties of real numbers are important in our study of algebra because a variable is simply a letter that represents a real number. In particular, the distributive property Given any real numbers a, b, and c, a ( b + c ) = a b + a c or ( b + c ) a = b a + c a . states that given any real numbers a, b, and c, This property is applied when simplifying algebraic expressions. To demonstrate how it is used, we simplify 2 ( 5 − 3 ) in two ways, and observe the same correct result. Certainly, if the contents of the parentheses can be simplified, do that first. On the other hand, when the contents of parentheses cannot be simplified, multiply every term within the parentheses by the factor outside of the parentheses using the distributive property. Applying the distributive property allows you to multiply and remove the parentheses.   Example 1: Simplify: 5 ( 7 y + 2 ) . Solution: Multiply 5 times each term inside the parentheses. Answer: 35 y + 10   Example 2: Simplify: − 3 ( 2 x 2 + 5 x + 1 ) . Solution: Multiply −3 times each of the coefficients of the terms inside the parentheses. Answer: − 6 x 2 − 15 x − 3   Example 3: Simplify: 5 ( − 2 a + 5 b ) − 2 c . Solution: Apply the distributive property by multiplying only the terms grouped within the parentheses by 5. Answer: − 10 a + 25 b − 2 c   Because multiplication is commutative, we can also write the distributive property in the following manner: ( b + c ) a = b a + c a .   Example 4: Simplify: ( 3 x − 4 y + 1 ) ⋅ 3 . Solution: Multiply each term within the parentheses by 3. Answer: 9 x − 12 y + 3   Division in algebra is often indicated using the fraction bar rather than with the symbol (÷). And sometimes it is useful to rewrite expressions involving division as products: Rewriting algebraic expressions as products allows us to apply the distributive property.   Example 5: Divide: 25 x 2 − 5 x + 10 5 . Solution: First, treat this as 1 5 times the expression in the numerator and then distribute. Alternate Solution: Think of 5 as a common denominator and divide each of the terms in the numerator by 5: Answer: 5 x 2 − x + 2   We will discuss the division of algebraic expressions in more detail as we progress through the course.   Try this! Simplify: 1 3 ( − 9 x + 27 y − 3 ) . Answer: − 3 x + 9 y − 1 Video Solution  || Combining Like Terms Terms with the same variable parts are called like terms Constant terms or terms with the same variable parts. , or similar terms Used when referring to like terms. . Furthermore, constant terms are considered to be like terms. If an algebraic expression contains like terms, apply the distributive property as follows: In other words, if the variable parts of terms are exactly the same, then we may add or subtract the coefficients to obtain the coefficient of a single term with the same variable part. This process is called combining like terms Adding or subtracting like terms within an algebraic expression to obtain a single term with the same variable part. . For example, Notice that the variable factors and their exponents do not change. Combining like terms in this manner, so that the expression contains no other similar terms, is called simplifying the expression The process of combining like terms until the expression contains no more similar terms. . Use this idea to simplify algebraic expressions with multiple like terms.   Example 6: Simplify: 3 a + 2 b − 4 a + 9 b . Solution: Identify the like terms and combine them. Answer: − a + 11 b   In the previous example, rearranging the terms is typically performed mentally and is not shown in the presentation of the solution.   Example 7: Simplify: x 2 + 3 x + 2 + 4 x 2 − 5 x − 7 . Solution: Identify the like terms and add the corresponding coefficients. Answer: 5 x 2 − 2 x − 5   Example 8: Simplify: 5 x 2 y − 3 x y 2 + 4 x 2 y − 2 x y 2 . Solution: Remember to leave the variable factors and their exponents unchanged in the resulting combined term. Answer: 9 x 2 y − 5 x y 2   Example 9: Simplify: 1 2 a − 1 3 b + 3 4 a + b . Solution: To add the fractional coefficients, use equivalent coefficients with common denominators for each like term. Answer: 5 4 a + 2 3 b   Example 10: Simplify: − 12 x ( x + y ) 3 + 26 x ( x + y ) 3 . Solution: Consider the variable part to be x ( x + y ) 3 . Then this expression has two like terms with coefficients −12 and 26. Answer: 14 x ( x + y ) 3   Try this! Simplify: − 7 x + 8 y − 2 x − 3 y . Answer: − 9 x + 5 y Video Solution  || Distributive Property and Like Terms When simplifying, we will often have to combine like terms after we apply the distributive property. This step is consistent with the order of operations: multiplication before addition.   Example 11: Simplify: 2 ( 3 a − b ) − 7 ( − 2 a + 3 b ) . Solution: Distribute 2 and −7 and then combine like terms. Answer: 20 a − 23 b   In the example above, it is important to point out that you can remove the parentheses and collect like terms because you multiply the second quantity by −7, not just by 7. To correctly apply the distributive property, think of this as adding −7 times the given quantity, 2 ( 3 a − b ) + ( − 7 ) ( − 2 a + 3 b ) .   Try this! Simplify: − 5 ( 2 x − 3 ) + 7 x . Answer: − 3 x + 15 Video Solution Often we will encounter algebraic expressions like + ( a + b ) or − ( a + b ) . As we have seen, the coefficients are actually implied to be +1 and −1, respectively, and therefore, the distributive property applies using +1 or –1 as the factor. Multiply each term within the parentheses by these factors: This leads to two useful properties,   Example 12: Simplify: 5 x − ( − 2 x 2 + 3 x − 1 ) . Solution: Multiply each term within the parentheses by −1 and then combine like terms. Answer: 2 x 2 + 2 x + 1   When distributing a negative number, all of the signs within the parentheses will change. Note that 5 x in the example above is a separate term; hence the distributive property does not apply to it.   Example 13: Simplify: 5 − 2 ( x 2 − 4 x − 3 ) . Solution: The order of operations requires that we multiply before subtracting. Therefore, distribute −2 and then combine the constant terms. Subtracting 5 − 2 first leads to an incorrect result, as illustrated below: Answer: −2x2 + 8x + 11 Caution It is worth repeating that you must follow the order of operations: multiply and divide before adding and subtracting! Try this! Simplify: 8 − 3 ( − x 2 + 2 x − 7 ) . Answer: 3 x 2 − 6 x + 29 Video Solution   Example 14: Subtract 3 x − 2 from twice the quantity − 4 x 2 + 2 x − 8 . Solution: First, group each expression and treat each as a quantity: Next, identify the key words and translate them into a mathematical expression. Finally, simplify the resulting expression. Answer: − 8 x 2 + x − 14  || 
book2_chapter2_2_1	Distributive Property The properties of real numbers are important in our study of algebra because a variable is simply a letter that represents a real number. In particular, the distributive property Given any real numbers a, b, and c, a ( b + c ) = a b + a c or ( b + c ) a = b a + c a . states that given any real numbers a, b, and c, This property is applied when simplifying algebraic expressions. To demonstrate how it is used, we simplify 2 ( 5 − 3 ) in two ways, and observe the same correct result. Certainly, if the contents of the parentheses can be simplified, do that first. On the other hand, when the contents of parentheses cannot be simplified, multiply every term within the parentheses by the factor outside of the parentheses using the distributive property. Applying the distributive property allows you to multiply and remove the parentheses.   Example 1: Simplify: 5 ( 7 y + 2 ) . Solution: Multiply 5 times each term inside the parentheses. Answer: 35 y + 10   Example 2: Simplify: − 3 ( 2 x 2 + 5 x + 1 ) . Solution: Multiply −3 times each of the coefficients of the terms inside the parentheses. Answer: − 6 x 2 − 15 x − 3   Example 3: Simplify: 5 ( − 2 a + 5 b ) − 2 c . Solution: Apply the distributive property by multiplying only the terms grouped within the parentheses by 5. Answer: − 10 a + 25 b − 2 c   Because multiplication is commutative, we can also write the distributive property in the following manner: ( b + c ) a = b a + c a .   Example 4: Simplify: ( 3 x − 4 y + 1 ) ⋅ 3 . Solution: Multiply each term within the parentheses by 3. Answer: 9 x − 12 y + 3   Division in algebra is often indicated using the fraction bar rather than with the symbol (÷). And sometimes it is useful to rewrite expressions involving division as products: Rewriting algebraic expressions as products allows us to apply the distributive property.   Example 5: Divide: 25 x 2 − 5 x + 10 5 . Solution: First, treat this as 1 5 times the expression in the numerator and then distribute. Alternate Solution: Think of 5 as a common denominator and divide each of the terms in the numerator by 5: Answer: 5 x 2 − x + 2   We will discuss the division of algebraic expressions in more detail as we progress through the course.   Try this! Simplify: 1 3 ( − 9 x + 27 y − 3 ) . Answer: − 3 x + 9 y − 1 Video Solution Distributive Property The properties of real numbers are important in our study of algebra because a variable is simply a letter that represents a real number. In particular, the distributive property Given any real numbers a, b, and c, a ( b + c ) = a b + a c or ( b + c ) a = b a + c a . states that given any real numbers a, b, and c, This property is applied when simplifying algebraic expressions. To demonstrate how it is used, we simplify 2 ( 5 − 3 ) in two ways, and observe the same correct result. Certainly, if the contents of the parentheses can be simplified, do that first. On the other hand, when the contents of parentheses cannot be simplified, multiply every term within the parentheses by the factor outside of the parentheses using the distributive property. Applying the distributive property allows you to multiply and remove the parentheses.   Example 1: Simplify: 5 ( 7 y + 2 ) . Solution: Multiply 5 times each term inside the parentheses. Answer: 35 y + 10   Example 2: Simplify: − 3 ( 2 x 2 + 5 x + 1 ) . Solution: Multiply −3 times each of the coefficients of the terms inside the parentheses. Answer: − 6 x 2 − 15 x − 3   Example 3: Simplify: 5 ( − 2 a + 5 b ) − 2 c . Solution: Apply the distributive property by multiplying only the terms grouped within the parentheses by 5. Answer: − 10 a + 25 b − 2 c   Because multiplication is commutative, we can also write the distributive property in the following manner: ( b + c ) a = b a + c a .   Example 4: Simplify: ( 3 x − 4 y + 1 ) ⋅ 3 . Solution: Multiply each term within the parentheses by 3. Answer: 9 x − 12 y + 3   Division in algebra is often indicated using the fraction bar rather than with the symbol (÷). And sometimes it is useful to rewrite expressions involving division as products: Rewriting algebraic expressions as products allows us to apply the distributive property.   Example 5: Divide: 25 x 2 − 5 x + 10 5 . Solution: First, treat this as 1 5 times the expression in the numerator and then distribute. Alternate Solution: Think of 5 as a common denominator and divide each of the terms in the numerator by 5: Answer: 5 x 2 − x + 2   We will discuss the division of algebraic expressions in more detail as we progress through the course.   Try this! Simplify: 1 3 ( − 9 x + 27 y − 3 ) . Answer: − 3 x + 9 y − 1 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_2_2	Combining Like Terms Terms with the same variable parts are called like terms Constant terms or terms with the same variable parts. , or similar terms Used when referring to like terms. . Furthermore, constant terms are considered to be like terms. If an algebraic expression contains like terms, apply the distributive property as follows: In other words, if the variable parts of terms are exactly the same, then we may add or subtract the coefficients to obtain the coefficient of a single term with the same variable part. This process is called combining like terms Adding or subtracting like terms within an algebraic expression to obtain a single term with the same variable part. . For example, Notice that the variable factors and their exponents do not change. Combining like terms in this manner, so that the expression contains no other similar terms, is called simplifying the expression The process of combining like terms until the expression contains no more similar terms. . Use this idea to simplify algebraic expressions with multiple like terms.   Example 6: Simplify: 3 a + 2 b − 4 a + 9 b . Solution: Identify the like terms and combine them. Answer: − a + 11 b   In the previous example, rearranging the terms is typically performed mentally and is not shown in the presentation of the solution.   Example 7: Simplify: x 2 + 3 x + 2 + 4 x 2 − 5 x − 7 . Solution: Identify the like terms and add the corresponding coefficients. Answer: 5 x 2 − 2 x − 5   Example 8: Simplify: 5 x 2 y − 3 x y 2 + 4 x 2 y − 2 x y 2 . Solution: Remember to leave the variable factors and their exponents unchanged in the resulting combined term. Answer: 9 x 2 y − 5 x y 2   Example 9: Simplify: 1 2 a − 1 3 b + 3 4 a + b . Solution: To add the fractional coefficients, use equivalent coefficients with common denominators for each like term. Answer: 5 4 a + 2 3 b   Example 10: Simplify: − 12 x ( x + y ) 3 + 26 x ( x + y ) 3 . Solution: Consider the variable part to be x ( x + y ) 3 . Then this expression has two like terms with coefficients −12 and 26. Answer: 14 x ( x + y ) 3   Try this! Simplify: − 7 x + 8 y − 2 x − 3 y . Answer: − 9 x + 5 y Video Solution Combining Like Terms Terms with the same variable parts are called like terms Constant terms or terms with the same variable parts. , or similar terms Used when referring to like terms. . Furthermore, constant terms are considered to be like terms. If an algebraic expression contains like terms, apply the distributive property as follows: In other words, if the variable parts of terms are exactly the same, then we may add or subtract the coefficients to obtain the coefficient of a single term with the same variable part. This process is called combining like terms Adding or subtracting like terms within an algebraic expression to obtain a single term with the same variable part. . For example, Notice that the variable factors and their exponents do not change. Combining like terms in this manner, so that the expression contains no other similar terms, is called simplifying the expression The process of combining like terms until the expression contains no more similar terms. . Use this idea to simplify algebraic expressions with multiple like terms.   Example 6: Simplify: 3 a + 2 b − 4 a + 9 b . Solution: Identify the like terms and combine them. Answer: − a + 11 b   In the previous example, rearranging the terms is typically performed mentally and is not shown in the presentation of the solution.   Example 7: Simplify: x 2 + 3 x + 2 + 4 x 2 − 5 x − 7 . Solution: Identify the like terms and add the corresponding coefficients. Answer: 5 x 2 − 2 x − 5   Example 8: Simplify: 5 x 2 y − 3 x y 2 + 4 x 2 y − 2 x y 2 . Solution: Remember to leave the variable factors and their exponents unchanged in the resulting combined term. Answer: 9 x 2 y − 5 x y 2   Example 9: Simplify: 1 2 a − 1 3 b + 3 4 a + b . Solution: To add the fractional coefficients, use equivalent coefficients with common denominators for each like term. Answer: 5 4 a + 2 3 b   Example 10: Simplify: − 12 x ( x + y ) 3 + 26 x ( x + y ) 3 . Solution: Consider the variable part to be x ( x + y ) 3 . Then this expression has two like terms with coefficients −12 and 26. Answer: 14 x ( x + y ) 3   Try this! Simplify: − 7 x + 8 y − 2 x − 3 y . Answer: − 9 x + 5 y Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_2_3	Distributive Property and Like Terms When simplifying, we will often have to combine like terms after we apply the distributive property. This step is consistent with the order of operations: multiplication before addition.   Example 11: Simplify: 2 ( 3 a − b ) − 7 ( − 2 a + 3 b ) . Solution: Distribute 2 and −7 and then combine like terms. Answer: 20 a − 23 b   In the example above, it is important to point out that you can remove the parentheses and collect like terms because you multiply the second quantity by −7, not just by 7. To correctly apply the distributive property, think of this as adding −7 times the given quantity, 2 ( 3 a − b ) + ( − 7 ) ( − 2 a + 3 b ) .   Try this! Simplify: − 5 ( 2 x − 3 ) + 7 x . Answer: − 3 x + 15 Video Solution Often we will encounter algebraic expressions like + ( a + b ) or − ( a + b ) . As we have seen, the coefficients are actually implied to be +1 and −1, respectively, and therefore, the distributive property applies using +1 or –1 as the factor. Multiply each term within the parentheses by these factors: This leads to two useful properties,   Example 12: Simplify: 5 x − ( − 2 x 2 + 3 x − 1 ) . Solution: Multiply each term within the parentheses by −1 and then combine like terms. Answer: 2 x 2 + 2 x + 1   When distributing a negative number, all of the signs within the parentheses will change. Note that 5 x in the example above is a separate term; hence the distributive property does not apply to it.   Example 13: Simplify: 5 − 2 ( x 2 − 4 x − 3 ) . Solution: The order of operations requires that we multiply before subtracting. Therefore, distribute −2 and then combine the constant terms. Subtracting 5 − 2 first leads to an incorrect result, as illustrated below: Answer: −2x2 + 8x + 11 Caution It is worth repeating that you must follow the order of operations: multiply and divide before adding and subtracting! Try this! Simplify: 8 − 3 ( − x 2 + 2 x − 7 ) . Answer: 3 x 2 − 6 x + 29 Video Solution   Example 14: Subtract 3 x − 2 from twice the quantity − 4 x 2 + 2 x − 8 . Solution: First, group each expression and treat each as a quantity: Next, identify the key words and translate them into a mathematical expression. Finally, simplify the resulting expression. Answer: − 8 x 2 + x − 14 Distributive Property and Like Terms When simplifying, we will often have to combine like terms after we apply the distributive property. This step is consistent with the order of operations: multiplication before addition.   Example 11: Simplify: 2 ( 3 a − b ) − 7 ( − 2 a + 3 b ) . Solution: Distribute 2 and −7 and then combine like terms. Answer: 20 a − 23 b   In the example above, it is important to point out that you can remove the parentheses and collect like terms because you multiply the second quantity by −7, not just by 7. To correctly apply the distributive property, think of this as adding −7 times the given quantity, 2 ( 3 a − b ) + ( − 7 ) ( − 2 a + 3 b ) .   Try this! Simplify: − 5 ( 2 x − 3 ) + 7 x . Answer: − 3 x + 15 Video Solution Often we will encounter algebraic expressions like + ( a + b ) or − ( a + b ) . As we have seen, the coefficients are actually implied to be +1 and −1, respectively, and therefore, the distributive property applies using +1 or –1 as the factor. Multiply each term within the parentheses by these factors: This leads to two useful properties,   Example 12: Simplify: 5 x − ( − 2 x 2 + 3 x − 1 ) . Solution: Multiply each term within the parentheses by −1 and then combine like terms. Answer: 2 x 2 + 2 x + 1   When distributing a negative number, all of the signs within the parentheses will change. Note that 5 x in the example above is a separate term; hence the distributive property does not apply to it.   Example 13: Simplify: 5 − 2 ( x 2 − 4 x − 3 ) . Solution: The order of operations requires that we multiply before subtracting. Therefore, distribute −2 and then combine the constant terms. Subtracting 5 − 2 first leads to an incorrect result, as illustrated below: Answer: −2x2 + 8x + 11 Caution It is worth repeating that you must follow the order of operations: multiply and divide before adding and subtracting! Try this! Simplify: 8 − 3 ( − x 2 + 2 x − 7 ) . Answer: 3 x 2 − 6 x + 29 Video Solution   Example 14: Subtract 3 x − 2 from twice the quantity − 4 x 2 + 2 x − 8 . Solution: First, group each expression and treat each as a quantity: Next, identify the key words and translate them into a mathematical expression. Finally, simplify the resulting expression. Answer: − 8 x 2 + x − 14  || 
book2_chapter2_3	 || Linear Equations with One Variable and Their Solutions Learning how to solve various algebraic equations is one of the main goals in algebra. This section introduces the basic techniques used for solving linear equations with one variable. An equation Statement indicating that two algebraic expressions are equal. is a statement indicating that two algebraic expressions are equal. A linear equation with one variable An equation that can be written in the general form a x + b = 0 , where a and b are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . , x, is an equation that can be written in the general form a x + b = 0 , where a and b are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . Here are some examples of linear equations, all of which are solved in this section: A solution Any value that can replace the variable in an equation to produce a true statement. to a linear equation is any value that can replace the variable to produce a true statement. The variable in the linear equation 2 x + 3 = 13 is x, and the solution is x = 5 . To verify this, substitute the value 5 for x and check that you obtain a true statement. Alternatively, when an equation is equal to a constant, we can verify a solution by substituting the value for the variable and show that the result is equal to that constant. In this sense, we say that solutions satisfy the equation After replacing the variable with a solution and simplifying, it produces a true statement. .   Example 1: Is x = 3 a solution to − 2 x − 3 = − 9 ? Answer: Yes, it is a solution, because x = 3 satisfies the equation.   Example 2: Is a = − 1 2 a solution to − 10 a + 5 = 25 ? Answer: No, it is not a solution, because a = − 1 2 does not satisfy the equation.   Recall that when evaluating expressions, it is a good practice to first replace all variables with parentheses, then substitute the appropriate values. By making use of parentheses we avoid some common errors when working the order of operations.   Example 3: Is y = − 3 a solution to 2 y − 5 = − y − 14 ? Solution: Answer: Yes, it is a solution, because y = − 3 produces a true statement.   Try this! Is x = − 3 a solution to − 2 x + 5 = − 1 ? Answer: No Video Solution  || Solving Basic Linear Equations We begin by defining equivalent equations Equations with the same solution set. as equations with the same solution set. Consider the following two linear equations and check to see if the solution is x = 7 . Here we can see that the two linear equations 3 x − 5 = 16 and 3 x = 21 are equivalent because they share the same solution set, namely, {7}. The goal is to develop a systematic process to find equivalent equations until the variable is isolated: To do this, use the properties of equality Properties that allow us to obtain equivalent equations by adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing both sides of an equation by nonzero real numbers. . Given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a real number, we have the following: Note Multiplying or dividing both sides of an equation by 0 is carefully avoided. Dividing by 0 is undefined and multiplying both sides by 0 results in the equation 0 = 0. To summarize, equality is retained and you obtain an equivalent equation if you add, subtract, multiply, or divide both sides of an equation by any nonzero real number. The technique for solving linear equations involves applying these properties in order to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. If the linear equation has a constant term, then we add to or subtract it from both sides of the equation to obtain an equivalent equation where the variable term is isolated.   Example 4: Solve: x + 3 = − 5 . Solution: To isolate the variable x on the left side, subtract 3 from both sides. Answer: The solution is x = − 8 . To check that this is true, substitute −8 into the original equation and simplify to see that it is satisfied: x + 3 = − 8 + 3 = − 5 ✓.   In the previous example, after subtracting 3 from both sides, you get x + 0 = − 8 . By the additive identity property of real numbers, this is equivalent to x = − 8 . This step is often left out in the presentation of the solution. If the variable term of the equation (including the coefficient) is isolated, then apply the multiplication or division property of equality to obtain an equivalent equation with the variable isolated. In other words, our goal is to obtain an equivalent equation with x or 1x isolated on one side of the equal sign.   Example 5: Solve: − 5 x = − 35 . Solution: The coefficient of x is –5, so divide both sides by −5. Answer: The solution is x = 7 . Perform the check mentally by substituting 7 for x in the original equation.   In the previous example, after dividing both sides by −5, x is left with a coefficient of 1, because − 5 − 5 = 1 . In fact, when we say “isolate the variable,” we mean to change the coefficient of the variable to 1, because 1 x = 7 is equivalent to x = 7 . This step is often left out of the instructional examples even though its omission is sometimes a source of confusion. Another important property is the symmetric property Allows you to solve for the variable on either side of the equal sign, because 5 = x is equivalent to x = 5 . : for any algebraic expressions A and B, The equation 2 = x is equivalent to x = 2 . It does not matter on which side we choose to isolate the variable.   Example 6: Solve: 2 = 5 + x . Solution: Isolate the variable x by subtracting 5 from both sides of the equation. Answer: The solution is −3, and checking the solution shows that 2 = 5 − 3.   Try this! Solve: 6 = x − 4 . Answer: x = 10 Video Solution  || Isolating the Variable in Two Steps A linear equation of the form a x + b = c takes two steps to solve. First, use the appropriate equality property of addition or subtraction to isolate the variable term. Next, isolate the variable using the equality property of multiplication or division. Checking solutions in the following examples is left to the reader.   Example 7: Solve: 2 x − 5 = 15 . Solution: Answer: The solution is 10.   Example 8: Solve: − 3 x − 2 = 9 . Solution: Answer: The solution is − 11 3 .   Example 9: Solve: 6 − 5 y = − 14 . Solution: When no sign precedes the term, it is understood to be positive. In other words, think of this as + 6 − 5 y = − 14 . Begin by subtracting 6 from both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is 4.   Example 10: Solve: 3 x + 1 2 = 2 3 . Solution: Answer: The solution is 1 18 .   Example 11: Solve: 3 − y = 1 . Solution: Recall that − y is equivalent to − 1 y ; divide both sides of the equation by −1. Alternatively, multiply both sides of − y = − 2 by −1 and achieve the same result: Answer: The solution is 2.   In summary, to retain equivalent equations, we must perform the same operation on both sides of the equation. First, apply the addition or subtraction property of equality to isolate the variable term and then apply the multiplication or division property of equality to isolate the variable on one side of the equation.   Try this! Solve: − 7 x + 6 = 27 . Answer: x = − 3 Video Solution  || Multiplying by the Reciprocal To solve an equation like 3 4 x = 1 , we can isolate the variable by dividing both sides by the coefficient. For example, On the left side of the equal sign, the fraction cancels. On the right side, we have a complex fraction and multiply by the reciprocal of the coefficient. You can save a step by recognizing this and start by multiplying both sides of the equation by the reciprocal of the coefficient. Recall that the product of reciprocals is 1, in this case , leaving the variable isolated.   Example 12: Solve: . Solution: Isolate the variable term using the addition property of equality and then multiply both sides of the equation by the reciprocal of the coefficient . Answer: The solution is −6.   Example 13: Solve: . Solution: The reciprocal of is because . Therefore, to isolate the variable x, multiply both sides by . Answer: The solution is −25.   Try this! Solve: . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_3_1	Linear Equations with One Variable and Their Solutions Learning how to solve various algebraic equations is one of the main goals in algebra. This section introduces the basic techniques used for solving linear equations with one variable. An equation Statement indicating that two algebraic expressions are equal. is a statement indicating that two algebraic expressions are equal. A linear equation with one variable An equation that can be written in the general form a x + b = 0 , where a and b are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . , x, is an equation that can be written in the general form a x + b = 0 , where a and b are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . Here are some examples of linear equations, all of which are solved in this section: A solution Any value that can replace the variable in an equation to produce a true statement. to a linear equation is any value that can replace the variable to produce a true statement. The variable in the linear equation 2 x + 3 = 13 is x, and the solution is x = 5 . To verify this, substitute the value 5 for x and check that you obtain a true statement. Alternatively, when an equation is equal to a constant, we can verify a solution by substituting the value for the variable and show that the result is equal to that constant. In this sense, we say that solutions satisfy the equation After replacing the variable with a solution and simplifying, it produces a true statement. .   Example 1: Is x = 3 a solution to − 2 x − 3 = − 9 ? Answer: Yes, it is a solution, because x = 3 satisfies the equation.   Example 2: Is a = − 1 2 a solution to − 10 a + 5 = 25 ? Answer: No, it is not a solution, because a = − 1 2 does not satisfy the equation.   Recall that when evaluating expressions, it is a good practice to first replace all variables with parentheses, then substitute the appropriate values. By making use of parentheses we avoid some common errors when working the order of operations.   Example 3: Is y = − 3 a solution to 2 y − 5 = − y − 14 ? Solution: Answer: Yes, it is a solution, because y = − 3 produces a true statement.   Try this! Is x = − 3 a solution to − 2 x + 5 = − 1 ? Answer: No Video Solution Linear Equations with One Variable and Their Solutions Learning how to solve various algebraic equations is one of the main goals in algebra. This section introduces the basic techniques used for solving linear equations with one variable. An equation Statement indicating that two algebraic expressions are equal. is a statement indicating that two algebraic expressions are equal. A linear equation with one variable An equation that can be written in the general form a x + b = 0 , where a and b are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . , x, is an equation that can be written in the general form a x + b = 0 , where a and b are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . Here are some examples of linear equations, all of which are solved in this section: A solution Any value that can replace the variable in an equation to produce a true statement. to a linear equation is any value that can replace the variable to produce a true statement. The variable in the linear equation 2 x + 3 = 13 is x, and the solution is x = 5 . To verify this, substitute the value 5 for x and check that you obtain a true statement. Alternatively, when an equation is equal to a constant, we can verify a solution by substituting the value for the variable and show that the result is equal to that constant. In this sense, we say that solutions satisfy the equation After replacing the variable with a solution and simplifying, it produces a true statement. .   Example 1: Is x = 3 a solution to − 2 x − 3 = − 9 ? Answer: Yes, it is a solution, because x = 3 satisfies the equation.   Example 2: Is a = − 1 2 a solution to − 10 a + 5 = 25 ? Answer: No, it is not a solution, because a = − 1 2 does not satisfy the equation.   Recall that when evaluating expressions, it is a good practice to first replace all variables with parentheses, then substitute the appropriate values. By making use of parentheses we avoid some common errors when working the order of operations.   Example 3: Is y = − 3 a solution to 2 y − 5 = − y − 14 ? Solution: Answer: Yes, it is a solution, because y = − 3 produces a true statement.   Try this! Is x = − 3 a solution to − 2 x + 5 = − 1 ? Answer: No Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_3_2	Solving Basic Linear Equations We begin by defining equivalent equations Equations with the same solution set. as equations with the same solution set. Consider the following two linear equations and check to see if the solution is x = 7 . Here we can see that the two linear equations 3 x − 5 = 16 and 3 x = 21 are equivalent because they share the same solution set, namely, {7}. The goal is to develop a systematic process to find equivalent equations until the variable is isolated: To do this, use the properties of equality Properties that allow us to obtain equivalent equations by adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing both sides of an equation by nonzero real numbers. . Given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a real number, we have the following: Note Multiplying or dividing both sides of an equation by 0 is carefully avoided. Dividing by 0 is undefined and multiplying both sides by 0 results in the equation 0 = 0. To summarize, equality is retained and you obtain an equivalent equation if you add, subtract, multiply, or divide both sides of an equation by any nonzero real number. The technique for solving linear equations involves applying these properties in order to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. If the linear equation has a constant term, then we add to or subtract it from both sides of the equation to obtain an equivalent equation where the variable term is isolated.   Example 4: Solve: x + 3 = − 5 . Solution: To isolate the variable x on the left side, subtract 3 from both sides. Answer: The solution is x = − 8 . To check that this is true, substitute −8 into the original equation and simplify to see that it is satisfied: x + 3 = − 8 + 3 = − 5 ✓.   In the previous example, after subtracting 3 from both sides, you get x + 0 = − 8 . By the additive identity property of real numbers, this is equivalent to x = − 8 . This step is often left out in the presentation of the solution. If the variable term of the equation (including the coefficient) is isolated, then apply the multiplication or division property of equality to obtain an equivalent equation with the variable isolated. In other words, our goal is to obtain an equivalent equation with x or 1x isolated on one side of the equal sign.   Example 5: Solve: − 5 x = − 35 . Solution: The coefficient of x is –5, so divide both sides by −5. Answer: The solution is x = 7 . Perform the check mentally by substituting 7 for x in the original equation.   In the previous example, after dividing both sides by −5, x is left with a coefficient of 1, because − 5 − 5 = 1 . In fact, when we say “isolate the variable,” we mean to change the coefficient of the variable to 1, because 1 x = 7 is equivalent to x = 7 . This step is often left out of the instructional examples even though its omission is sometimes a source of confusion. Another important property is the symmetric property Allows you to solve for the variable on either side of the equal sign, because 5 = x is equivalent to x = 5 . : for any algebraic expressions A and B, The equation 2 = x is equivalent to x = 2 . It does not matter on which side we choose to isolate the variable.   Example 6: Solve: 2 = 5 + x . Solution: Isolate the variable x by subtracting 5 from both sides of the equation. Answer: The solution is −3, and checking the solution shows that 2 = 5 − 3.   Try this! Solve: 6 = x − 4 . Answer: x = 10 Video Solution Solving Basic Linear Equations We begin by defining equivalent equations Equations with the same solution set. as equations with the same solution set. Consider the following two linear equations and check to see if the solution is x = 7 . Here we can see that the two linear equations 3 x − 5 = 16 and 3 x = 21 are equivalent because they share the same solution set, namely, {7}. The goal is to develop a systematic process to find equivalent equations until the variable is isolated: To do this, use the properties of equality Properties that allow us to obtain equivalent equations by adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing both sides of an equation by nonzero real numbers. . Given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a real number, we have the following: Note Multiplying or dividing both sides of an equation by 0 is carefully avoided. Dividing by 0 is undefined and multiplying both sides by 0 results in the equation 0 = 0. To summarize, equality is retained and you obtain an equivalent equation if you add, subtract, multiply, or divide both sides of an equation by any nonzero real number. The technique for solving linear equations involves applying these properties in order to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. If the linear equation has a constant term, then we add to or subtract it from both sides of the equation to obtain an equivalent equation where the variable term is isolated.   Example 4: Solve: x + 3 = − 5 . Solution: To isolate the variable x on the left side, subtract 3 from both sides. Answer: The solution is x = − 8 . To check that this is true, substitute −8 into the original equation and simplify to see that it is satisfied: x + 3 = − 8 + 3 = − 5 ✓.   In the previous example, after subtracting 3 from both sides, you get x + 0 = − 8 . By the additive identity property of real numbers, this is equivalent to x = − 8 . This step is often left out in the presentation of the solution. If the variable term of the equation (including the coefficient) is isolated, then apply the multiplication or division property of equality to obtain an equivalent equation with the variable isolated. In other words, our goal is to obtain an equivalent equation with x or 1x isolated on one side of the equal sign.   Example 5: Solve: − 5 x = − 35 . Solution: The coefficient of x is –5, so divide both sides by −5. Answer: The solution is x = 7 . Perform the check mentally by substituting 7 for x in the original equation.   In the previous example, after dividing both sides by −5, x is left with a coefficient of 1, because − 5 − 5 = 1 . In fact, when we say “isolate the variable,” we mean to change the coefficient of the variable to 1, because 1 x = 7 is equivalent to x = 7 . This step is often left out of the instructional examples even though its omission is sometimes a source of confusion. Another important property is the symmetric property Allows you to solve for the variable on either side of the equal sign, because 5 = x is equivalent to x = 5 . : for any algebraic expressions A and B, The equation 2 = x is equivalent to x = 2 . It does not matter on which side we choose to isolate the variable.   Example 6: Solve: 2 = 5 + x . Solution: Isolate the variable x by subtracting 5 from both sides of the equation. Answer: The solution is −3, and checking the solution shows that 2 = 5 − 3.   Try this! Solve: 6 = x − 4 . Answer: x = 10 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_3_3	Isolating the Variable in Two Steps A linear equation of the form a x + b = c takes two steps to solve. First, use the appropriate equality property of addition or subtraction to isolate the variable term. Next, isolate the variable using the equality property of multiplication or division. Checking solutions in the following examples is left to the reader.   Example 7: Solve: 2 x − 5 = 15 . Solution: Answer: The solution is 10.   Example 8: Solve: − 3 x − 2 = 9 . Solution: Answer: The solution is − 11 3 .   Example 9: Solve: 6 − 5 y = − 14 . Solution: When no sign precedes the term, it is understood to be positive. In other words, think of this as + 6 − 5 y = − 14 . Begin by subtracting 6 from both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is 4.   Example 10: Solve: 3 x + 1 2 = 2 3 . Solution: Answer: The solution is 1 18 .   Example 11: Solve: 3 − y = 1 . Solution: Recall that − y is equivalent to − 1 y ; divide both sides of the equation by −1. Alternatively, multiply both sides of − y = − 2 by −1 and achieve the same result: Answer: The solution is 2.   In summary, to retain equivalent equations, we must perform the same operation on both sides of the equation. First, apply the addition or subtraction property of equality to isolate the variable term and then apply the multiplication or division property of equality to isolate the variable on one side of the equation.   Try this! Solve: − 7 x + 6 = 27 . Answer: x = − 3 Video Solution Isolating the Variable in Two Steps A linear equation of the form a x + b = c takes two steps to solve. First, use the appropriate equality property of addition or subtraction to isolate the variable term. Next, isolate the variable using the equality property of multiplication or division. Checking solutions in the following examples is left to the reader.   Example 7: Solve: 2 x − 5 = 15 . Solution: Answer: The solution is 10.   Example 8: Solve: − 3 x − 2 = 9 . Solution: Answer: The solution is − 11 3 .   Example 9: Solve: 6 − 5 y = − 14 . Solution: When no sign precedes the term, it is understood to be positive. In other words, think of this as + 6 − 5 y = − 14 . Begin by subtracting 6 from both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is 4.   Example 10: Solve: 3 x + 1 2 = 2 3 . Solution: Answer: The solution is 1 18 .   Example 11: Solve: 3 − y = 1 . Solution: Recall that − y is equivalent to − 1 y ; divide both sides of the equation by −1. Alternatively, multiply both sides of − y = − 2 by −1 and achieve the same result: Answer: The solution is 2.   In summary, to retain equivalent equations, we must perform the same operation on both sides of the equation. First, apply the addition or subtraction property of equality to isolate the variable term and then apply the multiplication or division property of equality to isolate the variable on one side of the equation.   Try this! Solve: − 7 x + 6 = 27 . Answer: x = − 3 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_3_4	Multiplying by the Reciprocal To solve an equation like 3 4 x = 1 , we can isolate the variable by dividing both sides by the coefficient. For example, On the left side of the equal sign, the fraction cancels. On the right side, we have a complex fraction and multiply by the reciprocal of the coefficient. You can save a step by recognizing this and start by multiplying both sides of the equation by the reciprocal of the coefficient. Recall that the product of reciprocals is 1, in this case , leaving the variable isolated.   Example 12: Solve: . Solution: Isolate the variable term using the addition property of equality and then multiply both sides of the equation by the reciprocal of the coefficient . Answer: The solution is −6.   Example 13: Solve: . Solution: The reciprocal of is because . Therefore, to isolate the variable x, multiply both sides by . Answer: The solution is −25.   Try this! Solve: . Answer: Video Solution Multiplying by the Reciprocal To solve an equation like 3 4 x = 1 , we can isolate the variable by dividing both sides by the coefficient. For example, On the left side of the equal sign, the fraction cancels. On the right side, we have a complex fraction and multiply by the reciprocal of the coefficient. You can save a step by recognizing this and start by multiplying both sides of the equation by the reciprocal of the coefficient. Recall that the product of reciprocals is 1, in this case , leaving the variable isolated.   Example 12: Solve: . Solution: Isolate the variable term using the addition property of equality and then multiply both sides of the equation by the reciprocal of the coefficient . Answer: The solution is −6.   Example 13: Solve: . Solution: The reciprocal of is because . Therefore, to isolate the variable x, multiply both sides by . Answer: The solution is −25.   Try this! Solve: . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_4	 || Combining Like Terms and Simplifying Linear equations typically are not given in standard form, so solving them requires additional steps. These additional steps include simplifying expressions on each side of the equal sign using the order of operations. Same-Side Like Terms We will often encounter linear equations where the expressions on each side of the equal sign can be simplified. Typically, this involves combining same-side like terms Like terms of an equation on the same side of the equal sign. . If this is the case, then it is best to simplify each side first before solving.   Example 1: Solve: − 4 a + 2 − a = 3 − 2 . Solution: First, combine the like terms on each side of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is 1 5 . Opposite-Side Like Terms Given a linear equation in the form a x + b = c x + d , we begin by combining like terms on opposite sides of the equal sign. To combine opposite-side like terms Like terms of an equation on opposite sides of the equal sign. , use the addition or subtraction property of equality to effectively “move terms” from one side to the other so that they can be combined.   Example 2: Solve: − 2 y − 3 = 5 y + 11 . Solution: To “move” the term 5 y to the left side, subtract it on both sides. From here, solve using the techniques developed previously. Always check to see that the solution is correct by substituting the solution back into the original equation and simplifying to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is −2. General Guidelines for Solving Linear Equations When solving linear equations, the goal is to determine what value, if any, will produce a true statement when substituted in the original equation. Do this by isolating the variable using the following steps: Step 1: Simplify both sides of the equation using the order of operations and combine all same-side like terms. Step 2: Use the appropriate properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms with the variable term on one side of the equation and the constant term on the other. Step 3: Divide or multiply as needed to isolate the variable. Step 4: Check to see if the answer solves the original equation.   Example 3: Solve: − 1 2 ( 10 y − 2 ) + 3 = 14 . Solution: Simplify the linear expression on the left side before solving. To check, Answer: The solution is −2.   Example 4: Solve: 5 ( 3 x + 2 ) − 2 = − 2 ( 1 − 7 x ) . Solution: First, simplify the expressions on both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is −10. The check is left as an exercise.   Try this! Solve: 6 − 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) = 4 x − 7 . Answer: x = 1 Video Solution  || Opposite-Side Like Terms Given a linear equation in the form a x + b = c x + d , we begin by combining like terms on opposite sides of the equal sign. To combine opposite-side like terms Like terms of an equation on opposite sides of the equal sign. , use the addition or subtraction property of equality to effectively “move terms” from one side to the other so that they can be combined.   Example 2: Solve: − 2 y − 3 = 5 y + 11 . Solution: To “move” the term 5 y to the left side, subtract it on both sides. From here, solve using the techniques developed previously. Always check to see that the solution is correct by substituting the solution back into the original equation and simplifying to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is −2.  || General Guidelines for Solving Linear Equations When solving linear equations, the goal is to determine what value, if any, will produce a true statement when substituted in the original equation. Do this by isolating the variable using the following steps: Step 1: Simplify both sides of the equation using the order of operations and combine all same-side like terms. Step 2: Use the appropriate properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms with the variable term on one side of the equation and the constant term on the other. Step 3: Divide or multiply as needed to isolate the variable. Step 4: Check to see if the answer solves the original equation.   Example 3: Solve: − 1 2 ( 10 y − 2 ) + 3 = 14 . Solution: Simplify the linear expression on the left side before solving. To check, Answer: The solution is −2.   Example 4: Solve: 5 ( 3 x + 2 ) − 2 = − 2 ( 1 − 7 x ) . Solution: First, simplify the expressions on both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is −10. The check is left as an exercise.   Try this! Solve: 6 − 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) = 4 x − 7 . Answer: x = 1 Video Solution  || Conditional Equations, Identities, and Contradictions There are three different types of equations. Up to this point, we have been solving conditional equations Equations that are true for particular values. . These are equations that are true for particular values. An identity An equation that is true for all possible values. is an equation that is true for all possible values of the variable. For example, has a solution set consisting of all real numbers, R. A contradiction An equation that is never true and has no solution. is an equation that is never true and thus has no solutions. For example, has no solution. We use the empty set, ∅ , to indicate that there are no solutions. If the end result of solving an equation is a true statement, like 0 = 0, then the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution. If solving results in a false statement, like 0 = 1, then the equation is a contradiction and there is no solution.   Example 5: Solve: 4 ( x + 5 ) + 6 = 2 ( 2 x + 3 ) . Solution: Answer: ∅ . Solving leads to a false statement; therefore, the equation is a contradiction and there is no solution.   Example 6: Solve: 3 ( 3 y + 5 ) + 5 = 10 ( y + 2 ) − y . Solution: Answer: R. Solving leads to a true statement; therefore, the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution.   If it is hard to believe that any real number is a solution to the equation in the previous example, then choose your favorite real number, and substitute it in the equation to see that it leads to a true statement. Choose x = 7 and check:   Try this! Solve: − 2 ( 3 x + 1 ) − ( x − 3 ) = − 7 x + 1 . Answer: R Video Solution  || Clearing Decimals and Fractions The coefficients of linear equations may be any real number, even decimals and fractions. When decimals and fractions are used, it is possible to use the multiplication property of equality to clear the coefficients in a single step. If given decimal coefficients, then multiply by an appropriate power of 10 to clear the decimals. If given fractional coefficients, then multiply both sides of the equation by the least common multiple of the denominators (LCD).   Example 7: Solve: 2.3 x + 2.8 = − 1.2 x + 9.8 . Solution: Notice that all decimal coefficients are expressed with digits in the tenths place; this suggests that we can clear the decimals by multiplying both sides by 10. Take care to distribute 10 to each term on both sides of the equation. Answer: The solution is 2.   Example 8: Solve: 1 3 x + 1 5 = 1 5 x − 1 . Solution: Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides by the least common multiple of the given denominators. In this case, the LCM ( 3, 5 ) = 15 . Answer: The solution is −9.   It is important to know that these techniques only work for equations. Do not try to clear fractions when simplifying expressions. As a reminder, Solve equations and simplify expressions. If you multiply an expression by 6, you will change the problem. However, if you multiply both sides of an equation by 6, you obtain an equivalent equation.  || Literal Equations (Linear Formulas) Algebra lets us solve whole classes of applications using literal equations A formula that summarizes whole classes of problems. , or formulas. Formulas often have more than one variable and describe, or model, a particular real-world problem. For example, the familiar formula D = r t describes the distance traveled in terms of the average rate and time; given any two of these quantities, we can determine the third. Using algebra, we can solve the equation for any one of the variables and derive two more formulas. If we divide both sides by r, we obtain the formula t = D r . Use this formula to find the time, given the distance and the rate. If we divide both sides by t, we obtain the formula r = D t . Use this formula to find the rate, given the distance traveled and the time it takes to travel that distance. Using the techniques learned up to this point, we now have three equivalent formulas relating distance, average rate, and time: When given a literal equation, it is often necessary to solve for one of the variables in terms of the others. Use the properties of equality to isolate the indicated variable.   Example 9: Solve for a:    P = 2 a + b . Solution: The goal is to isolate the variable a. Answer: a = P − b 2   Example 10: Solve for y:    z = x + y 2 . Solution: The goal is to isolate the variable y. Answer: y = 2 z − x   Try this! Solve for b:    2 a − 3 b = c . Answer: b = 2 a − c 3 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_4_1	Combining Like Terms and Simplifying Linear equations typically are not given in standard form, so solving them requires additional steps. These additional steps include simplifying expressions on each side of the equal sign using the order of operations. Same-Side Like Terms We will often encounter linear equations where the expressions on each side of the equal sign can be simplified. Typically, this involves combining same-side like terms Like terms of an equation on the same side of the equal sign. . If this is the case, then it is best to simplify each side first before solving.   Example 1: Solve: − 4 a + 2 − a = 3 − 2 . Solution: First, combine the like terms on each side of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is 1 5 . Opposite-Side Like Terms Given a linear equation in the form a x + b = c x + d , we begin by combining like terms on opposite sides of the equal sign. To combine opposite-side like terms Like terms of an equation on opposite sides of the equal sign. , use the addition or subtraction property of equality to effectively “move terms” from one side to the other so that they can be combined.   Example 2: Solve: − 2 y − 3 = 5 y + 11 . Solution: To “move” the term 5 y to the left side, subtract it on both sides. From here, solve using the techniques developed previously. Always check to see that the solution is correct by substituting the solution back into the original equation and simplifying to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is −2. General Guidelines for Solving Linear Equations When solving linear equations, the goal is to determine what value, if any, will produce a true statement when substituted in the original equation. Do this by isolating the variable using the following steps: Step 1: Simplify both sides of the equation using the order of operations and combine all same-side like terms. Step 2: Use the appropriate properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms with the variable term on one side of the equation and the constant term on the other. Step 3: Divide or multiply as needed to isolate the variable. Step 4: Check to see if the answer solves the original equation.   Example 3: Solve: − 1 2 ( 10 y − 2 ) + 3 = 14 . Solution: Simplify the linear expression on the left side before solving. To check, Answer: The solution is −2.   Example 4: Solve: 5 ( 3 x + 2 ) − 2 = − 2 ( 1 − 7 x ) . Solution: First, simplify the expressions on both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is −10. The check is left as an exercise.   Try this! Solve: 6 − 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) = 4 x − 7 . Answer: x = 1 Video Solution Combining Like Terms and Simplifying Linear equations typically are not given in standard form, so solving them requires additional steps. These additional steps include simplifying expressions on each side of the equal sign using the order of operations. Same-Side Like Terms We will often encounter linear equations where the expressions on each side of the equal sign can be simplified. Typically, this involves combining same-side like terms Like terms of an equation on the same side of the equal sign. . If this is the case, then it is best to simplify each side first before solving.   Example 1: Solve: − 4 a + 2 − a = 3 − 2 . Solution: First, combine the like terms on each side of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is 1 5 . Opposite-Side Like Terms Given a linear equation in the form a x + b = c x + d , we begin by combining like terms on opposite sides of the equal sign. To combine opposite-side like terms Like terms of an equation on opposite sides of the equal sign. , use the addition or subtraction property of equality to effectively “move terms” from one side to the other so that they can be combined.   Example 2: Solve: − 2 y − 3 = 5 y + 11 . Solution: To “move” the term 5 y to the left side, subtract it on both sides. From here, solve using the techniques developed previously. Always check to see that the solution is correct by substituting the solution back into the original equation and simplifying to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is −2. General Guidelines for Solving Linear Equations When solving linear equations, the goal is to determine what value, if any, will produce a true statement when substituted in the original equation. Do this by isolating the variable using the following steps: Step 1: Simplify both sides of the equation using the order of operations and combine all same-side like terms. Step 2: Use the appropriate properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms with the variable term on one side of the equation and the constant term on the other. Step 3: Divide or multiply as needed to isolate the variable. Step 4: Check to see if the answer solves the original equation.   Example 3: Solve: − 1 2 ( 10 y − 2 ) + 3 = 14 . Solution: Simplify the linear expression on the left side before solving. To check, Answer: The solution is −2.   Example 4: Solve: 5 ( 3 x + 2 ) − 2 = − 2 ( 1 − 7 x ) . Solution: First, simplify the expressions on both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is −10. The check is left as an exercise.   Try this! Solve: 6 − 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) = 4 x − 7 . Answer: x = 1 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_4_3	Opposite-Side Like Terms Given a linear equation in the form a x + b = c x + d , we begin by combining like terms on opposite sides of the equal sign. To combine opposite-side like terms Like terms of an equation on opposite sides of the equal sign. , use the addition or subtraction property of equality to effectively “move terms” from one side to the other so that they can be combined.   Example 2: Solve: − 2 y − 3 = 5 y + 11 . Solution: To “move” the term 5 y to the left side, subtract it on both sides. From here, solve using the techniques developed previously. Always check to see that the solution is correct by substituting the solution back into the original equation and simplifying to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is −2. Opposite-Side Like Terms Given a linear equation in the form a x + b = c x + d , we begin by combining like terms on opposite sides of the equal sign. To combine opposite-side like terms Like terms of an equation on opposite sides of the equal sign. , use the addition or subtraction property of equality to effectively “move terms” from one side to the other so that they can be combined.   Example 2: Solve: − 2 y − 3 = 5 y + 11 . Solution: To “move” the term 5 y to the left side, subtract it on both sides. From here, solve using the techniques developed previously. Always check to see that the solution is correct by substituting the solution back into the original equation and simplifying to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is −2.  || 
book2_chapter2_4_4	General Guidelines for Solving Linear Equations When solving linear equations, the goal is to determine what value, if any, will produce a true statement when substituted in the original equation. Do this by isolating the variable using the following steps: Step 1: Simplify both sides of the equation using the order of operations and combine all same-side like terms. Step 2: Use the appropriate properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms with the variable term on one side of the equation and the constant term on the other. Step 3: Divide or multiply as needed to isolate the variable. Step 4: Check to see if the answer solves the original equation.   Example 3: Solve: − 1 2 ( 10 y − 2 ) + 3 = 14 . Solution: Simplify the linear expression on the left side before solving. To check, Answer: The solution is −2.   Example 4: Solve: 5 ( 3 x + 2 ) − 2 = − 2 ( 1 − 7 x ) . Solution: First, simplify the expressions on both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is −10. The check is left as an exercise.   Try this! Solve: 6 − 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) = 4 x − 7 . Answer: x = 1 Video Solution General Guidelines for Solving Linear Equations When solving linear equations, the goal is to determine what value, if any, will produce a true statement when substituted in the original equation. Do this by isolating the variable using the following steps: Step 1: Simplify both sides of the equation using the order of operations and combine all same-side like terms. Step 2: Use the appropriate properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms with the variable term on one side of the equation and the constant term on the other. Step 3: Divide or multiply as needed to isolate the variable. Step 4: Check to see if the answer solves the original equation.   Example 3: Solve: − 1 2 ( 10 y − 2 ) + 3 = 14 . Solution: Simplify the linear expression on the left side before solving. To check, Answer: The solution is −2.   Example 4: Solve: 5 ( 3 x + 2 ) − 2 = − 2 ( 1 − 7 x ) . Solution: First, simplify the expressions on both sides of the equal sign. Answer: The solution is −10. The check is left as an exercise.   Try this! Solve: 6 − 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) = 4 x − 7 . Answer: x = 1 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_4_5	Conditional Equations, Identities, and Contradictions There are three different types of equations. Up to this point, we have been solving conditional equations Equations that are true for particular values. . These are equations that are true for particular values. An identity An equation that is true for all possible values. is an equation that is true for all possible values of the variable. For example, has a solution set consisting of all real numbers, R. A contradiction An equation that is never true and has no solution. is an equation that is never true and thus has no solutions. For example, has no solution. We use the empty set, ∅ , to indicate that there are no solutions. If the end result of solving an equation is a true statement, like 0 = 0, then the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution. If solving results in a false statement, like 0 = 1, then the equation is a contradiction and there is no solution.   Example 5: Solve: 4 ( x + 5 ) + 6 = 2 ( 2 x + 3 ) . Solution: Answer: ∅ . Solving leads to a false statement; therefore, the equation is a contradiction and there is no solution.   Example 6: Solve: 3 ( 3 y + 5 ) + 5 = 10 ( y + 2 ) − y . Solution: Answer: R. Solving leads to a true statement; therefore, the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution.   If it is hard to believe that any real number is a solution to the equation in the previous example, then choose your favorite real number, and substitute it in the equation to see that it leads to a true statement. Choose x = 7 and check:   Try this! Solve: − 2 ( 3 x + 1 ) − ( x − 3 ) = − 7 x + 1 . Answer: R Video Solution Conditional Equations, Identities, and Contradictions There are three different types of equations. Up to this point, we have been solving conditional equations Equations that are true for particular values. . These are equations that are true for particular values. An identity An equation that is true for all possible values. is an equation that is true for all possible values of the variable. For example, has a solution set consisting of all real numbers, R. A contradiction An equation that is never true and has no solution. is an equation that is never true and thus has no solutions. For example, has no solution. We use the empty set, ∅ , to indicate that there are no solutions. If the end result of solving an equation is a true statement, like 0 = 0, then the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution. If solving results in a false statement, like 0 = 1, then the equation is a contradiction and there is no solution.   Example 5: Solve: 4 ( x + 5 ) + 6 = 2 ( 2 x + 3 ) . Solution: Answer: ∅ . Solving leads to a false statement; therefore, the equation is a contradiction and there is no solution.   Example 6: Solve: 3 ( 3 y + 5 ) + 5 = 10 ( y + 2 ) − y . Solution: Answer: R. Solving leads to a true statement; therefore, the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution.   If it is hard to believe that any real number is a solution to the equation in the previous example, then choose your favorite real number, and substitute it in the equation to see that it leads to a true statement. Choose x = 7 and check:   Try this! Solve: − 2 ( 3 x + 1 ) − ( x − 3 ) = − 7 x + 1 . Answer: R Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_4_6	Clearing Decimals and Fractions The coefficients of linear equations may be any real number, even decimals and fractions. When decimals and fractions are used, it is possible to use the multiplication property of equality to clear the coefficients in a single step. If given decimal coefficients, then multiply by an appropriate power of 10 to clear the decimals. If given fractional coefficients, then multiply both sides of the equation by the least common multiple of the denominators (LCD).   Example 7: Solve: 2.3 x + 2.8 = − 1.2 x + 9.8 . Solution: Notice that all decimal coefficients are expressed with digits in the tenths place; this suggests that we can clear the decimals by multiplying both sides by 10. Take care to distribute 10 to each term on both sides of the equation. Answer: The solution is 2.   Example 8: Solve: 1 3 x + 1 5 = 1 5 x − 1 . Solution: Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides by the least common multiple of the given denominators. In this case, the LCM ( 3, 5 ) = 15 . Answer: The solution is −9.   It is important to know that these techniques only work for equations. Do not try to clear fractions when simplifying expressions. As a reminder, Solve equations and simplify expressions. If you multiply an expression by 6, you will change the problem. However, if you multiply both sides of an equation by 6, you obtain an equivalent equation. Clearing Decimals and Fractions The coefficients of linear equations may be any real number, even decimals and fractions. When decimals and fractions are used, it is possible to use the multiplication property of equality to clear the coefficients in a single step. If given decimal coefficients, then multiply by an appropriate power of 10 to clear the decimals. If given fractional coefficients, then multiply both sides of the equation by the least common multiple of the denominators (LCD).   Example 7: Solve: 2.3 x + 2.8 = − 1.2 x + 9.8 . Solution: Notice that all decimal coefficients are expressed with digits in the tenths place; this suggests that we can clear the decimals by multiplying both sides by 10. Take care to distribute 10 to each term on both sides of the equation. Answer: The solution is 2.   Example 8: Solve: 1 3 x + 1 5 = 1 5 x − 1 . Solution: Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides by the least common multiple of the given denominators. In this case, the LCM ( 3, 5 ) = 15 . Answer: The solution is −9.   It is important to know that these techniques only work for equations. Do not try to clear fractions when simplifying expressions. As a reminder, Solve equations and simplify expressions. If you multiply an expression by 6, you will change the problem. However, if you multiply both sides of an equation by 6, you obtain an equivalent equation.  || 
book2_chapter2_4_7	Literal Equations (Linear Formulas) Algebra lets us solve whole classes of applications using literal equations A formula that summarizes whole classes of problems. , or formulas. Formulas often have more than one variable and describe, or model, a particular real-world problem. For example, the familiar formula D = r t describes the distance traveled in terms of the average rate and time; given any two of these quantities, we can determine the third. Using algebra, we can solve the equation for any one of the variables and derive two more formulas. If we divide both sides by r, we obtain the formula t = D r . Use this formula to find the time, given the distance and the rate. If we divide both sides by t, we obtain the formula r = D t . Use this formula to find the rate, given the distance traveled and the time it takes to travel that distance. Using the techniques learned up to this point, we now have three equivalent formulas relating distance, average rate, and time: When given a literal equation, it is often necessary to solve for one of the variables in terms of the others. Use the properties of equality to isolate the indicated variable.   Example 9: Solve for a:    P = 2 a + b . Solution: The goal is to isolate the variable a. Answer: a = P − b 2   Example 10: Solve for y:    z = x + y 2 . Solution: The goal is to isolate the variable y. Answer: y = 2 z − x   Try this! Solve for b:    2 a − 3 b = c . Answer: b = 2 a − c 3 Video Solution Literal Equations (Linear Formulas) Algebra lets us solve whole classes of applications using literal equations A formula that summarizes whole classes of problems. , or formulas. Formulas often have more than one variable and describe, or model, a particular real-world problem. For example, the familiar formula D = r t describes the distance traveled in terms of the average rate and time; given any two of these quantities, we can determine the third. Using algebra, we can solve the equation for any one of the variables and derive two more formulas. If we divide both sides by r, we obtain the formula t = D r . Use this formula to find the time, given the distance and the rate. If we divide both sides by t, we obtain the formula r = D t . Use this formula to find the rate, given the distance traveled and the time it takes to travel that distance. Using the techniques learned up to this point, we now have three equivalent formulas relating distance, average rate, and time: When given a literal equation, it is often necessary to solve for one of the variables in terms of the others. Use the properties of equality to isolate the indicated variable.   Example 9: Solve for a:    P = 2 a + b . Solution: The goal is to isolate the variable a. Answer: a = P − b 2   Example 10: Solve for y:    z = x + y 2 . Solution: The goal is to isolate the variable y. Answer: y = 2 z − x   Try this! Solve for b:    2 a − 3 b = c . Answer: b = 2 a − c 3 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_5	 || Key Words, Translation, and Strategy Algebra simplifies the process of solving real-world problems. This is done by using letters to represent unknowns, restating problems in the form of equations, and offering systematic techniques for solving those equations. To solve problems using algebra, first translate the wording of the problem into mathematical statements that describe the relationships between the given information and the unknowns. Usually, this translation to mathematical statements is the difficult step in the process. The key to the translation is to carefully read the problem and identify certain key words and phrases. Key Words Translation Sum, increased by, more than, plus, added to, total + Difference, decreased by, subtracted from, less, minus − Product, multiplied by, of, times, twice * Quotient, divided by, ratio, per / Is, total, result = Here are some examples of translated key phrases. Key Phrases Translation The sum of a number and 7. x + 7 Seven more than a number. The difference of a number and 7. x − 7 Seven less than a number. Seven subtracted from a number. The product of 2 and a number. 2 x Twice a number. One-half of a number. 1 2 x The quotient of a number and 7. x / 7 When translating sentences into mathematical statements, be sure to read the sentence several times and identify the key words and phrases.   Example 1: Translate: Four less than twice some number is 16. Solution: First, choose a variable for the unknown number and identify the key words and phrases. Let x represent the unknown indicated by “some number.” Remember that subtraction is not commutative. For this reason, take care when setting up differences. In this example, 4 − 2 x = 16 is an incorrect translation. Answer: 2 x − 4 = 16   It is important to first identify the variable—let x represent…—and state in words what the unknown quantity is. This step not only makes your work more readable but also forces you to think about what you are looking for. Usually, if you know what you are asked to find, then the task of finding it is achievable.   Example 2: Translate: When 7 is subtracted from 3 times the sum of a number and 12, the result is 20. Solution: Let n represent the unknown number. Answer: 3 ( n + 12 ) − 7 = 20   To understand why parentheses are needed, study the structures of the following two sentences and their translations: “3 times the sum of a number and 12” 3 ( n + 12 ) “the sum of 3 times a number and 12” 3 n + 12 The key is to focus on the phrase “3 times the sum.” This prompts us to group the sum within parentheses and then multiply by 3. Once an application is translated into an algebraic equation, solve it using the techniques you have learned. Guidelines for Setting Up and Solving Word Problems Step 1: Read the problem several times, identify the key words and phrases, and organize the given information. Step 2: Identify the variables by assigning a letter or expression to the unknown quantities. Step 3: Translate and set up an algebraic equation that models the problem. Step 4: Solve the resulting algebraic equation. Step 5: Finally, answer the question in sentence form and make sure it makes sense (check it). For now, set up all of your equations using only one variable. Avoid two variables by looking for a relationship between the unknowns.  || Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We classify applications involving relationships between real numbers broadly as number problems. These problems can sometimes be solved using some creative arithmetic, guessing, and checking. Solving in this manner is not a good practice and should be avoided. Begin by working through the basic steps outlined in the general guidelines for solving word problems.   Example 3: A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller integer. The sum of the two integers is 18. Find the integers. Solution: Identify variables: Begin by assigning a variable to the smaller integer. Use the first sentence to identify the larger integer in terms of the variable x: “A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller.” Set up an equation: Add the expressions that represent the two integers, and set the resulting expression equal to 18 as indicated in the second sentence: “The sum of the two integers is 18.” Solve: Solve the equation to obtain the smaller integer x. Back substitute: Use the expression 3 x − 2 to find the larger integer—this is called back substituting The process of finding the answers to other unknowns after one has been found. . Answer the question: The two integers are 5 and 13. Check: 5 + 13 = 18. The answer makes sense.   Example 4: The difference between two integers is 2. The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller. Find the integers. Solution: Use the relationship between the two integers in the second sentence, “The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller,” to identify the unknowns in terms of one variable. Since the difference is positive, subtract the smaller integer from the larger. Solve. Use 2x − 6 to find the larger integer. Answer: The two integers are 8 and 10. These integers clearly solve the problem.   It is worth mentioning again that you can often find solutions to simple problems by guessing and checking. This is so because the numbers are chosen to simplify the process of solving, so that the algebraic steps are not too tedious. You learn how to set up algebraic equations with easier problems, so that you can use these ideas to solve more difficult problems later.   Example 5: The sum of two consecutive even integers is 46. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive even integers.” Add the even integers and set them equal to 46. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next even integer. Answer: The consecutive even integers are 22 and 24.   It should be clear that consecutive even integers are separated by two units. However, it may not be so clear that odd integers are as well.   Example 6: The sum of two consecutive odd integers is 36. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive odd integers.” Add the two odd integers and set the expression equal to 36. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next odd integer. Answer: The consecutive odd integers are 17 and 19.   The algebraic setup for even and odd integer problems is the same. A common mistake is to use x and x + 3 when identifying the variables for consecutive odd integers. This is incorrect because adding 3 to an odd number yields an even number: for example, 5 + 3 = 8. An incorrect setup is very likely to lead to a decimal answer, which may be an indication that the problem was set up incorrectly.   Example 7: The sum of three consecutive integers is 24. Find the integers. Solution: Consecutive integers are separated by one unit. Add the integers and set the sum equal to 24. Solve. Back substitute to find the other two integers. Answer: The three consecutive integers are 7, 8 and 9, where 7 + 8 + 9 = 24.   Try this! The sum of three consecutive odd integers is 87. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 27, 29, and 31. Video Solution  || Geometry Problems (Perimeter) Recall that the perimeter The sum of the lengths of all the outside edges of a polygon. of a polygon is the sum of the lengths of all the outside edges. In addition, it is helpful to review the following perimeter formulas ( π ≈ 3.14159 ). Perimeter of a rectangle P = 2 l + 2 w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. : P = 2 l + 2 w Perimeter of a square P = 4 s , where s represents the length of a side. : P = 4 s Perimeter of a triangle P = a + b + c , where a, b, and c each represents the length of a different side. : P = a + b + c Perimeter of a circle ( circumference The perimeter of a circle given by C = 2 π r , where r represents the radius of the circle and π ≈ 3.14159 . ): C = 2 π r Keep in mind that you are looking for a relationship between the unknowns so that you can set up algebraic equations using only one variable. When working with geometry problems, it is often helpful to draw a picture.   Example 8: A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet. The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width. Find the dimensions of the rectangle. Solution: The sentence “The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width” gives the relationship between the two variables. The sentence “A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet” suggests an algebraic setup. Substitute 64 for the perimeter and the expression for the length into the appropriate formula as follows: Once you have set up an algebraic equation with one variable, solve for the width, w. Use 3w + 4 to find the length. Answer: The rectangle measures 7 feet by 25 feet. To check, add all of the sides:   Example 9: Two sides of a triangle are 5 and 7 inches longer than the third side. If the perimeter measures 21 inches, find the length of each side. Solution: The first sentence describes the relationships between the unknowns. Substitute these expressions into the appropriate formula and use 21 for the perimeter P. You now have an equation with one variable to solve. Back substitute. Answer: The three sides of the triangle measure 3 inches, 8 inches, and 10 inches. The check is left to the reader.   Try this! The length of a rectangle is 1 foot less than twice its width. If the perimeter is 46 feet, find the dimensions. Answer: Width: 8 feet; length: 15 feet Video Solution  || Problems Involving Money and Percents Whenever setting up an equation involving a percentage, we usually need to convert the percentage to a decimal or fraction. If the question asks for a percentage, then do not forget to convert your answer to a percent at the end. Also, when money is involved, be sure to round off to two decimal places.   Example 10: If a pair of shoes costs $52.50 including a 7 1 4 % tax, what is the original cost of the item before taxes are added? Solution: Begin by converting 7 1 4 % to a decimal. The amount of tax is this rate times the original cost of the item. The original cost of the item is what you are asked to find. Use this equation to solve for c, the original cost of the item. Answer: The cost of the item before taxes is $48.95. Check this by multiplying $48.95 by 0.0725 to obtain the tax and add it to this cost.   Example 11: Given a 5 1 8 % annual interest rate, how long will it take $1,200 to yield $307.50 in simple interest? Solution: Organize the data needed to use the simple interest formula I = p r t . Given interest for the time period: I = $ 307.50 Given principal: p = $ 1200 Given rate: r = 5 1 8 % = 5.125 % = 0.05125 Next, substitute all of the known quantities into the formula and then solve for the only unknown, t. Answer: It takes 5 years for $1,200 invested at 5 1 8 % to earn $307.50 in simple interest.   Example 12: Mary invested her total savings of $3,400 in two accounts. Her mutual fund account earned 8% last year and her CD earned 5%. If her total interest for the year was $245, how much was in each account? Solution: The relationship between the two unknowns is that they total $3,400. When a total is involved, a common technique used to avoid two variables is to represent the second unknown as the difference of the total and the first unknown. The total interest is the sum of the interest earned from each account. Interest earned in the mutual fund: I = P r t = x ⋅ 0.08 ⋅ 1 = 0.08 x Interest earned in the CD: I = P r t = ( 3,400 − x ) ⋅ 0.05 ⋅ 1 = 0.05 ( 3,400 − x ) This equation models the problem with one variable. Solve for x. Back substitute. Answer: Mary invested $2,500 at 8% in a mutual fund and $900 at 5% in a CD.   Example 13: Joe has a handful of dimes and quarters that values $5.30. He has one fewer than twice as many dimes than quarters. How many of each coin does he have? Solution: Begin by identifying the variables. To determine the total value of a number of coins, multiply the number of coins by the value of each coin. For example, 5 quarters have a value $0.25 ⋅ 5 = $1.25. Solve for the number of quarters, q. Back substitute into 2q − 1 to find the number of dimes. Answer: Joe has 12 quarters and 23 dimes. Check by multiplying $0.25 ⋅ 12 = $3.00 and $0.10 ⋅ 23 = $2.30. Then add to obtain the correct amount: $3.00 + $2.30 = $5.30.   Try this! A total amount of $5,900 is invested in two accounts. One account earns 3.5% interest and another earns 4.5%. If the interest for 1 year is $229.50, then how much is invested in each account? Answer: $3,600 is invested at 3.5% and $2,300 at 4.5%. Video Solution  || Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Uniform motion refers to movement at a speed, or rate, that does not change. We can determine the distance traveled by multiplying the average rate by the time traveled at that rate with the formula D = r ⋅ t . Applications involving uniform motion usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize the data in a chart and then set up an algebraic equation that models the problem.   Example 14: Two trains leave the station at the same time traveling in opposite directions. One travels at 70 miles per hour and the other at 60 miles per hour. How long does it take for the distance between them to reach 390 miles? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in on the following chart. The time for each train is equal. To avoid introducing two more variables, use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances traveled by each train. We can now completely fill in the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the distance column. The problem asks for the time it takes for the total distance to reach 390 miles. Solve for t. Answer: It takes 3 hours for the distance between the trains to reach 390 miles.   Example 15: A train traveling nonstop to its destination is able to make the trip at an average speed of 72 miles per hour. On the return trip, the train makes several stops and is only able to average 48 miles per hour. If the return trip takes 2 hours longer than the initial trip to the destination, then what is the travel time each way? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in the following chart: Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is again defined by the distance column. In this case, the distance to the destination and back is the same, and the equation is Solve for t. The return trip takes t + 2 = 4 + 2 = 6 hours. Answer: It takes 4 hours to arrive at the destination and 6 hours to return.   Try this! Mary departs for school on a bicycle at an average rate of 6 miles per hour. Her sister Kate, running late, leaves 15 minutes later and cycles at twice that speed. How long will it take Kate to catch up to Mary? Be careful! Pay attention to the units given in the problem. Answer: It takes 15 minutes for Kate to catch up. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_5_1	Key Words, Translation, and Strategy Algebra simplifies the process of solving real-world problems. This is done by using letters to represent unknowns, restating problems in the form of equations, and offering systematic techniques for solving those equations. To solve problems using algebra, first translate the wording of the problem into mathematical statements that describe the relationships between the given information and the unknowns. Usually, this translation to mathematical statements is the difficult step in the process. The key to the translation is to carefully read the problem and identify certain key words and phrases. Key Words Translation Sum, increased by, more than, plus, added to, total + Difference, decreased by, subtracted from, less, minus − Product, multiplied by, of, times, twice * Quotient, divided by, ratio, per / Is, total, result = Here are some examples of translated key phrases. Key Phrases Translation The sum of a number and 7. x + 7 Seven more than a number. The difference of a number and 7. x − 7 Seven less than a number. Seven subtracted from a number. The product of 2 and a number. 2 x Twice a number. One-half of a number. 1 2 x The quotient of a number and 7. x / 7 When translating sentences into mathematical statements, be sure to read the sentence several times and identify the key words and phrases.   Example 1: Translate: Four less than twice some number is 16. Solution: First, choose a variable for the unknown number and identify the key words and phrases. Let x represent the unknown indicated by “some number.” Remember that subtraction is not commutative. For this reason, take care when setting up differences. In this example, 4 − 2 x = 16 is an incorrect translation. Answer: 2 x − 4 = 16   It is important to first identify the variable—let x represent…—and state in words what the unknown quantity is. This step not only makes your work more readable but also forces you to think about what you are looking for. Usually, if you know what you are asked to find, then the task of finding it is achievable.   Example 2: Translate: When 7 is subtracted from 3 times the sum of a number and 12, the result is 20. Solution: Let n represent the unknown number. Answer: 3 ( n + 12 ) − 7 = 20   To understand why parentheses are needed, study the structures of the following two sentences and their translations: “3 times the sum of a number and 12” 3 ( n + 12 ) “the sum of 3 times a number and 12” 3 n + 12 The key is to focus on the phrase “3 times the sum.” This prompts us to group the sum within parentheses and then multiply by 3. Once an application is translated into an algebraic equation, solve it using the techniques you have learned. Guidelines for Setting Up and Solving Word Problems Step 1: Read the problem several times, identify the key words and phrases, and organize the given information. Step 2: Identify the variables by assigning a letter or expression to the unknown quantities. Step 3: Translate and set up an algebraic equation that models the problem. Step 4: Solve the resulting algebraic equation. Step 5: Finally, answer the question in sentence form and make sure it makes sense (check it). For now, set up all of your equations using only one variable. Avoid two variables by looking for a relationship between the unknowns. Key Words, Translation, and Strategy Algebra simplifies the process of solving real-world problems. This is done by using letters to represent unknowns, restating problems in the form of equations, and offering systematic techniques for solving those equations. To solve problems using algebra, first translate the wording of the problem into mathematical statements that describe the relationships between the given information and the unknowns. Usually, this translation to mathematical statements is the difficult step in the process. The key to the translation is to carefully read the problem and identify certain key words and phrases. Key Words Translation Sum, increased by, more than, plus, added to, total + Difference, decreased by, subtracted from, less, minus − Product, multiplied by, of, times, twice * Quotient, divided by, ratio, per / Is, total, result = Here are some examples of translated key phrases. Key Phrases Translation The sum of a number and 7. x + 7 Seven more than a number. The difference of a number and 7. x − 7 Seven less than a number. Seven subtracted from a number. The product of 2 and a number. 2 x Twice a number. One-half of a number. 1 2 x The quotient of a number and 7. x / 7 When translating sentences into mathematical statements, be sure to read the sentence several times and identify the key words and phrases.   Example 1: Translate: Four less than twice some number is 16. Solution: First, choose a variable for the unknown number and identify the key words and phrases. Let x represent the unknown indicated by “some number.” Remember that subtraction is not commutative. For this reason, take care when setting up differences. In this example, 4 − 2 x = 16 is an incorrect translation. Answer: 2 x − 4 = 16   It is important to first identify the variable—let x represent…—and state in words what the unknown quantity is. This step not only makes your work more readable but also forces you to think about what you are looking for. Usually, if you know what you are asked to find, then the task of finding it is achievable.   Example 2: Translate: When 7 is subtracted from 3 times the sum of a number and 12, the result is 20. Solution: Let n represent the unknown number. Answer: 3 ( n + 12 ) − 7 = 20   To understand why parentheses are needed, study the structures of the following two sentences and their translations: “3 times the sum of a number and 12” 3 ( n + 12 ) “the sum of 3 times a number and 12” 3 n + 12 The key is to focus on the phrase “3 times the sum.” This prompts us to group the sum within parentheses and then multiply by 3. Once an application is translated into an algebraic equation, solve it using the techniques you have learned. Guidelines for Setting Up and Solving Word Problems Step 1: Read the problem several times, identify the key words and phrases, and organize the given information. Step 2: Identify the variables by assigning a letter or expression to the unknown quantities. Step 3: Translate and set up an algebraic equation that models the problem. Step 4: Solve the resulting algebraic equation. Step 5: Finally, answer the question in sentence form and make sure it makes sense (check it). For now, set up all of your equations using only one variable. Avoid two variables by looking for a relationship between the unknowns.  || 
book2_chapter2_5_3	Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We classify applications involving relationships between real numbers broadly as number problems. These problems can sometimes be solved using some creative arithmetic, guessing, and checking. Solving in this manner is not a good practice and should be avoided. Begin by working through the basic steps outlined in the general guidelines for solving word problems.   Example 3: A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller integer. The sum of the two integers is 18. Find the integers. Solution: Identify variables: Begin by assigning a variable to the smaller integer. Use the first sentence to identify the larger integer in terms of the variable x: “A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller.” Set up an equation: Add the expressions that represent the two integers, and set the resulting expression equal to 18 as indicated in the second sentence: “The sum of the two integers is 18.” Solve: Solve the equation to obtain the smaller integer x. Back substitute: Use the expression 3 x − 2 to find the larger integer—this is called back substituting The process of finding the answers to other unknowns after one has been found. . Answer the question: The two integers are 5 and 13. Check: 5 + 13 = 18. The answer makes sense.   Example 4: The difference between two integers is 2. The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller. Find the integers. Solution: Use the relationship between the two integers in the second sentence, “The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller,” to identify the unknowns in terms of one variable. Since the difference is positive, subtract the smaller integer from the larger. Solve. Use 2x − 6 to find the larger integer. Answer: The two integers are 8 and 10. These integers clearly solve the problem.   It is worth mentioning again that you can often find solutions to simple problems by guessing and checking. This is so because the numbers are chosen to simplify the process of solving, so that the algebraic steps are not too tedious. You learn how to set up algebraic equations with easier problems, so that you can use these ideas to solve more difficult problems later.   Example 5: The sum of two consecutive even integers is 46. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive even integers.” Add the even integers and set them equal to 46. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next even integer. Answer: The consecutive even integers are 22 and 24.   It should be clear that consecutive even integers are separated by two units. However, it may not be so clear that odd integers are as well.   Example 6: The sum of two consecutive odd integers is 36. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive odd integers.” Add the two odd integers and set the expression equal to 36. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next odd integer. Answer: The consecutive odd integers are 17 and 19.   The algebraic setup for even and odd integer problems is the same. A common mistake is to use x and x + 3 when identifying the variables for consecutive odd integers. This is incorrect because adding 3 to an odd number yields an even number: for example, 5 + 3 = 8. An incorrect setup is very likely to lead to a decimal answer, which may be an indication that the problem was set up incorrectly.   Example 7: The sum of three consecutive integers is 24. Find the integers. Solution: Consecutive integers are separated by one unit. Add the integers and set the sum equal to 24. Solve. Back substitute to find the other two integers. Answer: The three consecutive integers are 7, 8 and 9, where 7 + 8 + 9 = 24.   Try this! The sum of three consecutive odd integers is 87. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 27, 29, and 31. Video Solution Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We classify applications involving relationships between real numbers broadly as number problems. These problems can sometimes be solved using some creative arithmetic, guessing, and checking. Solving in this manner is not a good practice and should be avoided. Begin by working through the basic steps outlined in the general guidelines for solving word problems.   Example 3: A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller integer. The sum of the two integers is 18. Find the integers. Solution: Identify variables: Begin by assigning a variable to the smaller integer. Use the first sentence to identify the larger integer in terms of the variable x: “A larger integer is 2 less than 3 times a smaller.” Set up an equation: Add the expressions that represent the two integers, and set the resulting expression equal to 18 as indicated in the second sentence: “The sum of the two integers is 18.” Solve: Solve the equation to obtain the smaller integer x. Back substitute: Use the expression 3 x − 2 to find the larger integer—this is called back substituting The process of finding the answers to other unknowns after one has been found. . Answer the question: The two integers are 5 and 13. Check: 5 + 13 = 18. The answer makes sense.   Example 4: The difference between two integers is 2. The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller. Find the integers. Solution: Use the relationship between the two integers in the second sentence, “The larger integer is 6 less than twice the smaller,” to identify the unknowns in terms of one variable. Since the difference is positive, subtract the smaller integer from the larger. Solve. Use 2x − 6 to find the larger integer. Answer: The two integers are 8 and 10. These integers clearly solve the problem.   It is worth mentioning again that you can often find solutions to simple problems by guessing and checking. This is so because the numbers are chosen to simplify the process of solving, so that the algebraic steps are not too tedious. You learn how to set up algebraic equations with easier problems, so that you can use these ideas to solve more difficult problems later.   Example 5: The sum of two consecutive even integers is 46. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive even integers.” Add the even integers and set them equal to 46. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next even integer. Answer: The consecutive even integers are 22 and 24.   It should be clear that consecutive even integers are separated by two units. However, it may not be so clear that odd integers are as well.   Example 6: The sum of two consecutive odd integers is 36. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase to focus on is “consecutive odd integers.” Add the two odd integers and set the expression equal to 36. Solve. Use x + 2 to find the next odd integer. Answer: The consecutive odd integers are 17 and 19.   The algebraic setup for even and odd integer problems is the same. A common mistake is to use x and x + 3 when identifying the variables for consecutive odd integers. This is incorrect because adding 3 to an odd number yields an even number: for example, 5 + 3 = 8. An incorrect setup is very likely to lead to a decimal answer, which may be an indication that the problem was set up incorrectly.   Example 7: The sum of three consecutive integers is 24. Find the integers. Solution: Consecutive integers are separated by one unit. Add the integers and set the sum equal to 24. Solve. Back substitute to find the other two integers. Answer: The three consecutive integers are 7, 8 and 9, where 7 + 8 + 9 = 24.   Try this! The sum of three consecutive odd integers is 87. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 27, 29, and 31. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_5_4	Geometry Problems (Perimeter) Recall that the perimeter The sum of the lengths of all the outside edges of a polygon. of a polygon is the sum of the lengths of all the outside edges. In addition, it is helpful to review the following perimeter formulas ( π ≈ 3.14159 ). Perimeter of a rectangle P = 2 l + 2 w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. : P = 2 l + 2 w Perimeter of a square P = 4 s , where s represents the length of a side. : P = 4 s Perimeter of a triangle P = a + b + c , where a, b, and c each represents the length of a different side. : P = a + b + c Perimeter of a circle ( circumference The perimeter of a circle given by C = 2 π r , where r represents the radius of the circle and π ≈ 3.14159 . ): C = 2 π r Keep in mind that you are looking for a relationship between the unknowns so that you can set up algebraic equations using only one variable. When working with geometry problems, it is often helpful to draw a picture.   Example 8: A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet. The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width. Find the dimensions of the rectangle. Solution: The sentence “The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width” gives the relationship between the two variables. The sentence “A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet” suggests an algebraic setup. Substitute 64 for the perimeter and the expression for the length into the appropriate formula as follows: Once you have set up an algebraic equation with one variable, solve for the width, w. Use 3w + 4 to find the length. Answer: The rectangle measures 7 feet by 25 feet. To check, add all of the sides:   Example 9: Two sides of a triangle are 5 and 7 inches longer than the third side. If the perimeter measures 21 inches, find the length of each side. Solution: The first sentence describes the relationships between the unknowns. Substitute these expressions into the appropriate formula and use 21 for the perimeter P. You now have an equation with one variable to solve. Back substitute. Answer: The three sides of the triangle measure 3 inches, 8 inches, and 10 inches. The check is left to the reader.   Try this! The length of a rectangle is 1 foot less than twice its width. If the perimeter is 46 feet, find the dimensions. Answer: Width: 8 feet; length: 15 feet Video Solution Geometry Problems (Perimeter) Recall that the perimeter The sum of the lengths of all the outside edges of a polygon. of a polygon is the sum of the lengths of all the outside edges. In addition, it is helpful to review the following perimeter formulas ( π ≈ 3.14159 ). Perimeter of a rectangle P = 2 l + 2 w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. : P = 2 l + 2 w Perimeter of a square P = 4 s , where s represents the length of a side. : P = 4 s Perimeter of a triangle P = a + b + c , where a, b, and c each represents the length of a different side. : P = a + b + c Perimeter of a circle ( circumference The perimeter of a circle given by C = 2 π r , where r represents the radius of the circle and π ≈ 3.14159 . ): C = 2 π r Keep in mind that you are looking for a relationship between the unknowns so that you can set up algebraic equations using only one variable. When working with geometry problems, it is often helpful to draw a picture.   Example 8: A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet. The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width. Find the dimensions of the rectangle. Solution: The sentence “The length is 4 feet more than 3 times the width” gives the relationship between the two variables. The sentence “A rectangle has a perimeter measuring 64 feet” suggests an algebraic setup. Substitute 64 for the perimeter and the expression for the length into the appropriate formula as follows: Once you have set up an algebraic equation with one variable, solve for the width, w. Use 3w + 4 to find the length. Answer: The rectangle measures 7 feet by 25 feet. To check, add all of the sides:   Example 9: Two sides of a triangle are 5 and 7 inches longer than the third side. If the perimeter measures 21 inches, find the length of each side. Solution: The first sentence describes the relationships between the unknowns. Substitute these expressions into the appropriate formula and use 21 for the perimeter P. You now have an equation with one variable to solve. Back substitute. Answer: The three sides of the triangle measure 3 inches, 8 inches, and 10 inches. The check is left to the reader.   Try this! The length of a rectangle is 1 foot less than twice its width. If the perimeter is 46 feet, find the dimensions. Answer: Width: 8 feet; length: 15 feet Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_5_5	Problems Involving Money and Percents Whenever setting up an equation involving a percentage, we usually need to convert the percentage to a decimal or fraction. If the question asks for a percentage, then do not forget to convert your answer to a percent at the end. Also, when money is involved, be sure to round off to two decimal places.   Example 10: If a pair of shoes costs $52.50 including a 7 1 4 % tax, what is the original cost of the item before taxes are added? Solution: Begin by converting 7 1 4 % to a decimal. The amount of tax is this rate times the original cost of the item. The original cost of the item is what you are asked to find. Use this equation to solve for c, the original cost of the item. Answer: The cost of the item before taxes is $48.95. Check this by multiplying $48.95 by 0.0725 to obtain the tax and add it to this cost.   Example 11: Given a 5 1 8 % annual interest rate, how long will it take $1,200 to yield $307.50 in simple interest? Solution: Organize the data needed to use the simple interest formula I = p r t . Given interest for the time period: I = $ 307.50 Given principal: p = $ 1200 Given rate: r = 5 1 8 % = 5.125 % = 0.05125 Next, substitute all of the known quantities into the formula and then solve for the only unknown, t. Answer: It takes 5 years for $1,200 invested at 5 1 8 % to earn $307.50 in simple interest.   Example 12: Mary invested her total savings of $3,400 in two accounts. Her mutual fund account earned 8% last year and her CD earned 5%. If her total interest for the year was $245, how much was in each account? Solution: The relationship between the two unknowns is that they total $3,400. When a total is involved, a common technique used to avoid two variables is to represent the second unknown as the difference of the total and the first unknown. The total interest is the sum of the interest earned from each account. Interest earned in the mutual fund: I = P r t = x ⋅ 0.08 ⋅ 1 = 0.08 x Interest earned in the CD: I = P r t = ( 3,400 − x ) ⋅ 0.05 ⋅ 1 = 0.05 ( 3,400 − x ) This equation models the problem with one variable. Solve for x. Back substitute. Answer: Mary invested $2,500 at 8% in a mutual fund and $900 at 5% in a CD.   Example 13: Joe has a handful of dimes and quarters that values $5.30. He has one fewer than twice as many dimes than quarters. How many of each coin does he have? Solution: Begin by identifying the variables. To determine the total value of a number of coins, multiply the number of coins by the value of each coin. For example, 5 quarters have a value $0.25 ⋅ 5 = $1.25. Solve for the number of quarters, q. Back substitute into 2q − 1 to find the number of dimes. Answer: Joe has 12 quarters and 23 dimes. Check by multiplying $0.25 ⋅ 12 = $3.00 and $0.10 ⋅ 23 = $2.30. Then add to obtain the correct amount: $3.00 + $2.30 = $5.30.   Try this! A total amount of $5,900 is invested in two accounts. One account earns 3.5% interest and another earns 4.5%. If the interest for 1 year is $229.50, then how much is invested in each account? Answer: $3,600 is invested at 3.5% and $2,300 at 4.5%. Video Solution Problems Involving Money and Percents Whenever setting up an equation involving a percentage, we usually need to convert the percentage to a decimal or fraction. If the question asks for a percentage, then do not forget to convert your answer to a percent at the end. Also, when money is involved, be sure to round off to two decimal places.   Example 10: If a pair of shoes costs $52.50 including a 7 1 4 % tax, what is the original cost of the item before taxes are added? Solution: Begin by converting 7 1 4 % to a decimal. The amount of tax is this rate times the original cost of the item. The original cost of the item is what you are asked to find. Use this equation to solve for c, the original cost of the item. Answer: The cost of the item before taxes is $48.95. Check this by multiplying $48.95 by 0.0725 to obtain the tax and add it to this cost.   Example 11: Given a 5 1 8 % annual interest rate, how long will it take $1,200 to yield $307.50 in simple interest? Solution: Organize the data needed to use the simple interest formula I = p r t . Given interest for the time period: I = $ 307.50 Given principal: p = $ 1200 Given rate: r = 5 1 8 % = 5.125 % = 0.05125 Next, substitute all of the known quantities into the formula and then solve for the only unknown, t. Answer: It takes 5 years for $1,200 invested at 5 1 8 % to earn $307.50 in simple interest.   Example 12: Mary invested her total savings of $3,400 in two accounts. Her mutual fund account earned 8% last year and her CD earned 5%. If her total interest for the year was $245, how much was in each account? Solution: The relationship between the two unknowns is that they total $3,400. When a total is involved, a common technique used to avoid two variables is to represent the second unknown as the difference of the total and the first unknown. The total interest is the sum of the interest earned from each account. Interest earned in the mutual fund: I = P r t = x ⋅ 0.08 ⋅ 1 = 0.08 x Interest earned in the CD: I = P r t = ( 3,400 − x ) ⋅ 0.05 ⋅ 1 = 0.05 ( 3,400 − x ) This equation models the problem with one variable. Solve for x. Back substitute. Answer: Mary invested $2,500 at 8% in a mutual fund and $900 at 5% in a CD.   Example 13: Joe has a handful of dimes and quarters that values $5.30. He has one fewer than twice as many dimes than quarters. How many of each coin does he have? Solution: Begin by identifying the variables. To determine the total value of a number of coins, multiply the number of coins by the value of each coin. For example, 5 quarters have a value $0.25 ⋅ 5 = $1.25. Solve for the number of quarters, q. Back substitute into 2q − 1 to find the number of dimes. Answer: Joe has 12 quarters and 23 dimes. Check by multiplying $0.25 ⋅ 12 = $3.00 and $0.10 ⋅ 23 = $2.30. Then add to obtain the correct amount: $3.00 + $2.30 = $5.30.   Try this! A total amount of $5,900 is invested in two accounts. One account earns 3.5% interest and another earns 4.5%. If the interest for 1 year is $229.50, then how much is invested in each account? Answer: $3,600 is invested at 3.5% and $2,300 at 4.5%. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_5_6	Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Uniform motion refers to movement at a speed, or rate, that does not change. We can determine the distance traveled by multiplying the average rate by the time traveled at that rate with the formula D = r ⋅ t . Applications involving uniform motion usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize the data in a chart and then set up an algebraic equation that models the problem.   Example 14: Two trains leave the station at the same time traveling in opposite directions. One travels at 70 miles per hour and the other at 60 miles per hour. How long does it take for the distance between them to reach 390 miles? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in on the following chart. The time for each train is equal. To avoid introducing two more variables, use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances traveled by each train. We can now completely fill in the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the distance column. The problem asks for the time it takes for the total distance to reach 390 miles. Solve for t. Answer: It takes 3 hours for the distance between the trains to reach 390 miles.   Example 15: A train traveling nonstop to its destination is able to make the trip at an average speed of 72 miles per hour. On the return trip, the train makes several stops and is only able to average 48 miles per hour. If the return trip takes 2 hours longer than the initial trip to the destination, then what is the travel time each way? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in the following chart: Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is again defined by the distance column. In this case, the distance to the destination and back is the same, and the equation is Solve for t. The return trip takes t + 2 = 4 + 2 = 6 hours. Answer: It takes 4 hours to arrive at the destination and 6 hours to return.   Try this! Mary departs for school on a bicycle at an average rate of 6 miles per hour. Her sister Kate, running late, leaves 15 minutes later and cycles at twice that speed. How long will it take Kate to catch up to Mary? Be careful! Pay attention to the units given in the problem. Answer: It takes 15 minutes for Kate to catch up. Video Solution Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Uniform motion refers to movement at a speed, or rate, that does not change. We can determine the distance traveled by multiplying the average rate by the time traveled at that rate with the formula D = r ⋅ t . Applications involving uniform motion usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize the data in a chart and then set up an algebraic equation that models the problem.   Example 14: Two trains leave the station at the same time traveling in opposite directions. One travels at 70 miles per hour and the other at 60 miles per hour. How long does it take for the distance between them to reach 390 miles? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in on the following chart. The time for each train is equal. To avoid introducing two more variables, use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances traveled by each train. We can now completely fill in the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the distance column. The problem asks for the time it takes for the total distance to reach 390 miles. Solve for t. Answer: It takes 3 hours for the distance between the trains to reach 390 miles.   Example 15: A train traveling nonstop to its destination is able to make the trip at an average speed of 72 miles per hour. On the return trip, the train makes several stops and is only able to average 48 miles per hour. If the return trip takes 2 hours longer than the initial trip to the destination, then what is the travel time each way? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. The given information is filled in the following chart: Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is again defined by the distance column. In this case, the distance to the destination and back is the same, and the equation is Solve for t. The return trip takes t + 2 = 4 + 2 = 6 hours. Answer: It takes 4 hours to arrive at the destination and 6 hours to return.   Try this! Mary departs for school on a bicycle at an average rate of 6 miles per hour. Her sister Kate, running late, leaves 15 minutes later and cycles at twice that speed. How long will it take Kate to catch up to Mary? Be careful! Pay attention to the units given in the problem. Answer: It takes 15 minutes for Kate to catch up. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_6	 || Definitions A ratio Relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. is a relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. Ratios are typically expressed using the following notation: All of the above are equivalent forms used to express a ratio. However, the most familiar way to express a ratio is in the form of a fraction. When writing ratios, it is important to pay attention to the units. If the units are the same, then the ratio can be written without them.   Example 1: Express the ratio 12 feet to 48 feet in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 1 to 4   If the units are different, then we must be sure to include them because the ratio represents a rate A ratio where the units for the numerator and the denominator are different. .   Example 2: Express the ratio 220 miles to 4 hours in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 55 miles to 1 hour (or 55 miles per hour)   Rates are useful when determining unit cost The price of each unit. , or the price of each unit. We use the unit cost to compare values when the quantities are not the same. To determine the unit cost, divide the cost by the number of units.   Example 3: A local supermarket offers a pack of 12 sodas for $3.48 on sale, and the local discount warehouse offers the soda in a 36-can case for $11.52. Which is the better value? Solution: Divide the cost by the number of cans to obtain the unit price. Supermarket Discount warehouse $ 3.48 12     cans = $ 0.29 / can $ 11.52 36     cans = $ 0.32 / can Answer: The supermarket sale price of $3.48 for a 12-pack is a better value at $0.29 per can.   A proportion A statement of the equality of two ratios. is a statement of equality of two ratios. This proportion is often read “a is to b as c is to d.” Here is an example of a simple proportion, If we clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the proportion by the product of the denominators, 8, then we obtain the following true statement: Given any nonzero real numbers a, b, c, and d that satisfy a proportion, multiply both sides by the product of the denominators to obtain the following: This shows that cross products are equal, and is commonly referred to as cross multiplication If a b = c d , then a d = b c . .  || Solving Proportions Cross multiply to solve proportions where terms are unknown.   Example 4: Solve: 5 8 = n 4 . Solution: Cross multiply and then solve for n. Answer: n = 5 2   Example 5: Solve: 15 x = 5 6 . Solution: Cross multiply then solve for x. Answer: x = 18   Example 6: Solve: n + 3 5 = 7 2 . Solution: When cross multiplying, be sure to group n + 3 . Apply the distributive property in the next step. Answer: n = 29 2   Try this! Solve: 5 3 = 3 n − 1 2 . Answer: n = 13 9 Video Solution  || Applications When setting up proportions, consistency with the units of each ratio is critical. Units for the numerators should be the same and units for the denominators should also be the same.   Example 7: It is claimed that 2 out of 3 dentists prefer a certain brand of toothpaste. If 600 dentists are surveyed, then how many will say they prefer that brand? Solution: First, identify the unknown and assign it a variable. Since you are looking for the number of dentists who prefer the brand name out of a total of 600 surveyed, construct the ratios with the number of dentists who prefer the brand in the numerator and the total number surveyed in the denominator. Cross multiply and solve for n, Answer: The claim suggests that 400 out of 600 dentists surveyed prefer the brand name.   Example 8: In Tulare County, 3 out of every 7 voters said yes to Proposition 40. If 42,000 people voted, how many said no to Proposition 40? Solution: The problem gives the ratio of voters who said yes, but it asks for the number who said no. If 3 out of 7 said yes, then we can assume 4 out of 7 said no. Set up the ratios with the number of voters who said no in the numerator and the total number of voters in the denominator. Cross multiply and solve for n. Answer: 24,000 voters out of 42,000 said no.   Example 9: The sum of two integers in the ratio of 4 to 5 is 27. Find the integers. Solution: The sum of two integers is 27; use this relationship to avoid two variables. The integers are given to be in the ratio of 4 to 5. Set up the following proportion: Use 27 − n to determine the other integer. Answer: The integers are 12 and 15.   Try this! A recipe calls for 5 tablespoons of sugar for every 8 cups of flour. How many tablespoons of sugar are required for 32 cups of flour? Answer: 20 tablespoons of sugar Video Solution  || Similar Triangles We will often encounter proportion problems in geometry and trigonometry. One application involves similar triangles Triangles with the same shape but not necessarily the same size. The measures of corresponding angles are equal and the corresponding sides are proportional. , which have the same shape, but not necessarily the same size. The measures of the corresponding angles of similar triangles are equal, and the measures of the corresponding sides are proportional. Given similar triangles ABC and RST, We may write A B C   ~   R S T and conclude that all of the corresponding angles are equal. The notation indicates that angle A corresponds to angle R and that the measures of these angles are equal: A = R. In addition, the measures of other pairs of corresponding angles are equal: B = S and C = T. Use uppercase letters for angles and a lowercase letter to denote the side opposite of the given angle. Denote the proportionality of the sides as follows:   Example 10: If triangle ABC is similar to RST, where a = 3 , b = 4 , c = 5 , and r = 9 , then find the remaining two sides. Solution: Draw a picture and identify the variables pictorially. Represent the remaining unknown sides by s and t. Set up proportions and solve for the missing sides. Answer: The two remaining sides measure 12 units and 15 units.   The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles is called the scale factor The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles. . In the previous example, the ratio of the two given sides a and r is Therefore, triangle ABC is similar to triangle RST with a scale factor of 1/3. This means that each leg of triangle ABC is 1/3 of the measure of the corresponding legs of triangle RST. Also, another interesting fact is that the perimeters of similar triangles are in the same proportion as their sides and share the same scale factor.   Example 11: If a triangle ABC has a perimeter of 12 units and is similar to RST with a scale factor of 1/3, then find the perimeter of triangle RST. Solution: Scale factor 1/3 implies that the perimeters are in proportion to this ratio. Set up a proportion as follows: Cross multiply and solve for x. Answer: The perimeter of triangle RST is 36 units.  || 
book2_chapter2_6_1	Definitions A ratio Relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. is a relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. Ratios are typically expressed using the following notation: All of the above are equivalent forms used to express a ratio. However, the most familiar way to express a ratio is in the form of a fraction. When writing ratios, it is important to pay attention to the units. If the units are the same, then the ratio can be written without them.   Example 1: Express the ratio 12 feet to 48 feet in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 1 to 4   If the units are different, then we must be sure to include them because the ratio represents a rate A ratio where the units for the numerator and the denominator are different. .   Example 2: Express the ratio 220 miles to 4 hours in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 55 miles to 1 hour (or 55 miles per hour)   Rates are useful when determining unit cost The price of each unit. , or the price of each unit. We use the unit cost to compare values when the quantities are not the same. To determine the unit cost, divide the cost by the number of units.   Example 3: A local supermarket offers a pack of 12 sodas for $3.48 on sale, and the local discount warehouse offers the soda in a 36-can case for $11.52. Which is the better value? Solution: Divide the cost by the number of cans to obtain the unit price. Supermarket Discount warehouse $ 3.48 12     cans = $ 0.29 / can $ 11.52 36     cans = $ 0.32 / can Answer: The supermarket sale price of $3.48 for a 12-pack is a better value at $0.29 per can.   A proportion A statement of the equality of two ratios. is a statement of equality of two ratios. This proportion is often read “a is to b as c is to d.” Here is an example of a simple proportion, If we clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the proportion by the product of the denominators, 8, then we obtain the following true statement: Given any nonzero real numbers a, b, c, and d that satisfy a proportion, multiply both sides by the product of the denominators to obtain the following: This shows that cross products are equal, and is commonly referred to as cross multiplication If a b = c d , then a d = b c . . Definitions A ratio Relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. is a relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. Ratios are typically expressed using the following notation: All of the above are equivalent forms used to express a ratio. However, the most familiar way to express a ratio is in the form of a fraction. When writing ratios, it is important to pay attention to the units. If the units are the same, then the ratio can be written without them.   Example 1: Express the ratio 12 feet to 48 feet in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 1 to 4   If the units are different, then we must be sure to include them because the ratio represents a rate A ratio where the units for the numerator and the denominator are different. .   Example 2: Express the ratio 220 miles to 4 hours in reduced form. Solution: Answer: 55 miles to 1 hour (or 55 miles per hour)   Rates are useful when determining unit cost The price of each unit. , or the price of each unit. We use the unit cost to compare values when the quantities are not the same. To determine the unit cost, divide the cost by the number of units.   Example 3: A local supermarket offers a pack of 12 sodas for $3.48 on sale, and the local discount warehouse offers the soda in a 36-can case for $11.52. Which is the better value? Solution: Divide the cost by the number of cans to obtain the unit price. Supermarket Discount warehouse $ 3.48 12     cans = $ 0.29 / can $ 11.52 36     cans = $ 0.32 / can Answer: The supermarket sale price of $3.48 for a 12-pack is a better value at $0.29 per can.   A proportion A statement of the equality of two ratios. is a statement of equality of two ratios. This proportion is often read “a is to b as c is to d.” Here is an example of a simple proportion, If we clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the proportion by the product of the denominators, 8, then we obtain the following true statement: Given any nonzero real numbers a, b, c, and d that satisfy a proportion, multiply both sides by the product of the denominators to obtain the following: This shows that cross products are equal, and is commonly referred to as cross multiplication If a b = c d , then a d = b c . .  || 
book2_chapter2_6_2	Solving Proportions Cross multiply to solve proportions where terms are unknown.   Example 4: Solve: 5 8 = n 4 . Solution: Cross multiply and then solve for n. Answer: n = 5 2   Example 5: Solve: 15 x = 5 6 . Solution: Cross multiply then solve for x. Answer: x = 18   Example 6: Solve: n + 3 5 = 7 2 . Solution: When cross multiplying, be sure to group n + 3 . Apply the distributive property in the next step. Answer: n = 29 2   Try this! Solve: 5 3 = 3 n − 1 2 . Answer: n = 13 9 Video Solution Solving Proportions Cross multiply to solve proportions where terms are unknown.   Example 4: Solve: 5 8 = n 4 . Solution: Cross multiply and then solve for n. Answer: n = 5 2   Example 5: Solve: 15 x = 5 6 . Solution: Cross multiply then solve for x. Answer: x = 18   Example 6: Solve: n + 3 5 = 7 2 . Solution: When cross multiplying, be sure to group n + 3 . Apply the distributive property in the next step. Answer: n = 29 2   Try this! Solve: 5 3 = 3 n − 1 2 . Answer: n = 13 9 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_6_3	Applications When setting up proportions, consistency with the units of each ratio is critical. Units for the numerators should be the same and units for the denominators should also be the same.   Example 7: It is claimed that 2 out of 3 dentists prefer a certain brand of toothpaste. If 600 dentists are surveyed, then how many will say they prefer that brand? Solution: First, identify the unknown and assign it a variable. Since you are looking for the number of dentists who prefer the brand name out of a total of 600 surveyed, construct the ratios with the number of dentists who prefer the brand in the numerator and the total number surveyed in the denominator. Cross multiply and solve for n, Answer: The claim suggests that 400 out of 600 dentists surveyed prefer the brand name.   Example 8: In Tulare County, 3 out of every 7 voters said yes to Proposition 40. If 42,000 people voted, how many said no to Proposition 40? Solution: The problem gives the ratio of voters who said yes, but it asks for the number who said no. If 3 out of 7 said yes, then we can assume 4 out of 7 said no. Set up the ratios with the number of voters who said no in the numerator and the total number of voters in the denominator. Cross multiply and solve for n. Answer: 24,000 voters out of 42,000 said no.   Example 9: The sum of two integers in the ratio of 4 to 5 is 27. Find the integers. Solution: The sum of two integers is 27; use this relationship to avoid two variables. The integers are given to be in the ratio of 4 to 5. Set up the following proportion: Use 27 − n to determine the other integer. Answer: The integers are 12 and 15.   Try this! A recipe calls for 5 tablespoons of sugar for every 8 cups of flour. How many tablespoons of sugar are required for 32 cups of flour? Answer: 20 tablespoons of sugar Video Solution Applications When setting up proportions, consistency with the units of each ratio is critical. Units for the numerators should be the same and units for the denominators should also be the same.   Example 7: It is claimed that 2 out of 3 dentists prefer a certain brand of toothpaste. If 600 dentists are surveyed, then how many will say they prefer that brand? Solution: First, identify the unknown and assign it a variable. Since you are looking for the number of dentists who prefer the brand name out of a total of 600 surveyed, construct the ratios with the number of dentists who prefer the brand in the numerator and the total number surveyed in the denominator. Cross multiply and solve for n, Answer: The claim suggests that 400 out of 600 dentists surveyed prefer the brand name.   Example 8: In Tulare County, 3 out of every 7 voters said yes to Proposition 40. If 42,000 people voted, how many said no to Proposition 40? Solution: The problem gives the ratio of voters who said yes, but it asks for the number who said no. If 3 out of 7 said yes, then we can assume 4 out of 7 said no. Set up the ratios with the number of voters who said no in the numerator and the total number of voters in the denominator. Cross multiply and solve for n. Answer: 24,000 voters out of 42,000 said no.   Example 9: The sum of two integers in the ratio of 4 to 5 is 27. Find the integers. Solution: The sum of two integers is 27; use this relationship to avoid two variables. The integers are given to be in the ratio of 4 to 5. Set up the following proportion: Use 27 − n to determine the other integer. Answer: The integers are 12 and 15.   Try this! A recipe calls for 5 tablespoons of sugar for every 8 cups of flour. How many tablespoons of sugar are required for 32 cups of flour? Answer: 20 tablespoons of sugar Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_6_4	Similar Triangles We will often encounter proportion problems in geometry and trigonometry. One application involves similar triangles Triangles with the same shape but not necessarily the same size. The measures of corresponding angles are equal and the corresponding sides are proportional. , which have the same shape, but not necessarily the same size. The measures of the corresponding angles of similar triangles are equal, and the measures of the corresponding sides are proportional. Given similar triangles ABC and RST, We may write A B C   ~   R S T and conclude that all of the corresponding angles are equal. The notation indicates that angle A corresponds to angle R and that the measures of these angles are equal: A = R. In addition, the measures of other pairs of corresponding angles are equal: B = S and C = T. Use uppercase letters for angles and a lowercase letter to denote the side opposite of the given angle. Denote the proportionality of the sides as follows:   Example 10: If triangle ABC is similar to RST, where a = 3 , b = 4 , c = 5 , and r = 9 , then find the remaining two sides. Solution: Draw a picture and identify the variables pictorially. Represent the remaining unknown sides by s and t. Set up proportions and solve for the missing sides. Answer: The two remaining sides measure 12 units and 15 units.   The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles is called the scale factor The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles. . In the previous example, the ratio of the two given sides a and r is Therefore, triangle ABC is similar to triangle RST with a scale factor of 1/3. This means that each leg of triangle ABC is 1/3 of the measure of the corresponding legs of triangle RST. Also, another interesting fact is that the perimeters of similar triangles are in the same proportion as their sides and share the same scale factor.   Example 11: If a triangle ABC has a perimeter of 12 units and is similar to RST with a scale factor of 1/3, then find the perimeter of triangle RST. Solution: Scale factor 1/3 implies that the perimeters are in proportion to this ratio. Set up a proportion as follows: Cross multiply and solve for x. Answer: The perimeter of triangle RST is 36 units. Similar Triangles We will often encounter proportion problems in geometry and trigonometry. One application involves similar triangles Triangles with the same shape but not necessarily the same size. The measures of corresponding angles are equal and the corresponding sides are proportional. , which have the same shape, but not necessarily the same size. The measures of the corresponding angles of similar triangles are equal, and the measures of the corresponding sides are proportional. Given similar triangles ABC and RST, We may write A B C   ~   R S T and conclude that all of the corresponding angles are equal. The notation indicates that angle A corresponds to angle R and that the measures of these angles are equal: A = R. In addition, the measures of other pairs of corresponding angles are equal: B = S and C = T. Use uppercase letters for angles and a lowercase letter to denote the side opposite of the given angle. Denote the proportionality of the sides as follows:   Example 10: If triangle ABC is similar to RST, where a = 3 , b = 4 , c = 5 , and r = 9 , then find the remaining two sides. Solution: Draw a picture and identify the variables pictorially. Represent the remaining unknown sides by s and t. Set up proportions and solve for the missing sides. Answer: The two remaining sides measure 12 units and 15 units.   The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles is called the scale factor The reduced ratio of any two corresponding sides of similar triangles. . In the previous example, the ratio of the two given sides a and r is Therefore, triangle ABC is similar to triangle RST with a scale factor of 1/3. This means that each leg of triangle ABC is 1/3 of the measure of the corresponding legs of triangle RST. Also, another interesting fact is that the perimeters of similar triangles are in the same proportion as their sides and share the same scale factor.   Example 11: If a triangle ABC has a perimeter of 12 units and is similar to RST with a scale factor of 1/3, then find the perimeter of triangle RST. Solution: Scale factor 1/3 implies that the perimeters are in proportion to this ratio. Set up a proportion as follows: Cross multiply and solve for x. Answer: The perimeter of triangle RST is 36 units.  || 
book2_chapter2_7	 || Unbounded Intervals An algebraic inequality Expressions related with the symbols ≤ , <, ≥ , and >. , such as x ≥ 2 , is read “x is greater than or equal to 2.” This inequality has infinitely many solutions for x. Some of the solutions are 2, 3, 3.5, 5, 20, and 20.001. Since it is impossible to list all of the solutions, a system is needed that allows a clear communication of this infinite set. Two common ways of expressing solutions to an inequality are by graphing them on a number line Solutions to an algebraic inequality expressed by shading the solution on a number line. and using interval notation A textual system of expressing solutions to an algebraic inequality. . To express the solution graphically, draw a number line and shade in all the values that are solutions to the inequality. Interval notation is textual and uses specific notation as follows: Determine the interval notation after graphing the solution set on a number line. The numbers in interval notation should be written in the same order as they appear on the number line, with smaller numbers in the set appearing first. In this example, there is an inclusive inequality An inequality that includes the boundary point indicated by the “or equal” part of the symbols ≤ and ≥ and a closed dot on the number line. , which means that the lower-bound 2 is included in the solution. Denote this with a closed dot on the number line and a square bracket in interval notation. The symbol (∞) is read as infinity The symbol (∞) indicates the interval is unbounded to the right. and indicates that the set is unbounded to the right on a number line. Interval notation requires a parenthesis to enclose infinity. The square bracket indicates the boundary is included in the solution. The parentheses indicate the boundary is not included. Infinity is an upper bound to the real numbers, but is not itself a real number: it cannot be included in the solution set. Now compare the interval notation in the previous example to that of the strict, or noninclusive, inequality that follows: Strict inequalities Express ordering relationships using the symbol < for “less than” and > for “greater than.” imply that solutions may get very close to the boundary point, in this case 2, but not actually include it. Denote this idea with an open dot on the number line and a round parenthesis in interval notation.   Example 1: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3 . Solution: Use an open dot at 3 and shade all real numbers strictly less than 3. Use negative infinity The symbol (−∞) indicates the interval is unbounded to the left. (−∞) to indicate that the solution set is unbounded to the left on a number line. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   Example 2: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x ≤ 5 . Solution: Use a closed dot and shade all numbers less than and including 5. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   5 ]   It is important to see that 5 ≥ x is the same as x ≤ 5 . Both require values of x to be smaller than or equal to 5. To avoid confusion, it is good practice to rewrite all inequalities with the variable on the left. Also, when using text, use “inf” as a shortened form of infinity. For example, ( − ∞ ,   5 ] can be expressed textually as (−inf, 5]. A compound inequality Two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” is actually two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” Compound inequalities with the logical “or” require that either condition must be satisfied. Therefore, the solution set of this type of compound inequality consists of all the elements of the solution sets of each inequality. When we join these individual solution sets it is called the union The set formed by joining the individual solution sets indicated by the logical use of the word “or” and denoted with the symbol ∪ . , denoted ∪ . For example, the solutions to the compound inequality x < 3   o r   x ≥ 6 can be graphed as follows: Sometimes we encounter compound inequalities where the separate solution sets overlap. In the case where the compound inequality contains the word “or,” we combine all the elements of both sets to create one set containing all the elements of each.   Example 3: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x ≤ − 1   or   x < 3 . Solution: Combine all solutions of both inequalities. The solutions to each inequality are sketched above the number line as a means to determine the union, which is graphed on the number line below. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   Any real number less than 3 in the shaded region on the number line will satisfy at least one of the two given inequalities.   Example 4: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3   or   x ≥ − 1 . Solution: Both solution sets are graphed above the union, which is graphed below. Answer: Interval notation: R = (−∞, ∞)   When you combine both solution sets and form the union, you can see that all real numbers satisfy the original compound inequality. In summary, and  || Bounded Intervals An inequality such as reads “−1 one is less than or equal to x and x is less than three.” This is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: The logical “and” requires that both conditions must be true. Both inequalities are satisfied by all the elements in the intersection The set formed by the shared values of the individual solution sets that is indicated by the logical use of the word “and,” denoted with the symbol ∩ . , denoted ∩ , of the solution sets of each.   Example 5: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3   and   x ≥ − 1 . Solution: Determine the intersection, or overlap, of the two solution sets. The solutions to each inequality are sketched above the number line as a means to determine the intersection, which is graphed on the number line below. Here x = 3 is not a solution because it solves only one of the inequalities. Answer: Interval notation: [ − 1 ,   3 )   Alternatively, we may interpret − 1 ≤ x < 3 as all possible values for x between or bounded by −1 and 3 on a number line. For example, one such solution is x = 1 . Notice that 1 is between −1 and 3 on a number line, or that −1 < 1 < 3. Similarly, we can see that other possible solutions are −1, −0.99, 0, 0.0056, 1.8, and 2.99. Since there are infinitely many real numbers between −1 and 3, we must express the solution graphically and/or with interval notation, in this case [ − 1 ,   3 ) .   Example 6: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: − 3 2 < x < 2 . Solution: Shade all real numbers bounded by, or strictly between, − 3 2 = − 1 1 2 and 2. Answer: Interval notation: ( − 3 2 ,   2 )   Example 7: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: − 5 < x ≤ 15 . Solution: Shade all real numbers between −5 and 15, and indicate that the upper bound, 15, is included in the solution set by using a closed dot. Answer: Interval notation: ( − 5 ,   15 ]   In the previous two examples, we did not decompose the inequalities; instead we chose to think of all real numbers between the two given bounds. In summary,  || Set-Builder Notation In this text, we use interval notation. However, other resources that you are likely to encounter use an alternate method for describing sets called set-builder notation A system for describing sets using familiar mathematical notation. . We have used set notation to list the elements such as the integers The braces group the elements of the set and the ellipsis marks indicate that the integers continue forever. In this section, we wish to describe intervals of real numbers—for example, the real numbers greater than or equal to 2. Since the set is too large to list, set-builder notation allows us to describe it using familiar mathematical notation. An example of set-builder notation follows: Here x∈R describes the type of number, where the symbol (∈) is read “element of.” This implies that the variable x represents a real number. The vertical bar (|) is read “such that.” Finally, the statement x ≥ 2 is the condition that describes the set using mathematical notation. At this point in our study of algebra, it is assumed that all variables represent real numbers. For this reason, you can omit the “∈R” and write { x | x ≥ 2 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal to 2.” To describe compound inequalities such as x < 3   or   x ≥ 6 , write { x | x < 3   or   x ≥ 6 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is less than 3 or x is greater than or equal to 6.” Write bounded intervals, such as − 1 ≤ x < 3 , as { x | − 1 ≤ x < 3 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal to −1 and less than 3.”  || 
book2_chapter2_7_1	Unbounded Intervals An algebraic inequality Expressions related with the symbols ≤ , <, ≥ , and >. , such as x ≥ 2 , is read “x is greater than or equal to 2.” This inequality has infinitely many solutions for x. Some of the solutions are 2, 3, 3.5, 5, 20, and 20.001. Since it is impossible to list all of the solutions, a system is needed that allows a clear communication of this infinite set. Two common ways of expressing solutions to an inequality are by graphing them on a number line Solutions to an algebraic inequality expressed by shading the solution on a number line. and using interval notation A textual system of expressing solutions to an algebraic inequality. . To express the solution graphically, draw a number line and shade in all the values that are solutions to the inequality. Interval notation is textual and uses specific notation as follows: Determine the interval notation after graphing the solution set on a number line. The numbers in interval notation should be written in the same order as they appear on the number line, with smaller numbers in the set appearing first. In this example, there is an inclusive inequality An inequality that includes the boundary point indicated by the “or equal” part of the symbols ≤ and ≥ and a closed dot on the number line. , which means that the lower-bound 2 is included in the solution. Denote this with a closed dot on the number line and a square bracket in interval notation. The symbol (∞) is read as infinity The symbol (∞) indicates the interval is unbounded to the right. and indicates that the set is unbounded to the right on a number line. Interval notation requires a parenthesis to enclose infinity. The square bracket indicates the boundary is included in the solution. The parentheses indicate the boundary is not included. Infinity is an upper bound to the real numbers, but is not itself a real number: it cannot be included in the solution set. Now compare the interval notation in the previous example to that of the strict, or noninclusive, inequality that follows: Strict inequalities Express ordering relationships using the symbol < for “less than” and > for “greater than.” imply that solutions may get very close to the boundary point, in this case 2, but not actually include it. Denote this idea with an open dot on the number line and a round parenthesis in interval notation.   Example 1: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3 . Solution: Use an open dot at 3 and shade all real numbers strictly less than 3. Use negative infinity The symbol (−∞) indicates the interval is unbounded to the left. (−∞) to indicate that the solution set is unbounded to the left on a number line. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   Example 2: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x ≤ 5 . Solution: Use a closed dot and shade all numbers less than and including 5. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   5 ]   It is important to see that 5 ≥ x is the same as x ≤ 5 . Both require values of x to be smaller than or equal to 5. To avoid confusion, it is good practice to rewrite all inequalities with the variable on the left. Also, when using text, use “inf” as a shortened form of infinity. For example, ( − ∞ ,   5 ] can be expressed textually as (−inf, 5]. A compound inequality Two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” is actually two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” Compound inequalities with the logical “or” require that either condition must be satisfied. Therefore, the solution set of this type of compound inequality consists of all the elements of the solution sets of each inequality. When we join these individual solution sets it is called the union The set formed by joining the individual solution sets indicated by the logical use of the word “or” and denoted with the symbol ∪ . , denoted ∪ . For example, the solutions to the compound inequality x < 3   o r   x ≥ 6 can be graphed as follows: Sometimes we encounter compound inequalities where the separate solution sets overlap. In the case where the compound inequality contains the word “or,” we combine all the elements of both sets to create one set containing all the elements of each.   Example 3: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x ≤ − 1   or   x < 3 . Solution: Combine all solutions of both inequalities. The solutions to each inequality are sketched above the number line as a means to determine the union, which is graphed on the number line below. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   Any real number less than 3 in the shaded region on the number line will satisfy at least one of the two given inequalities.   Example 4: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3   or   x ≥ − 1 . Solution: Both solution sets are graphed above the union, which is graphed below. Answer: Interval notation: R = (−∞, ∞)   When you combine both solution sets and form the union, you can see that all real numbers satisfy the original compound inequality. In summary, and Unbounded Intervals An algebraic inequality Expressions related with the symbols ≤ , <, ≥ , and >. , such as x ≥ 2 , is read “x is greater than or equal to 2.” This inequality has infinitely many solutions for x. Some of the solutions are 2, 3, 3.5, 5, 20, and 20.001. Since it is impossible to list all of the solutions, a system is needed that allows a clear communication of this infinite set. Two common ways of expressing solutions to an inequality are by graphing them on a number line Solutions to an algebraic inequality expressed by shading the solution on a number line. and using interval notation A textual system of expressing solutions to an algebraic inequality. . To express the solution graphically, draw a number line and shade in all the values that are solutions to the inequality. Interval notation is textual and uses specific notation as follows: Determine the interval notation after graphing the solution set on a number line. The numbers in interval notation should be written in the same order as they appear on the number line, with smaller numbers in the set appearing first. In this example, there is an inclusive inequality An inequality that includes the boundary point indicated by the “or equal” part of the symbols ≤ and ≥ and a closed dot on the number line. , which means that the lower-bound 2 is included in the solution. Denote this with a closed dot on the number line and a square bracket in interval notation. The symbol (∞) is read as infinity The symbol (∞) indicates the interval is unbounded to the right. and indicates that the set is unbounded to the right on a number line. Interval notation requires a parenthesis to enclose infinity. The square bracket indicates the boundary is included in the solution. The parentheses indicate the boundary is not included. Infinity is an upper bound to the real numbers, but is not itself a real number: it cannot be included in the solution set. Now compare the interval notation in the previous example to that of the strict, or noninclusive, inequality that follows: Strict inequalities Express ordering relationships using the symbol < for “less than” and > for “greater than.” imply that solutions may get very close to the boundary point, in this case 2, but not actually include it. Denote this idea with an open dot on the number line and a round parenthesis in interval notation.   Example 1: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3 . Solution: Use an open dot at 3 and shade all real numbers strictly less than 3. Use negative infinity The symbol (−∞) indicates the interval is unbounded to the left. (−∞) to indicate that the solution set is unbounded to the left on a number line. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   Example 2: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x ≤ 5 . Solution: Use a closed dot and shade all numbers less than and including 5. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   5 ]   It is important to see that 5 ≥ x is the same as x ≤ 5 . Both require values of x to be smaller than or equal to 5. To avoid confusion, it is good practice to rewrite all inequalities with the variable on the left. Also, when using text, use “inf” as a shortened form of infinity. For example, ( − ∞ ,   5 ] can be expressed textually as (−inf, 5]. A compound inequality Two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” is actually two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” Compound inequalities with the logical “or” require that either condition must be satisfied. Therefore, the solution set of this type of compound inequality consists of all the elements of the solution sets of each inequality. When we join these individual solution sets it is called the union The set formed by joining the individual solution sets indicated by the logical use of the word “or” and denoted with the symbol ∪ . , denoted ∪ . For example, the solutions to the compound inequality x < 3   o r   x ≥ 6 can be graphed as follows: Sometimes we encounter compound inequalities where the separate solution sets overlap. In the case where the compound inequality contains the word “or,” we combine all the elements of both sets to create one set containing all the elements of each.   Example 3: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x ≤ − 1   or   x < 3 . Solution: Combine all solutions of both inequalities. The solutions to each inequality are sketched above the number line as a means to determine the union, which is graphed on the number line below. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   Any real number less than 3 in the shaded region on the number line will satisfy at least one of the two given inequalities.   Example 4: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3   or   x ≥ − 1 . Solution: Both solution sets are graphed above the union, which is graphed below. Answer: Interval notation: R = (−∞, ∞)   When you combine both solution sets and form the union, you can see that all real numbers satisfy the original compound inequality. In summary, and  || 
book2_chapter2_7_2	Bounded Intervals An inequality such as reads “−1 one is less than or equal to x and x is less than three.” This is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: The logical “and” requires that both conditions must be true. Both inequalities are satisfied by all the elements in the intersection The set formed by the shared values of the individual solution sets that is indicated by the logical use of the word “and,” denoted with the symbol ∩ . , denoted ∩ , of the solution sets of each.   Example 5: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3   and   x ≥ − 1 . Solution: Determine the intersection, or overlap, of the two solution sets. The solutions to each inequality are sketched above the number line as a means to determine the intersection, which is graphed on the number line below. Here x = 3 is not a solution because it solves only one of the inequalities. Answer: Interval notation: [ − 1 ,   3 )   Alternatively, we may interpret − 1 ≤ x < 3 as all possible values for x between or bounded by −1 and 3 on a number line. For example, one such solution is x = 1 . Notice that 1 is between −1 and 3 on a number line, or that −1 < 1 < 3. Similarly, we can see that other possible solutions are −1, −0.99, 0, 0.0056, 1.8, and 2.99. Since there are infinitely many real numbers between −1 and 3, we must express the solution graphically and/or with interval notation, in this case [ − 1 ,   3 ) .   Example 6: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: − 3 2 < x < 2 . Solution: Shade all real numbers bounded by, or strictly between, − 3 2 = − 1 1 2 and 2. Answer: Interval notation: ( − 3 2 ,   2 )   Example 7: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: − 5 < x ≤ 15 . Solution: Shade all real numbers between −5 and 15, and indicate that the upper bound, 15, is included in the solution set by using a closed dot. Answer: Interval notation: ( − 5 ,   15 ]   In the previous two examples, we did not decompose the inequalities; instead we chose to think of all real numbers between the two given bounds. In summary, Bounded Intervals An inequality such as reads “−1 one is less than or equal to x and x is less than three.” This is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: The logical “and” requires that both conditions must be true. Both inequalities are satisfied by all the elements in the intersection The set formed by the shared values of the individual solution sets that is indicated by the logical use of the word “and,” denoted with the symbol ∩ . , denoted ∩ , of the solution sets of each.   Example 5: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: x < 3   and   x ≥ − 1 . Solution: Determine the intersection, or overlap, of the two solution sets. The solutions to each inequality are sketched above the number line as a means to determine the intersection, which is graphed on the number line below. Here x = 3 is not a solution because it solves only one of the inequalities. Answer: Interval notation: [ − 1 ,   3 )   Alternatively, we may interpret − 1 ≤ x < 3 as all possible values for x between or bounded by −1 and 3 on a number line. For example, one such solution is x = 1 . Notice that 1 is between −1 and 3 on a number line, or that −1 < 1 < 3. Similarly, we can see that other possible solutions are −1, −0.99, 0, 0.0056, 1.8, and 2.99. Since there are infinitely many real numbers between −1 and 3, we must express the solution graphically and/or with interval notation, in this case [ − 1 ,   3 ) .   Example 6: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: − 3 2 < x < 2 . Solution: Shade all real numbers bounded by, or strictly between, − 3 2 = − 1 1 2 and 2. Answer: Interval notation: ( − 3 2 ,   2 )   Example 7: Graph and give the interval notation equivalent: − 5 < x ≤ 15 . Solution: Shade all real numbers between −5 and 15, and indicate that the upper bound, 15, is included in the solution set by using a closed dot. Answer: Interval notation: ( − 5 ,   15 ]   In the previous two examples, we did not decompose the inequalities; instead we chose to think of all real numbers between the two given bounds. In summary,  || 
book2_chapter2_7_3	Set-Builder Notation In this text, we use interval notation. However, other resources that you are likely to encounter use an alternate method for describing sets called set-builder notation A system for describing sets using familiar mathematical notation. . We have used set notation to list the elements such as the integers The braces group the elements of the set and the ellipsis marks indicate that the integers continue forever. In this section, we wish to describe intervals of real numbers—for example, the real numbers greater than or equal to 2. Since the set is too large to list, set-builder notation allows us to describe it using familiar mathematical notation. An example of set-builder notation follows: Here x∈R describes the type of number, where the symbol (∈) is read “element of.” This implies that the variable x represents a real number. The vertical bar (|) is read “such that.” Finally, the statement x ≥ 2 is the condition that describes the set using mathematical notation. At this point in our study of algebra, it is assumed that all variables represent real numbers. For this reason, you can omit the “∈R” and write { x | x ≥ 2 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal to 2.” To describe compound inequalities such as x < 3   or   x ≥ 6 , write { x | x < 3   or   x ≥ 6 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is less than 3 or x is greater than or equal to 6.” Write bounded intervals, such as − 1 ≤ x < 3 , as { x | − 1 ≤ x < 3 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal to −1 and less than 3.” Set-Builder Notation In this text, we use interval notation. However, other resources that you are likely to encounter use an alternate method for describing sets called set-builder notation A system for describing sets using familiar mathematical notation. . We have used set notation to list the elements such as the integers The braces group the elements of the set and the ellipsis marks indicate that the integers continue forever. In this section, we wish to describe intervals of real numbers—for example, the real numbers greater than or equal to 2. Since the set is too large to list, set-builder notation allows us to describe it using familiar mathematical notation. An example of set-builder notation follows: Here x∈R describes the type of number, where the symbol (∈) is read “element of.” This implies that the variable x represents a real number. The vertical bar (|) is read “such that.” Finally, the statement x ≥ 2 is the condition that describes the set using mathematical notation. At this point in our study of algebra, it is assumed that all variables represent real numbers. For this reason, you can omit the “∈R” and write { x | x ≥ 2 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal to 2.” To describe compound inequalities such as x < 3   or   x ≥ 6 , write { x | x < 3   or   x ≥ 6 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is less than 3 or x is greater than or equal to 6.” Write bounded intervals, such as − 1 ≤ x < 3 , as { x | − 1 ≤ x < 3 } , which is read “the set of all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal to −1 and less than 3.”  || 
book2_chapter2_8	 || Definition of a Linear Inequality A linear inequality A mathematical statement relating a linear expression as either less than or greater than another. is a mathematical statement that relates a linear expression as either less than or greater than another. The following are some examples of linear inequalities, all of which are solved in this section: A solution to a linear inequality A real number that produces a true statement when its value is substituted for the variable. is a real number that will produce a true statement when substituted for the variable. Linear inequalities have either infinitely many solutions or no solution. If there are infinitely many solutions, graph the solution set on a number line and/or express the solution using interval notation.   Example 1: Are x = − 2 and x = 4 solutions to 3 x + 7 < 16 ? Solution: Substitute the values for x, simplify, and check to see if we obtain a true statement. Answer: x = − 2 is a solution and x = 4 is not.  || Algebra of Linear Inequalities All but one of the techniques learned for solving linear equations apply to solving linear inequalities. You may add or subtract any real number to both sides of an inequality, and you may multiply or divide both sides by any positive real number to create equivalent inequalities. For example, Both subtracting 7 from each side and dividing each side by +5 results in an equivalent inequality that is true.   Example 2: Solve and graph the solution set: 3 x + 7 < 16 . Solution: It is helpful to take a minute and choose a few values in and out of the solution set, substitute them into the original inequality, and then verify the results. As indicated, you should expect x = 0 to solve the original inequality, but x = 5 should not. Checking in this manner gives a good indication that the inequality is solved correctly. This can be done mentally. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   When working with linear inequalities, a different rule applies when multiplying or dividing by a negative number. To illustrate the problem, consider the true statement 10 > − 5 and divide both sides by −5. Dividing by −5 results in a false statement. To retain a true statement, the inequality must be reversed. The same problem occurs when multiplying by a negative number. This leads to the following new rule: when multiplying or dividing by a negative number, reverse the inequality. It is easy to forget to do this so take special care to watch for negative coefficients. In general, given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a positive nonzero real number, we have the following properties of inequalities Properties used to obtain equivalent inequalities and used as a means to solve them. : We use these properties to obtain an equivalent inequality Inequalities that share the same solution set. , one with the same solution set, where the variable is isolated. The process is similar to solving linear equations.   Example 3: Solve: − 2 x + 1 ≥ 21 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   − 10 ]   Example 4: Solve: − 7 ( 2 x + 1 ) < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4 7 ,   ∞ )   Example 5: Solve: 5 x − 3 ( 2 x − 1 ) ≥ 2 ( x − 3 ) . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ]   Try this! Solve: 3 − 5 ( x − 1 ) ≤ 28 . Answer: [ − 4 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution  || Compound Inequalities Following are some examples of compound linear inequalities: These compound inequalities Two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” are actually two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” For example, is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: Solve each inequality individually, and the intersection of the two solution sets solves the original compound inequality. While this method works, there is another method that usually requires fewer steps. Apply the properties of this section to all three parts of the compound inequality with the goal of isolating the variable in the middle of the statement to determine the bounds of the solution set.   Example 6: Solve: − 3 < 2 x + 5 < 17 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4, 6 )   Example 7: Solve: − 1 ≤ 1 2 x − 3 < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: [ 4, 8 )   It is important to note that when multiplying or dividing all three parts of a compound inequality by a negative number, you must reverse all of the inequalities in the statement. For example, The answer above can be written in an equivalent form, where smaller numbers lie to the left and the larger numbers lie to the right, as they appear on a number line. Using interval notation, write ( − 10 ,   5 ) .   Try this! Solve: − 8 ≤ 2 ( − 3 x + 5 ) < 34 . Answer: ( − 4 ,   3 ] Video Solution For compound inequalities with the word “or” you must work both inequalities separately and then consider the union of the solution sets. Values in this union solve either inequality.   Example 8: Solve: 3 x + 1 < 10   or   2 x − 1 ≥ 11 Solution: Solve each inequality and form the union by combining the solution sets. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ) ∪ [ 6 ,   ∞ )   Try this! Solve: 4 x − 1 < − 5   or   4 x − 1 > 5 . Answer: ( − ∞ , − 1 ) ∪ ( 3 2 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution  || Applications of Linear Inequalities Some of the key words and phrases that indicate inequalities are summarized below: Key Phrases Translation A number is at least 5. x ≥ 5 A number is 5 or more inclusive. A number is at most 3. x ≤ 3 A number is 3 or less inclusive. A number is strictly less than 4. x < 4 A number is less than 4, noninclusive. A number is greater than 7. x > 7 A number is more than 7, noninclusive. A number is in between 2 and 10. 2 < x < 10 A number is at least 5 and at most 15. 5 ≤ x ≤ 15 A number may range from 5 to 15. As with all applications, carefully read the problem several times and look for key words and phrases. Identify the unknowns and assign variables. Next, translate the wording into a mathematical inequality. Finally, use the properties you have learned to solve the inequality and express the solution graphically or in interval notation.   Example 9: Translate: Five less than twice a number is at most 25. Solution: First, choose a variable for the unknown number and identify the key words and phrases. Answer: 2 n − 5 ≤ 25 . The key phrase “is at most” indicates that the quantity has a maximum value of 25 or smaller.   Example 10: The temperature in the desert can range from 10°C to 45°C in one 24-hour period. Find the equivalent range in degrees Fahrenheit, F, given that C = 5 9 ( F − 32 ) . Solution: Set up a compound inequality where the temperature in Celsius is inclusively between 10°C and 45°C. Then substitute the expression equivalent to the Celsius temperature in the inequality and solve for F. Answer: The equivalent Fahrenheit range is from 50°F to 113°F.   Example 11: In the first four events of a meet, a gymnast scores 7.5, 8.2, 8.5, and 9.0. What must she score on the fifth event to average at least 8.5? Solution: The average must be at least 8.5; this means that the average must be greater than or equal to 8.5. Answer: She must score at least 9.3 on the fifth event.  || 
book2_chapter2_8_1	Definition of a Linear Inequality A linear inequality A mathematical statement relating a linear expression as either less than or greater than another. is a mathematical statement that relates a linear expression as either less than or greater than another. The following are some examples of linear inequalities, all of which are solved in this section: A solution to a linear inequality A real number that produces a true statement when its value is substituted for the variable. is a real number that will produce a true statement when substituted for the variable. Linear inequalities have either infinitely many solutions or no solution. If there are infinitely many solutions, graph the solution set on a number line and/or express the solution using interval notation.   Example 1: Are x = − 2 and x = 4 solutions to 3 x + 7 < 16 ? Solution: Substitute the values for x, simplify, and check to see if we obtain a true statement. Answer: x = − 2 is a solution and x = 4 is not. Definition of a Linear Inequality A linear inequality A mathematical statement relating a linear expression as either less than or greater than another. is a mathematical statement that relates a linear expression as either less than or greater than another. The following are some examples of linear inequalities, all of which are solved in this section: A solution to a linear inequality A real number that produces a true statement when its value is substituted for the variable. is a real number that will produce a true statement when substituted for the variable. Linear inequalities have either infinitely many solutions or no solution. If there are infinitely many solutions, graph the solution set on a number line and/or express the solution using interval notation.   Example 1: Are x = − 2 and x = 4 solutions to 3 x + 7 < 16 ? Solution: Substitute the values for x, simplify, and check to see if we obtain a true statement. Answer: x = − 2 is a solution and x = 4 is not.  || 
book2_chapter2_8_2	Algebra of Linear Inequalities All but one of the techniques learned for solving linear equations apply to solving linear inequalities. You may add or subtract any real number to both sides of an inequality, and you may multiply or divide both sides by any positive real number to create equivalent inequalities. For example, Both subtracting 7 from each side and dividing each side by +5 results in an equivalent inequality that is true.   Example 2: Solve and graph the solution set: 3 x + 7 < 16 . Solution: It is helpful to take a minute and choose a few values in and out of the solution set, substitute them into the original inequality, and then verify the results. As indicated, you should expect x = 0 to solve the original inequality, but x = 5 should not. Checking in this manner gives a good indication that the inequality is solved correctly. This can be done mentally. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   When working with linear inequalities, a different rule applies when multiplying or dividing by a negative number. To illustrate the problem, consider the true statement 10 > − 5 and divide both sides by −5. Dividing by −5 results in a false statement. To retain a true statement, the inequality must be reversed. The same problem occurs when multiplying by a negative number. This leads to the following new rule: when multiplying or dividing by a negative number, reverse the inequality. It is easy to forget to do this so take special care to watch for negative coefficients. In general, given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a positive nonzero real number, we have the following properties of inequalities Properties used to obtain equivalent inequalities and used as a means to solve them. : We use these properties to obtain an equivalent inequality Inequalities that share the same solution set. , one with the same solution set, where the variable is isolated. The process is similar to solving linear equations.   Example 3: Solve: − 2 x + 1 ≥ 21 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   − 10 ]   Example 4: Solve: − 7 ( 2 x + 1 ) < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4 7 ,   ∞ )   Example 5: Solve: 5 x − 3 ( 2 x − 1 ) ≥ 2 ( x − 3 ) . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ]   Try this! Solve: 3 − 5 ( x − 1 ) ≤ 28 . Answer: [ − 4 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution Algebra of Linear Inequalities All but one of the techniques learned for solving linear equations apply to solving linear inequalities. You may add or subtract any real number to both sides of an inequality, and you may multiply or divide both sides by any positive real number to create equivalent inequalities. For example, Both subtracting 7 from each side and dividing each side by +5 results in an equivalent inequality that is true.   Example 2: Solve and graph the solution set: 3 x + 7 < 16 . Solution: It is helpful to take a minute and choose a few values in and out of the solution set, substitute them into the original inequality, and then verify the results. As indicated, you should expect x = 0 to solve the original inequality, but x = 5 should not. Checking in this manner gives a good indication that the inequality is solved correctly. This can be done mentally. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 )   When working with linear inequalities, a different rule applies when multiplying or dividing by a negative number. To illustrate the problem, consider the true statement 10 > − 5 and divide both sides by −5. Dividing by −5 results in a false statement. To retain a true statement, the inequality must be reversed. The same problem occurs when multiplying by a negative number. This leads to the following new rule: when multiplying or dividing by a negative number, reverse the inequality. It is easy to forget to do this so take special care to watch for negative coefficients. In general, given algebraic expressions A and B, where c is a positive nonzero real number, we have the following properties of inequalities Properties used to obtain equivalent inequalities and used as a means to solve them. : We use these properties to obtain an equivalent inequality Inequalities that share the same solution set. , one with the same solution set, where the variable is isolated. The process is similar to solving linear equations.   Example 3: Solve: − 2 x + 1 ≥ 21 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   − 10 ]   Example 4: Solve: − 7 ( 2 x + 1 ) < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4 7 ,   ∞ )   Example 5: Solve: 5 x − 3 ( 2 x − 1 ) ≥ 2 ( x − 3 ) . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ]   Try this! Solve: 3 − 5 ( x − 1 ) ≤ 28 . Answer: [ − 4 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_8_3	Compound Inequalities Following are some examples of compound linear inequalities: These compound inequalities Two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” are actually two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” For example, is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: Solve each inequality individually, and the intersection of the two solution sets solves the original compound inequality. While this method works, there is another method that usually requires fewer steps. Apply the properties of this section to all three parts of the compound inequality with the goal of isolating the variable in the middle of the statement to determine the bounds of the solution set.   Example 6: Solve: − 3 < 2 x + 5 < 17 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4, 6 )   Example 7: Solve: − 1 ≤ 1 2 x − 3 < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: [ 4, 8 )   It is important to note that when multiplying or dividing all three parts of a compound inequality by a negative number, you must reverse all of the inequalities in the statement. For example, The answer above can be written in an equivalent form, where smaller numbers lie to the left and the larger numbers lie to the right, as they appear on a number line. Using interval notation, write ( − 10 ,   5 ) .   Try this! Solve: − 8 ≤ 2 ( − 3 x + 5 ) < 34 . Answer: ( − 4 ,   3 ] Video Solution For compound inequalities with the word “or” you must work both inequalities separately and then consider the union of the solution sets. Values in this union solve either inequality.   Example 8: Solve: 3 x + 1 < 10   or   2 x − 1 ≥ 11 Solution: Solve each inequality and form the union by combining the solution sets. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ) ∪ [ 6 ,   ∞ )   Try this! Solve: 4 x − 1 < − 5   or   4 x − 1 > 5 . Answer: ( − ∞ , − 1 ) ∪ ( 3 2 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution Compound Inequalities Following are some examples of compound linear inequalities: These compound inequalities Two or more inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” are actually two inequalities in one statement joined by the word “and” or by the word “or.” For example, is a compound inequality because it can be decomposed as follows: Solve each inequality individually, and the intersection of the two solution sets solves the original compound inequality. While this method works, there is another method that usually requires fewer steps. Apply the properties of this section to all three parts of the compound inequality with the goal of isolating the variable in the middle of the statement to determine the bounds of the solution set.   Example 6: Solve: − 3 < 2 x + 5 < 17 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: ( − 4, 6 )   Example 7: Solve: − 1 ≤ 1 2 x − 3 < 1 . Solution: Answer: Interval notation: [ 4, 8 )   It is important to note that when multiplying or dividing all three parts of a compound inequality by a negative number, you must reverse all of the inequalities in the statement. For example, The answer above can be written in an equivalent form, where smaller numbers lie to the left and the larger numbers lie to the right, as they appear on a number line. Using interval notation, write ( − 10 ,   5 ) .   Try this! Solve: − 8 ≤ 2 ( − 3 x + 5 ) < 34 . Answer: ( − 4 ,   3 ] Video Solution For compound inequalities with the word “or” you must work both inequalities separately and then consider the union of the solution sets. Values in this union solve either inequality.   Example 8: Solve: 3 x + 1 < 10   or   2 x − 1 ≥ 11 Solution: Solve each inequality and form the union by combining the solution sets. Answer: Interval notation: ( − ∞ ,   3 ) ∪ [ 6 ,   ∞ )   Try this! Solve: 4 x − 1 < − 5   or   4 x − 1 > 5 . Answer: ( − ∞ , − 1 ) ∪ ( 3 2 ,   ∞ ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter2_8_4	Applications of Linear Inequalities Some of the key words and phrases that indicate inequalities are summarized below: Key Phrases Translation A number is at least 5. x ≥ 5 A number is 5 or more inclusive. A number is at most 3. x ≤ 3 A number is 3 or less inclusive. A number is strictly less than 4. x < 4 A number is less than 4, noninclusive. A number is greater than 7. x > 7 A number is more than 7, noninclusive. A number is in between 2 and 10. 2 < x < 10 A number is at least 5 and at most 15. 5 ≤ x ≤ 15 A number may range from 5 to 15. As with all applications, carefully read the problem several times and look for key words and phrases. Identify the unknowns and assign variables. Next, translate the wording into a mathematical inequality. Finally, use the properties you have learned to solve the inequality and express the solution graphically or in interval notation.   Example 9: Translate: Five less than twice a number is at most 25. Solution: First, choose a variable for the unknown number and identify the key words and phrases. Answer: 2 n − 5 ≤ 25 . The key phrase “is at most” indicates that the quantity has a maximum value of 25 or smaller.   Example 10: The temperature in the desert can range from 10°C to 45°C in one 24-hour period. Find the equivalent range in degrees Fahrenheit, F, given that C = 5 9 ( F − 32 ) . Solution: Set up a compound inequality where the temperature in Celsius is inclusively between 10°C and 45°C. Then substitute the expression equivalent to the Celsius temperature in the inequality and solve for F. Answer: The equivalent Fahrenheit range is from 50°F to 113°F.   Example 11: In the first four events of a meet, a gymnast scores 7.5, 8.2, 8.5, and 9.0. What must she score on the fifth event to average at least 8.5? Solution: The average must be at least 8.5; this means that the average must be greater than or equal to 8.5. Answer: She must score at least 9.3 on the fifth event. Applications of Linear Inequalities Some of the key words and phrases that indicate inequalities are summarized below: Key Phrases Translation A number is at least 5. x ≥ 5 A number is 5 or more inclusive. A number is at most 3. x ≤ 3 A number is 3 or less inclusive. A number is strictly less than 4. x < 4 A number is less than 4, noninclusive. A number is greater than 7. x > 7 A number is more than 7, noninclusive. A number is in between 2 and 10. 2 < x < 10 A number is at least 5 and at most 15. 5 ≤ x ≤ 15 A number may range from 5 to 15. As with all applications, carefully read the problem several times and look for key words and phrases. Identify the unknowns and assign variables. Next, translate the wording into a mathematical inequality. Finally, use the properties you have learned to solve the inequality and express the solution graphically or in interval notation.   Example 9: Translate: Five less than twice a number is at most 25. Solution: First, choose a variable for the unknown number and identify the key words and phrases. Answer: 2 n − 5 ≤ 25 . The key phrase “is at most” indicates that the quantity has a maximum value of 25 or smaller.   Example 10: The temperature in the desert can range from 10°C to 45°C in one 24-hour period. Find the equivalent range in degrees Fahrenheit, F, given that C = 5 9 ( F − 32 ) . Solution: Set up a compound inequality where the temperature in Celsius is inclusively between 10°C and 45°C. Then substitute the expression equivalent to the Celsius temperature in the inequality and solve for F. Answer: The equivalent Fahrenheit range is from 50°F to 113°F.   Example 11: In the first four events of a meet, a gymnast scores 7.5, 8.2, 8.5, and 9.0. What must she score on the fifth event to average at least 8.5? Solution: The average must be at least 8.5; this means that the average must be greater than or equal to 8.5. Answer: She must score at least 9.3 on the fifth event.  || 
book2_chapter5	 ||  || Product, Quotient, and Power Rule for Exponents If a factor is repeated multiple times, then the product can be written in exponential form An equivalent expression written using a rational exponent. x n . The positive integer exponent n indicates the number of times the base x is repeated as a factor. For example, Here the base is 5 and the exponent is 4. Exponents are sometimes indicated with the caret (^) symbol found on the keyboard: 5^4 = 5*5*5*5. Next consider the product of 2 3 and 2 5 , Expanding the expression using the definition produces multiple factors of the base, which is quite cumbersome, particularly when n is large. For this reason, we will develop some useful rules to help us simplify expressions with exponents. In this example, notice that we could obtain the same result by adding the exponents. In general, this describes the product rule for exponents x m ⋅ x n = x m + n ; the product of two expressions with the same base can be simplified by adding the exponents. . If m and n are positive integers, then In other words, when multiplying two expressions with the same base, add the exponents.   Example 1: Simplify: 10 5 ⋅ 10 18 . Solution: Answer: 10 23   In the previous example, notice that we did not multiply the base 10 times itself. When applying the product rule, add the exponents and leave the base unchanged.   Example 2: Simplify: x 6 ⋅ x 12 ⋅ x . Solution: Recall that the variable x is assumed to have an exponent of 1: x = x 1 . Answer: x 19   The base could be any algebraic expression.   Example 3: Simplify: ( x + y ) 9   ( x + y ) 13 . Solution: Treat the expression ( x + y ) as the base. Answer: ( x + y ) 22   The commutative property of multiplication allows us to use the product rule for exponents to simplify factors of an algebraic expression.   Example 4: Simplify: 2 x 8 y ⋅ 3 x 4 y 7 . Solution: Multiply the coefficients and add the exponents of variable factors with the same base. Answer: 6 x 12 y 8   Next, we will develop a rule for division by first looking at the quotient of 2 7 and 2 3 . Here we can cancel factors after applying the definition of exponents. Notice that the same result can be obtained by subtracting the exponents. This describes the quotient rule for exponents x m x n = x m − n ; the quotient of two expressions with the same base can be simplified by subtracting the exponents. . If m and n are positive integers and x ≠ 0 , then In other words, when you divide two expressions with the same base, subtract the exponents.   Example 5: Simplify: 12 y 15 4 y 7 . Solution: Divide the coefficients and subtract the exponents of the variable y. Answer: 3 y 8   Example 6: Simplify: 20 x 10 ( x + 5 ) 6 10 x 9 ( x + 5 ) 2 . Solution: Answer: 2 x ( x + 5 ) 4   Now raise 2 3 to the fourth power as follows: After writing the base 2 3 as a factor four times, expand to obtain 12 factors of 2. We can obtain the same result by multiplying the exponents. In general, this describes the power rule for exponents ( x m ) n = x m n ; a power raised to a power can be simplified by multiplying the exponents. . Given positive integers m and n, then In other words, when raising a power to a power, multiply the exponents.   Example 7: Simplify: ( y 6 ) 7 . Solution: Answer: y 42   To summarize, we have developed three very useful rules of exponents that are used extensively in algebra. If given positive integers m and n, then Product rule: x m ⋅ x n = x m + n Quotient rule: x m x n = x m − n   ,   x ≠ 0 Power rule: ( x m ) n = x m ⋅ n   Try this! Simplify: y 5 ⋅ ( y 4 ) 6 . Answer: y 29 Video Solution  || Power Rules for Products and Quotients Now we consider raising grouped products to a power. For example, After expanding, we have four factors of the product xy. This is equivalent to raising each of the original factors to the fourth power. In general, this describes the power rule for a product ( x y ) n = x n y n ; if a product is raised to a power, then apply that power to each factor in the product. . If n is a positive integer, then   Example 8: Simplify: ( 2 a b ) 7 . Solution: We must apply the exponent 7 to all the factors, including the coefficient, 2. If a coefficient is raised to a relatively small power, then present the real number equivalent, as we did in this example: 2 7 = 128 . Answer: 128 a 7 b 7   In many cases, the process of simplifying expressions involving exponents requires the use of several rules of exponents.   Example 9: Simplify: ( 3 x y 3 ) 4 . Solution: Answer: 81 x 4 y 12   Example 10: Simplify: ( 4 x 2 y 5 z ) 3 . Solution: Answer: 64 x 6 y 15 z 3   Example 11: Simplify: [ 5 ( x + y ) 3 ] 3 . Solution: Answer: 125 ( x + y ) 9   Next, consider a quotient raised to a power. Here we obtain four factors of the quotient, which is equivalent to the numerator and the denominator both raised to the fourth power. In general, this describes the power rule for a quotient ( x y ) n = x n y n ; if a quotient is raised to a power, then apply that power to the numerator and the denominator. . If n is a positive integer and y ≠ 0 , then In other words, given a fraction raised to a power, we can apply that exponent to the numerator and the denominator. This rule requires that the denominator is nonzero. We will make this assumption for the remainder of the section.   Example 12: Simplify: ( 3 a b ) 3 . Solution: First, apply the power rule for a quotient and then the power rule for a product. Answer: 27 a 3 b 3   In practice, we often combine these two steps by applying the exponent to all factors in the numerator and the denominator.   Example 13: Simplify: ( a b 2 2 c 3 ) 5 . Solution: Apply the exponent 5 to all of the factors in the numerator and the denominator. Answer:   a 5 b 10 32 c 15   Example 14: Simplify: ( 5 x 5 ( 2 x − 1 ) 4 3 y 7 ) 2 . Solution: Answer: 25 x 10 ( 2 x − 1 ) 8 9 y 14   It is a good practice to simplify within parentheses before using the power rules; this is consistent with the order of operations.   Example 15: Simplify: ( − 2 x 3 y 4 z x y 2 ) 4 . Solution: Answer: 16 x 8 y 8 z 4   To summarize, we have developed two new rules that are useful when grouping symbols are used in conjunction with exponents. If given a positive integer n, where y is a nonzero number, then Power rule for a product: ( x y ) n = x n y n Power rule for a quotient: ( x y ) n = x n y n   Try this! Simplify: ( 4 x 2 ( x − y ) 3 3 y z 5 ) 3 . Answer: 64 x 6 ( x − y ) 9 27 y 3 z 15 Video Solution  || Zero as an Exponent Using the quotient rule for exponents, we can define what it means to have 0 as an exponent. Consider the following calculation: Eight divided by 8 is clearly equal to 1, and when the quotient rule for exponents is applied, we see that a 0 exponent results. This leads us to the definition of zero as an exponent x 0 = 1 ; any nonzero base raised to the 0 power is defined to be 1. , where x ≠ 0 : It is important to note that 0 0 is undefined. If the base is negative, then the result is still +1. In other words, any nonzero base raised to the 0 power is defined to be 1. In the following examples, assume all variables are nonzero.   Example 16: Simplify: a. ( − 5 ) 0 b. − 5 0 Solution: a. Any nonzero quantity raised to the 0 power is equal to 1. b. In the example − 5 0 , the base is 5, not −5. Answers: a. 1; b. −1   Example 17: Simplify: ( 5 x 3 y 0 z 2 ) 2 . Solution: It is good practice to simplify within the parentheses first. Answer: 25 x 6 z 4   Example 18: Simplify: ( − 8 a 10 b 5 5 c 12 d 14 ) 0 . Solution: Answer: 1   Try this! Simplify: 5 x 0 and ( 5 x ) 0 . Answer: 5 x 0 = 5 and ( 5 x ) 0 = 1 Video Solution  ||  || Definitions A polynomial An algebraic expression consisting of terms with real number coefficients and variables with whole number exponents. is a special algebraic expression with terms that consist of real number coefficients and variable factors with whole number exponents. Polynomials do not have variables in the denominator of any term. The degree of a term The exponent of the variable; if there is more than one variable in the term, the degree of the term is the sum their exponents. in a polynomial is defined to be the exponent of the variable, or if there is more than one variable in the term, the degree is the sum of their exponents. Recall that x 0 = 1 ; any constant term can be written as a product of x 0 and itself. Hence the degree of a constant term is 0. Term Degree 3 x 2 2 6 x 2 y 2 + 1 = 3 7 a 2 b 3 2 + 3 = 5 8 0 , since 8 = 8 x 0 2 x 1, since x = x 1 The degree of a polynomial The largest degree of all of its terms. is the largest degree of all of its terms. Polynomial Degree 4 x 5 − 3 x 3 + 2 x − 1 5 6 x 2 y − 5 x y 3 + 7 4 , because 5 x y 3 has degree 4. 1 2 x + 5 4 1, because x = x 1 We classify polynomials by the number of terms and the degree as follows: Expression Classification Degree 5 x 7 Monomial Polynomial with one term. (one term) 7 8 x 6 − 1 Binomial Polynomial with two terms. (two terms) 6 − 3 x 2 + x − 1 Trinomial Polynomial with three terms. (three terms) 2 5 x 3 − 2 x 2 + 3 x − 6 Polynomial An algebraic expression consisting of terms with real number coefficients and variables with whole number exponents. (many terms) 3 In this text, we will call polynomials with four or more terms simply polynomials.   Example 1: Classify and state the degree: 7 x 2 − 4 x 5 − 1 . Solution: Here there are three terms. The highest variable exponent is 5. Therefore, this is a trinomial of degree 5. Answer: Trinomial; degree 5   Example 2: Classify and state the degree: 12 a 5 b c 3 . Solution: Since the expression consists of only multiplication, it is one term, a monomial. The variable part can be written as a 5 b 1 c 3 ; hence its degree is 5 + 1 + 3 = 9 . Answer: Monomial; degree 9   Example 3: Classify and state the degree: 4 x 2 y − 6 x y 4 + 5 x 3 y 3 + 4 . Solution: The term 4 x 2 y has degree 3; − 6 x y 4 has degree 5; 5 x 3 y 3 has degree 6; and the constant term 4 has degree 0. Therefore, the polynomial has 4 terms with degree 6. Answer: Polynomial; degree 6   Of particular interest are polynomials with one variable A polynomial where each term has the form a n x n , where a n is any real number and n is any whole number. , where each term is of the form a n x n . Here a n is any real number and n is any whole number. Such polynomials have the standard form Typically, we arrange terms of polynomials in descending order based on the degree of each term. The leading coefficient The coefficient of the term with the largest degree. is the coefficient of the variable with the highest power, in this case, a n .   Example 4: Write in standard form: 3 x − 4 x 2 + 5 x 3 + 7 − 2 x 4 . Solution: Since terms are separated by addition, write the following: In this form, we can see that the subtraction in the original corresponds to negative coefficients. Because addition is commutative, we can write the terms in descending order based on the degree of each term as follows: Answer: − 2 x 4 + 5 x 3 − 4 x 2 + 3 x + 7   We can further classify polynomials with one variable by their degree as follows: Polynomial Name 5 Constant (degree 0) 2 x + 1 Linear (degree 1) 3 x 2 + 5 x − 3 Quadratic (degree 2) x 3 + x 2 + x + 1 Cubic (degree 3) 7 x 4 + 3 x 3 − 7 x + 8 Fourth-degree polynomial In this text, we call any polynomial of degree n ≥ 4 an nth-degree polynomial. In other words, if the degree is 4, we call the polynomial a fourth-degree polynomial. If the degree is 5, we call it a fifth-degree polynomial, and so on.  || Evaluating Polynomials Given the values for the variables in a polynomial, we can substitute and simplify using the order of operations.   Example 5: Evaluate: 3 x − 1 , where x = − 3 2 . Solution: First, replace the variable with parentheses and then substitute the given value. Answer: −11/2   Example 6: Evaluate: 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 , where x = − 1 . Solution: Answer: 0   Example 7: Evaluate: − 2 a 2 b + a b 2 − 7 , where a = 3 and b = − 2 . Solution: Answer: 41   Example 8: The volume of a sphere in cubic units is given by the formula V = 4 3 π r 3 , where r is the radius. Calculate the volume of a sphere with radius r = 3 2 meters. Solution: Answer: 9 2 π cubic meters   Try this! Evaluate: x 3 − x 2 + 4 x − 2 , where x = − 3 . Answer: −50 Video Solution  || Polynomial Functions Polynomial functions with one variable are functions that can be written in the form where a n is any real number and n is any whole number. Some examples of the different classes of polynomial functions are listed below: Polynomial function Name f ( x ) = 5 Constant function A polynomial function with degree 0. (degree 0) f ( x ) = − 2 x + 1 Linear function A polynomial function with degree 1. (degree 1) f ( x ) = 5 x 2 + 4 x − 3 Quadratic function A polynomial function with degree 2. (degree 2) f ( x ) = x 3 − 1 Cubic function A polynomial function with degree 3. (degree 3) f ( x ) = 4 x 5 + 3 x 4 − 7 Polynomial function Since there are no restrictions on the values for x, the domain of any polynomial function consists of all real numbers.   Example 9: Calculate: f ( 5 ) , given f ( x ) = − 2 x 2 + 5 x + 10 . Solution: Recall that the function notation f ( 5 ) indicates we should evaluate the function when x = 5 . Replace every instance of the variable x with the value 5. Answer: f ( 5 ) = − 15   Example 10: Calculate: f ( − 1 ) , given f ( x ) = − x 3 + 2 x 2 − 4 x + 1 . Solution: Replace the variable x with −1. Answer: f ( − 1 ) = 8   Try this! Given g ( x ) = x 3 − 2 x 2 − x − 4 , calculate g ( − 1 ) . Answer: g ( − 1 ) = − 6 Video Solution  ||  || Adding Polynomials Recall that we combine like terms, or terms with the same variable part, as a means to simplify expressions. To do this, add the coefficients of the terms to obtain a single term with the same variable part. For example, Notice that the variable part, x 2 , does not change. This, in addition to the commutative and associative properties of addition, allows us to add polynomials The process of combining all like terms of two or more polynomials. .   Example 1: Add: 3 x + ( 4 x − 5 ) . Solution: The property + ( a + b ) = a + b , which was derived using the distributive property, allows us to remove the parentheses so that we can add like terms. Answer: 7 x − 5   Example 2: Add: ( 3 x 2 + 3 x + 5 ) + ( 2 x 2 − x − 2 ) . Solution: Remove the parentheses and then combine like terms. Answer: 5 x 2 + 2 x + 3   Example 3: Add: ( − 5 x 2 y − 2 x y 2 + 7 x y ) + ( 4 x 2 y + 7 x y 2 − 3 x y ) . Solution: Remember that the variable parts have to be exactly the same before we can add the coefficients. Answer: − x 2 y + 5 x y 2 + 4 x y   It is common practice to present the terms of the simplified polynomial expression in descending order based on their degree. In other words, we typically present polynomials in standard form, with terms in order from highest to lowest degree.   Example 4: Add: ( a − 4 a 3 + a 5 − 8 ) + ( − 9 a 5 + a 4 − 7 a + 5 + a 3 ) . Solution: Answer: − 8 a 5 + a 4 − 3 a 3 − 6 a − 3   Try this! Add: ( 6 − 5 x 3 + x 2 − x ) + ( x 2 + x + 6 x 3 − 1 ) . Answer: x 3 + 2 x 2 + 5 Video Solution  || Subtracting Polynomials When subtracting polynomials The process of subtracting all the terms of one polynomial from another and combining like terms. , we see that the parentheses become very important. Recall that the distributive property allowed us to derive the following: In other words, when subtracting an algebraic expression, we remove the parentheses by subtracting each term.   Example 5: Subtract: 10 x − ( 3 x + 5 ) . Solution: Subtract each term within the parentheses and then combine like terms. Answer: 7 x − 5   Subtracting a quantity is equivalent to multiplying it by −1.   Example 6: Subtract: ( 3 x 2 + 3 x + 5 ) − ( 2 x 2 − x − 2 ) . Solution: Distribute the −1, remove the parentheses, and then combine like terms. Answer: x 2 + 4 x + 7   Multiplying the terms of a polynomial by −1 changes all the signs.   Example 7: Subtract: ( − 5 x 3 − 2 x 2 + 7 ) − ( 4 x 3 + 7 x 2 − 3 x + 2 ) . Solution: Distribute the −1, remove the parentheses, and then combine like terms. Answer: − 9 x 3 − 9 x 2 + 3 x + 5   Example 8: Subtract 6 x 2 − 3 x − 1 from 2 x 2 + 5 x − 2 . Solution: Since subtraction is not commutative, we must take care to set up the difference correctly. First, write the quantity ( 2 x 2 + 5 x − 2 ) ; from this, subtract the quantity ( 6 x 2 − 3 x − 1 ) . Answer: − 4 x 2 + 8 x − 1   Example 9: Simplify: ( 2 x 2 − 3 x + 5 ) − ( x 2 − 3 x + 1 ) + ( 5 x 2 − 4 x − 8 ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property, remove the parentheses, and then combine like terms. Answer: 6 x 2 − 4 x − 4   Try this! Subtract: ( 8 x 2 y − 5 x y 2 + 6 ) − ( x 2 y + 2 x y 2 − 1 ) . Answer: 7 x 2 y − 7 x y 2 + 7 Video Solution  || Adding and Subtracting Polynomial Functions We use function notation to indicate addition and subtraction of functions as follows: Addition of functions: ( f + g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) + g ( x ) Subtraction of functions: ( f − g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) − g ( x ) When using function notation, be careful to group the entire function and add or subtract accordingly.   Example 10: Calculate: ( f + g ) ( x ) , given f ( x ) = − x 2 − 3 x + 5 and g ( x ) = 3 x 2 + 2 x + 1 . Solution: The notation ( f + g ) ( x ) indicates that you should add the functions f ( x ) + g ( x ) and collect like terms. Answer: ( f + g ) ( x ) = 2 x 2 − x + 6   Example 11: Calculate: ( f − g ) ( x ) , given f ( x ) = 2 x − 3 and g ( x ) = − 2 x 2 + 2 x + 5 . Solution: The notation ( f − g ) ( x ) indicates that you should subtract the functions f ( x ) − g ( x ) : Answer: ( f − g ) ( x ) = 2 x 2 − 8   We may be asked to evaluate the sum or difference of two functions. We have the option to first find the sum or difference and use the resulting function to evaluate for the given variable, or to first evaluate each function and then find the sum or difference.   Example 12: Calculate: ( f − g ) ( 5 ) , given f ( x ) = x 2 + x − 7 and g ( x ) = 4 x + 10 . Solution: First, find ( f − g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) − g ( x ) . Therefore, Next, substitute 5 for the variable x. Answer: ( f − g ) ( 5 ) = − 7 Alternate Solution: Since ( f − g ) ( 5 ) = f ( 5 ) − g ( 5 ) , we can find f ( 5 ) and g ( 5 ) and then subtract the results. Therefore, we have Answer: ( f − g ) ( 5 ) = − 7  ||  || Multiplying by a Monomial Recall the product rule for exponents: if m and n are positive integers, then In other words, when multiplying two expressions with the same base, add the exponents. This rule applies when multiplying a monomial by a monomial. To find the product of monomials, multiply the coefficients and add the exponents of variable factors with the same base. For example, To multiply a polynomial by a monomial, apply the distributive property and then simplify each term.   Example 1: Multiply: − 5 x ( 4 x − 2 ) . Solution: In this case, multiply the monomial, − 5 x , by the binomial, 4 x − 2 . Apply the distributive property and then simplify. Answer: − 20 x 2 + 10 x   Example 2: Multiply: 2 x 2 ( 3 x 2 − 5 x + 1 ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and then simplify. Answer: 6 x 4 − 10 x 3 + 2 x 2   Example 3: Multiply: − 3 a b 2 ( a 2 b 3 + 2 a 3 b − 6 a b − 4 ) . Solution: Answer: − 3 a 3 b 5 − 6 a 4 b 3 + 18 a 2 b 3 + 12 a b 2   To summarize, multiplying a polynomial by a monomial involves the distributive property and the product rule for exponents. Multiply all of the terms of the polynomial by the monomial. For each term, multiply the coefficients and add exponents of variables where the bases are the same.   Try this! Multiply: − 5 x 2 y ( 2 x y 2 − 3 x y + 6 x 2 y − 1 ) . Answer: − 10 x 3 y 3 + 15 x 3 y 2 − 30 x 4 y 2 + 5 x 2 y Video Solution  || Multiplying by a Binomial In the same way that we used the distributive property to find the product of a monomial and a binomial, we will use it to to find the product of two binomials. Here we apply the distributive property multiple times to produce the final result. This same result is obtained in one step if we apply the distributive property to a and b separately as follows: This is often called the FOIL When multiplying binomials we apply the distributive property multiple times in such a way as to multiply the first terms, outer terms, inner terms, and last terms. method. We add the products of the first terms of each binomial ac, the outer terms ad, the inner terms bc, and finally the last terms bd. This mnemonic device only works for products of binomials; hence it is best to just remember that the distributive property applies.   Example 4: Multiply: ( 2 x + 3 ) ( 5 x − 2 ) . Solution: Distribute 2 x and then distribute 3. Simplify by combining like terms. Answer: 10 x 2 + 11 x − 6   Example 5: Multiply: ( 1 2 x − 1 4 ) ( 1 2 x + 1 4 ) . Solution: Distribute 1 2 x and then distribute − 1 4 . Answer: 1 4 x 2 − 1 16   Example 6: Multiply: ( 3 y 2 − 1 ) ( 2 y + 1 ) . Solution: Answer: 6 y 3 + 3 y 2 − 2 y − 1   After applying the distributive property, combine any like terms.   Example 7: Multiply: . Solution: After multiplying each term of the trinomial by and , simplify. Answer:   Example 8: Multiply: . Solution: Perform one product at a time. Answer:   At this point, it is worth pointing out a common mistake: The confusion comes from the product to a power rule of exponents, where we apply the power to all factors. Since there are two terms within the parentheses, that rule does not apply. Care should be taken to understand what is different in the following two examples:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || Product of Polynomials When multiplying polynomials, we apply the distributive property many times. Multiply all of the terms of each polynomial and then combine like terms.   Example 9: Multiply: . Solution: Multiply each term of the first trinomial by each term of the second trinomial and then combine like terms. Aligning like terms in columns, as we have here, aids in the simplification process. Answer:   Notice that when multiplying a trinomial by a trinomial, we obtain nine terms before simplifying. In fact, when multiplying an n-term polynomial by an m-term polynomial, we will obtain n × m terms. In the previous example, we were asked to multiply and found that Because it is easy to make a small calculation error, it is a good practice to trace through the steps mentally to verify that the operations were performed correctly. Alternatively, we can check by evaluating We can be fairly certain that we have multiplied the polynomials correctly if we check that a few values evaluate to the same results in the original expression and in the answer. any value for x in both expressions to verify that the results are the same. Here we choose x = 2: Because the results could coincidentally be the same, a check by evaluating does not necessarily prove that we have multiplied correctly. However, after verifying a few values, we can be fairly confident that the product is correct.   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || Special Products In this section, the goal is to recognize certain special products that occur often in our study of algebra. We will develop three formulas that will be very useful as we move along. The three should be memorized. We begin by considering the following two calculations: This leads us to two formulas that describe perfect square trinomials The trinomials obtained by squaring the binomials and : We can use these formulas to quickly square a binomial.   Example 10: Multiply: . Solution: Here and . Apply the formula: Answer:   This process should become routine enough to be performed mentally.   Example 11: Multiply: . Solution: Here and . Apply the appropriate formula as follows: Answer:   Our third special product follows: This product is called difference of squares where a and b represent algebraic expressions. : The binomials and are called conjugate binomials The binomials and . . Therefore, when conjugate binomials are multiplied, the middle term eliminates, and the product is itself a binomial.   Example 12: Multiply: . Solution: Answer:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || Multiplying Polynomial Functions We use function notation to indicate multiplication as follows: Multiplication of functions:   Example 13: Calculate: , given and . Solution: Multiply all terms of the trinomial by the monomial function . Answer:   Example 14: Calculate: , given and . Solution: First, determine . We have Next, substitute −1 for the variable x. Answer:   Because , we could alternatively calculate and separately and then multiply the results (try this as an exercise). However, if we were asked to evaluate multiple values for the function , it would be best to first determine the general form, as we have in the previous example.  ||  || Dividing by a Monomial Recall the quotient rule for exponents: if x is nonzero and m and n are positive integers, then In other words, when dividing two expressions with the same base, subtract the exponents. This rule applies when dividing a monomial by a monomial. In this section, we will assume that all variables in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 1: Divide: 28 y 3 7 y . Solution: Divide the coefficients and subtract the exponents of the variable y. Answer: 4 y 2   Example 2: Divide: 24 x 7 y 5 8 x 3 y 2 . Solution: Divide the coefficients and apply the quotient rule by subtracting the exponents of the like bases. Answer: 3 x 4 y 3   When dividing a polynomial by a monomial, we may treat the monomial as a common denominator and break up the fraction using the following property: Applying this property results in terms that can be treated as quotients of monomials.   Example 3: Divide: − 5 x 4 + 25 x 3 − 15 x 2 5 x 2 . Solution: Break up the fraction by dividing each term in the numerator by the monomial in the denominator and then simplify each term. Answer: − x 2 + 5 x − 3   Check your division by multiplying the answer, the quotient The result after dividing. , by the monomial in the denominator, the divisor The denominator of a quotient. , to see if you obtain the original numerator, the dividend The numerator of a quotient. .   Example 4: Divide: 9 a 4 b − 7 a 3 b 2 + 3 a 2 b − 3 a 2 b . Solution: Answer: − 3 a 2 + 7 3 a b − 1 . The check is optional and is left to the reader.   Try this! Divide: ( 16 x 5 − 8 x 4 + 5 x 3 + 2 x 2 ) ÷ ( 2 x 2 ) . Answer: 8 x 3 − 4 x 2 + 5 2 x + 1 Video Solution  || Dividing by a Polynomial The same technique outlined for dividing by a monomial does not work for polynomials with two or more terms in the denominator. In this section, we will outline a process called polynomial long division The process of dividing two polynomials using the division algorithm. , which is based on the division algorithm for real numbers. For the sake of clarity, we will assume that all expressions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 5: Divide: x 3 + 3 x 2 − 8 x − 4 x − 2 . Solution: Here x − 2 is the divisor and x 3 + 3 x 2 − 8 x − 4 is the dividend. Step 1: To determine the first term of the quotient, divide the leading term of the dividend by the leading term of the divisor. Step 2: Multiply the first term of the quotient by the divisor, remembering to distribute, and line up like terms with the dividend. Step 3: Subtract the resulting quantity from the dividend. Take care to subtract both terms. Step 4: Bring down the remaining terms and repeat the process from step 1. Notice that the leading term is eliminated and that the result has a degree that is one less than the dividend. The complete process is illustrated below: Polynomial long division ends when the degree of the remainder The expression that is left after the division algorithm ends. is less than the degree of the divisor. Here the remainder is 0. Therefore, the binomial divides the polynomial evenly and the answer is the quotient shown above the division line. To check the answer, multiply the divisor by the quotient to see if you obtain the dividend: Answer: x 2 + 5 x + 2   Next, we demonstrate the case where there is a nonzero remainder. Just as with real numbers, the final answer adds the fraction where the remainder is the numerator and the divisor is the denominator to the quotient. In general, when dividing we have If we multiply both sides by the divisor we obtain   Example 6: Divide: 6 x 2 − 5 x + 3 2 x − 1 . Solution: Since the denominator is a binomial, begin by setting up polynomial long division. To start, determine what monomial times 2 x − 1 results in a leading term 6 x 2 . This is the quotient of the given leading terms: ( 6 x 2 ) ÷ ( 2 x ) = 3 x . Multiply 3 x times the divisor 2 x − 1 and line up the result with like terms of the dividend. Subtract the result from the dividend and bring down the constant term +3. Subtracting eliminates the leading term and − 5 x − ( − 3 x ) = − 5 x + 3 x = − 2 x . The quotient of − 2 x and 2 x is −1. Multiply 2 x − 1 by −1 and line up the result. Subtract again and notice that we are left with a remainder. The constant term 2 has degree 0, and thus the division ends. We may write Answer: 3 x − 1 + 2 2 x − 1 . To check that this result is correct, we multiply as follows:   Occasionally, some of the powers of the variables appear to be missing within a polynomial. This can lead to errors when lining up like terms. Therefore, when first learning how to divide polynomials using long division, fill in the missing terms with zero coefficients, called placeholders Terms with zero coefficients used to fill in all missing exponents within a polynomial. .   Example 7: Divide: 27 x 3 + 64 3 x + 4 . Solution: Notice that the binomial in the numerator does not have terms with degree 2 or 1. The division is simplified if we rewrite the expression with placeholders: Set up polynomial long division: We begin with 27 x 3 ÷ 3 x = 9 x 2 and work the rest of the division algorithm. Answer: 9 x 2 − 12 x + 16   Example 8: Divide: 3 x 4 − 2 x 3 + 6 x 2 + 23 x − 7 x 2 − 2 x + 5 . Solution: Begin the process by dividing the leading terms to determine the leading term of the quotient 3 x 4 ÷ x 2 = 3 x 2 . Take care to distribute and line up the like terms. Continue the process until the remainder has a degree less than 2. The remainder is x − 2 . Write the answer with the remainder: Answer: 3 x 2 + 4 x − 1 + x − 2 x 2 − 2 x + 5   Polynomial long division takes time and practice to master. Work lots of problems and remember that you may check your answers by multiplying the quotient by the divisor (and adding the remainder if present) to obtain the dividend.   Try this! Divide: 20 x 4 − 32 x 3 + 7 x 2 + 8 x − 10   5 x − 3 . Answer: 4 x 3 − 4 x 2 − x + 1 − 7 5 x − 3 Video Solution  || Dividing Polynomial Functions We may use function notation to indicate division as follows: Division of functions: ( f / g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) g ( x ) The quotient of two polynomial functions does not necessarily have a domain of all real numbers. The values for x that make the function in the denominator 0 are restricted from the domain. This will be discussed in more detail at a later time. For now, assume all functions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 9: Calculate: ( f / g ) ( x ) given f ( x ) = 6 x 5 − 36 x 4 + 12 x 3 − 6 x 2 and g ( x ) = − 6 x 2 . Solution: The notation indicates that we should divide: Answer: ( f / g ) ( x ) = − x 3 + 6 x 2 − 2 x + 1   Example 10: Calculate: ( f / g ) ( − 1 ) , given f ( x ) = − 3 x 3 + 7 x 2 − 11 x − 1 and g ( x ) = 3 x − 1 . Solution: First, determine ( f / g ) ( x ) . Therefore, Substitute −1 for the variable x . Answer: ( f / g ) ( − 1 ) = − 4  ||  || Negative Exponents In this section, we define what it means to have negative integer exponents. We begin with the following equivalent fractions: Notice that 4, 8, and 32 are all powers of 2. Hence we can write 4 = 2 2 , 8 = 2 3 , and 32 = 2 5 . If the exponent of the term in the denominator is larger than the exponent of the term in the numerator, then the application of the quotient rule for exponents results in a negative exponent. In this case, we have the following: We conclude that 2 − 3 = 1 2 3 . This is true in general and leads to the definition of negative exponents x − n = 1 x n , given any integer n, where x is nonzero. . Given any integer n and x ≠ 0 , then Here x ≠ 0 because 1 0 is undefined. For clarity, in this section, assume all variables are nonzero. Simplifying expressions with negative exponents requires that we rewrite the expression with positive exponents.   Example 1: Simplify: 10 − 2 . Solution: Answer: 1 100   Example 2: Simplify: ( − 3 ) − 1 . Solution: Answer: − 1 3   Example 3: Simplify: 1 y − 3 . Solution: Answer: y 3   At this point we highlight two very important examples, If the grouped quantity is raised to a negative exponent, then apply the definition and write the entire grouped quantity in the denominator. If there is no grouping, then apply the definition only to the base preceding the exponent.   Example 4: Simplify: ( 2 a b ) − 3 . Solution: First, apply the definition of −3 as an exponent and then apply the power of a product rule. Answer: 1 8 a 3 b 3   Example 5: Simplify: ( − 3 x y 3 ) − 2 . Solution: Answer: 1 9 x 2 y 6   Example 6: Simplify: x − 3 y − 4 . Solution: Answer: y 4 x 3   The previous example suggests a property of quotients with negative exponents x − n y − m = y m x n , given any integers m and n, where x ≠ 0 and y ≠ 0 . . If given any integers m and n, where x ≠ 0 and y ≠ 0 , then In other words, negative exponents in the numerator can be written as positive exponents in the denominator, and negative exponents in the denominator can be written as positive exponents in the numerator.   Example 7: Simplify: − 2 x − 5 y 3 z − 2 . Solution: Take care with the coefficient −2; recognize that this is the base and that the exponent is actually +1: − 2 = ( − 2 ) 1 . Hence the rules of negative exponents do not apply to this coefficient; leave it in the numerator. Answer: − 2 y 3 z 2 x 5   Example 8: Simplify: ( − 3 x − 4 ) − 3 y − 2 . Solution: Apply the power of a product rule before applying negative exponents. Answer: − x 12 y 2 27   Example 9: Simplify: ( 3 x 2 ) − 4 ( − 2 y − 1 z 3 ) − 2 . Solution: Answer: 4 z 6 81 x 8 y 2   Example 10: Simplify: ( 5 x 2 y ) 3 x − 5 y − 3 . Solution: First, apply the power of a product rule and then the quotient rule. Answer: 125 x 11 y 6   To summarize, we have the following rules for negative integer exponents with nonzero bases: Negative exponents: x − n = 1 x n Quotients with negative exponents: x − n y − m = y m x n   Try this! Simplify: ( − 5 x y − 3 ) − 2 5 x 4 y − 4 . Answer: y 10 125 x 6 Video Solution  || Scientific Notation Real numbers expressed in scientific notation Real numbers expressed in the form a × 10 n , where n is an integer and 1 ≤ a < 10 . have the form where n is an integer and 1 ≤ a < 10 . This form is particularly useful when the numbers are very large or very small. For example, It is cumbersome to write all the zeros in both of these cases. Scientific notation is an alternative, compact representation of these numbers. The factor 10 n indicates the power of 10 to multiply the coefficient by to convert back to decimal form: This is equivalent to moving the decimal in the coefficient fifteen places to the right. A negative exponent indicates that the number is very small: This is equivalent to moving the decimal in the coefficient eleven places to the left. Converting a decimal number to scientific notation involves moving the decimal as well. Consider all of the equivalent forms of 0.00563 with factors of 10 that follow: While all of these are equal, 5.63 × 10 − 3 is the only form considered to be expressed in scientific notation. This is because the coefficient 5.63 is between 1 and 10 as required by the definition. Notice that we can convert 5.63 × 10 − 3 back to decimal form, as a check, by moving the decimal to the left three places.   Example 11: Write 1,075,000,000,000 using scientific notation. Solution: Here we count twelve decimal places to the left of the decimal point to obtain the number 1.075. Answer: 1.075 × 10 12   Example 12: Write 0.000003045 using scientific notation. Solution: Here we count six decimal places to the right to obtain 3.045. Answer: 3.045 × 10 − 6   Often we will need to perform operations when using numbers in scientific notation. All the rules of exponents developed so far also apply to numbers in scientific notation.   Example 13: Multiply: ( 4.36 × 10 − 5 ) ( 5.3 × 10 12 ) . Solution: Use the fact that multiplication is commutative and apply the product rule for exponents. Answer: 2.3108 × 10 8   Example 14: Divide: ( 3.24 × 10 8 ) ÷ ( 9.0 × 10 − 3 ) . Solution: Answer: 3.6 × 10 10   Example 15: The speed of light is approximately 6.7 × 10 8 miles per hour. Express this speed in miles per second. Solution: A unit analysis indicates that we must divide the number by 3,600. Answer: The speed of light is approximately 1.9 × 10 5 miles per second.   Example 16: By what factor is the radius of the sun larger than the radius of earth? Solution: We want to find the number that when multiplied times the radius of earth equals the radius of the sun. Source: NASA and European Space Agency, from http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/multimedia/display.cfm?IM_ID=188. Therefore, Answer: The radius of the sun is approximately 110 times that of earth.   Try this! Divide: ( 6.75 × 10 − 8 ) ÷ ( 9 × 10 − 17 ) . Answer: 7.5 × 10 8 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_1	 || Product, Quotient, and Power Rule for Exponents If a factor is repeated multiple times, then the product can be written in exponential form An equivalent expression written using a rational exponent. x n . The positive integer exponent n indicates the number of times the base x is repeated as a factor. For example, Here the base is 5 and the exponent is 4. Exponents are sometimes indicated with the caret (^) symbol found on the keyboard: 5^4 = 5*5*5*5. Next consider the product of 2 3 and 2 5 , Expanding the expression using the definition produces multiple factors of the base, which is quite cumbersome, particularly when n is large. For this reason, we will develop some useful rules to help us simplify expressions with exponents. In this example, notice that we could obtain the same result by adding the exponents. In general, this describes the product rule for exponents x m ⋅ x n = x m + n ; the product of two expressions with the same base can be simplified by adding the exponents. . If m and n are positive integers, then In other words, when multiplying two expressions with the same base, add the exponents.   Example 1: Simplify: 10 5 ⋅ 10 18 . Solution: Answer: 10 23   In the previous example, notice that we did not multiply the base 10 times itself. When applying the product rule, add the exponents and leave the base unchanged.   Example 2: Simplify: x 6 ⋅ x 12 ⋅ x . Solution: Recall that the variable x is assumed to have an exponent of 1: x = x 1 . Answer: x 19   The base could be any algebraic expression.   Example 3: Simplify: ( x + y ) 9   ( x + y ) 13 . Solution: Treat the expression ( x + y ) as the base. Answer: ( x + y ) 22   The commutative property of multiplication allows us to use the product rule for exponents to simplify factors of an algebraic expression.   Example 4: Simplify: 2 x 8 y ⋅ 3 x 4 y 7 . Solution: Multiply the coefficients and add the exponents of variable factors with the same base. Answer: 6 x 12 y 8   Next, we will develop a rule for division by first looking at the quotient of 2 7 and 2 3 . Here we can cancel factors after applying the definition of exponents. Notice that the same result can be obtained by subtracting the exponents. This describes the quotient rule for exponents x m x n = x m − n ; the quotient of two expressions with the same base can be simplified by subtracting the exponents. . If m and n are positive integers and x ≠ 0 , then In other words, when you divide two expressions with the same base, subtract the exponents.   Example 5: Simplify: 12 y 15 4 y 7 . Solution: Divide the coefficients and subtract the exponents of the variable y. Answer: 3 y 8   Example 6: Simplify: 20 x 10 ( x + 5 ) 6 10 x 9 ( x + 5 ) 2 . Solution: Answer: 2 x ( x + 5 ) 4   Now raise 2 3 to the fourth power as follows: After writing the base 2 3 as a factor four times, expand to obtain 12 factors of 2. We can obtain the same result by multiplying the exponents. In general, this describes the power rule for exponents ( x m ) n = x m n ; a power raised to a power can be simplified by multiplying the exponents. . Given positive integers m and n, then In other words, when raising a power to a power, multiply the exponents.   Example 7: Simplify: ( y 6 ) 7 . Solution: Answer: y 42   To summarize, we have developed three very useful rules of exponents that are used extensively in algebra. If given positive integers m and n, then Product rule: x m ⋅ x n = x m + n Quotient rule: x m x n = x m − n   ,   x ≠ 0 Power rule: ( x m ) n = x m ⋅ n   Try this! Simplify: y 5 ⋅ ( y 4 ) 6 . Answer: y 29 Video Solution  || Power Rules for Products and Quotients Now we consider raising grouped products to a power. For example, After expanding, we have four factors of the product xy. This is equivalent to raising each of the original factors to the fourth power. In general, this describes the power rule for a product ( x y ) n = x n y n ; if a product is raised to a power, then apply that power to each factor in the product. . If n is a positive integer, then   Example 8: Simplify: ( 2 a b ) 7 . Solution: We must apply the exponent 7 to all the factors, including the coefficient, 2. If a coefficient is raised to a relatively small power, then present the real number equivalent, as we did in this example: 2 7 = 128 . Answer: 128 a 7 b 7   In many cases, the process of simplifying expressions involving exponents requires the use of several rules of exponents.   Example 9: Simplify: ( 3 x y 3 ) 4 . Solution: Answer: 81 x 4 y 12   Example 10: Simplify: ( 4 x 2 y 5 z ) 3 . Solution: Answer: 64 x 6 y 15 z 3   Example 11: Simplify: [ 5 ( x + y ) 3 ] 3 . Solution: Answer: 125 ( x + y ) 9   Next, consider a quotient raised to a power. Here we obtain four factors of the quotient, which is equivalent to the numerator and the denominator both raised to the fourth power. In general, this describes the power rule for a quotient ( x y ) n = x n y n ; if a quotient is raised to a power, then apply that power to the numerator and the denominator. . If n is a positive integer and y ≠ 0 , then In other words, given a fraction raised to a power, we can apply that exponent to the numerator and the denominator. This rule requires that the denominator is nonzero. We will make this assumption for the remainder of the section.   Example 12: Simplify: ( 3 a b ) 3 . Solution: First, apply the power rule for a quotient and then the power rule for a product. Answer: 27 a 3 b 3   In practice, we often combine these two steps by applying the exponent to all factors in the numerator and the denominator.   Example 13: Simplify: ( a b 2 2 c 3 ) 5 . Solution: Apply the exponent 5 to all of the factors in the numerator and the denominator. Answer:   a 5 b 10 32 c 15   Example 14: Simplify: ( 5 x 5 ( 2 x − 1 ) 4 3 y 7 ) 2 . Solution: Answer: 25 x 10 ( 2 x − 1 ) 8 9 y 14   It is a good practice to simplify within parentheses before using the power rules; this is consistent with the order of operations.   Example 15: Simplify: ( − 2 x 3 y 4 z x y 2 ) 4 . Solution: Answer: 16 x 8 y 8 z 4   To summarize, we have developed two new rules that are useful when grouping symbols are used in conjunction with exponents. If given a positive integer n, where y is a nonzero number, then Power rule for a product: ( x y ) n = x n y n Power rule for a quotient: ( x y ) n = x n y n   Try this! Simplify: ( 4 x 2 ( x − y ) 3 3 y z 5 ) 3 . Answer: 64 x 6 ( x − y ) 9 27 y 3 z 15 Video Solution  || Zero as an Exponent Using the quotient rule for exponents, we can define what it means to have 0 as an exponent. Consider the following calculation: Eight divided by 8 is clearly equal to 1, and when the quotient rule for exponents is applied, we see that a 0 exponent results. This leads us to the definition of zero as an exponent x 0 = 1 ; any nonzero base raised to the 0 power is defined to be 1. , where x ≠ 0 : It is important to note that 0 0 is undefined. If the base is negative, then the result is still +1. In other words, any nonzero base raised to the 0 power is defined to be 1. In the following examples, assume all variables are nonzero.   Example 16: Simplify: a. ( − 5 ) 0 b. − 5 0 Solution: a. Any nonzero quantity raised to the 0 power is equal to 1. b. In the example − 5 0 , the base is 5, not −5. Answers: a. 1; b. −1   Example 17: Simplify: ( 5 x 3 y 0 z 2 ) 2 . Solution: It is good practice to simplify within the parentheses first. Answer: 25 x 6 z 4   Example 18: Simplify: ( − 8 a 10 b 5 5 c 12 d 14 ) 0 . Solution: Answer: 1   Try this! Simplify: 5 x 0 and ( 5 x ) 0 . Answer: 5 x 0 = 5 and ( 5 x ) 0 = 1 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_1_1	Product, Quotient, and Power Rule for Exponents If a factor is repeated multiple times, then the product can be written in exponential form An equivalent expression written using a rational exponent. x n . The positive integer exponent n indicates the number of times the base x is repeated as a factor. For example, Here the base is 5 and the exponent is 4. Exponents are sometimes indicated with the caret (^) symbol found on the keyboard: 5^4 = 5*5*5*5. Next consider the product of 2 3 and 2 5 , Expanding the expression using the definition produces multiple factors of the base, which is quite cumbersome, particularly when n is large. For this reason, we will develop some useful rules to help us simplify expressions with exponents. In this example, notice that we could obtain the same result by adding the exponents. In general, this describes the product rule for exponents x m ⋅ x n = x m + n ; the product of two expressions with the same base can be simplified by adding the exponents. . If m and n are positive integers, then In other words, when multiplying two expressions with the same base, add the exponents.   Example 1: Simplify: 10 5 ⋅ 10 18 . Solution: Answer: 10 23   In the previous example, notice that we did not multiply the base 10 times itself. When applying the product rule, add the exponents and leave the base unchanged.   Example 2: Simplify: x 6 ⋅ x 12 ⋅ x . Solution: Recall that the variable x is assumed to have an exponent of 1: x = x 1 . Answer: x 19   The base could be any algebraic expression.   Example 3: Simplify: ( x + y ) 9   ( x + y ) 13 . Solution: Treat the expression ( x + y ) as the base. Answer: ( x + y ) 22   The commutative property of multiplication allows us to use the product rule for exponents to simplify factors of an algebraic expression.   Example 4: Simplify: 2 x 8 y ⋅ 3 x 4 y 7 . Solution: Multiply the coefficients and add the exponents of variable factors with the same base. Answer: 6 x 12 y 8   Next, we will develop a rule for division by first looking at the quotient of 2 7 and 2 3 . Here we can cancel factors after applying the definition of exponents. Notice that the same result can be obtained by subtracting the exponents. This describes the quotient rule for exponents x m x n = x m − n ; the quotient of two expressions with the same base can be simplified by subtracting the exponents. . If m and n are positive integers and x ≠ 0 , then In other words, when you divide two expressions with the same base, subtract the exponents.   Example 5: Simplify: 12 y 15 4 y 7 . Solution: Divide the coefficients and subtract the exponents of the variable y. Answer: 3 y 8   Example 6: Simplify: 20 x 10 ( x + 5 ) 6 10 x 9 ( x + 5 ) 2 . Solution: Answer: 2 x ( x + 5 ) 4   Now raise 2 3 to the fourth power as follows: After writing the base 2 3 as a factor four times, expand to obtain 12 factors of 2. We can obtain the same result by multiplying the exponents. In general, this describes the power rule for exponents ( x m ) n = x m n ; a power raised to a power can be simplified by multiplying the exponents. . Given positive integers m and n, then In other words, when raising a power to a power, multiply the exponents.   Example 7: Simplify: ( y 6 ) 7 . Solution: Answer: y 42   To summarize, we have developed three very useful rules of exponents that are used extensively in algebra. If given positive integers m and n, then Product rule: x m ⋅ x n = x m + n Quotient rule: x m x n = x m − n   ,   x ≠ 0 Power rule: ( x m ) n = x m ⋅ n   Try this! Simplify: y 5 ⋅ ( y 4 ) 6 . Answer: y 29 Video Solution Product, Quotient, and Power Rule for Exponents If a factor is repeated multiple times, then the product can be written in exponential form An equivalent expression written using a rational exponent. x n . The positive integer exponent n indicates the number of times the base x is repeated as a factor. For example, Here the base is 5 and the exponent is 4. Exponents are sometimes indicated with the caret (^) symbol found on the keyboard: 5^4 = 5*5*5*5. Next consider the product of 2 3 and 2 5 , Expanding the expression using the definition produces multiple factors of the base, which is quite cumbersome, particularly when n is large. For this reason, we will develop some useful rules to help us simplify expressions with exponents. In this example, notice that we could obtain the same result by adding the exponents. In general, this describes the product rule for exponents x m ⋅ x n = x m + n ; the product of two expressions with the same base can be simplified by adding the exponents. . If m and n are positive integers, then In other words, when multiplying two expressions with the same base, add the exponents.   Example 1: Simplify: 10 5 ⋅ 10 18 . Solution: Answer: 10 23   In the previous example, notice that we did not multiply the base 10 times itself. When applying the product rule, add the exponents and leave the base unchanged.   Example 2: Simplify: x 6 ⋅ x 12 ⋅ x . Solution: Recall that the variable x is assumed to have an exponent of 1: x = x 1 . Answer: x 19   The base could be any algebraic expression.   Example 3: Simplify: ( x + y ) 9   ( x + y ) 13 . Solution: Treat the expression ( x + y ) as the base. Answer: ( x + y ) 22   The commutative property of multiplication allows us to use the product rule for exponents to simplify factors of an algebraic expression.   Example 4: Simplify: 2 x 8 y ⋅ 3 x 4 y 7 . Solution: Multiply the coefficients and add the exponents of variable factors with the same base. Answer: 6 x 12 y 8   Next, we will develop a rule for division by first looking at the quotient of 2 7 and 2 3 . Here we can cancel factors after applying the definition of exponents. Notice that the same result can be obtained by subtracting the exponents. This describes the quotient rule for exponents x m x n = x m − n ; the quotient of two expressions with the same base can be simplified by subtracting the exponents. . If m and n are positive integers and x ≠ 0 , then In other words, when you divide two expressions with the same base, subtract the exponents.   Example 5: Simplify: 12 y 15 4 y 7 . Solution: Divide the coefficients and subtract the exponents of the variable y. Answer: 3 y 8   Example 6: Simplify: 20 x 10 ( x + 5 ) 6 10 x 9 ( x + 5 ) 2 . Solution: Answer: 2 x ( x + 5 ) 4   Now raise 2 3 to the fourth power as follows: After writing the base 2 3 as a factor four times, expand to obtain 12 factors of 2. We can obtain the same result by multiplying the exponents. In general, this describes the power rule for exponents ( x m ) n = x m n ; a power raised to a power can be simplified by multiplying the exponents. . Given positive integers m and n, then In other words, when raising a power to a power, multiply the exponents.   Example 7: Simplify: ( y 6 ) 7 . Solution: Answer: y 42   To summarize, we have developed three very useful rules of exponents that are used extensively in algebra. If given positive integers m and n, then Product rule: x m ⋅ x n = x m + n Quotient rule: x m x n = x m − n   ,   x ≠ 0 Power rule: ( x m ) n = x m ⋅ n   Try this! Simplify: y 5 ⋅ ( y 4 ) 6 . Answer: y 29 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_1_2	Power Rules for Products and Quotients Now we consider raising grouped products to a power. For example, After expanding, we have four factors of the product xy. This is equivalent to raising each of the original factors to the fourth power. In general, this describes the power rule for a product ( x y ) n = x n y n ; if a product is raised to a power, then apply that power to each factor in the product. . If n is a positive integer, then   Example 8: Simplify: ( 2 a b ) 7 . Solution: We must apply the exponent 7 to all the factors, including the coefficient, 2. If a coefficient is raised to a relatively small power, then present the real number equivalent, as we did in this example: 2 7 = 128 . Answer: 128 a 7 b 7   In many cases, the process of simplifying expressions involving exponents requires the use of several rules of exponents.   Example 9: Simplify: ( 3 x y 3 ) 4 . Solution: Answer: 81 x 4 y 12   Example 10: Simplify: ( 4 x 2 y 5 z ) 3 . Solution: Answer: 64 x 6 y 15 z 3   Example 11: Simplify: [ 5 ( x + y ) 3 ] 3 . Solution: Answer: 125 ( x + y ) 9   Next, consider a quotient raised to a power. Here we obtain four factors of the quotient, which is equivalent to the numerator and the denominator both raised to the fourth power. In general, this describes the power rule for a quotient ( x y ) n = x n y n ; if a quotient is raised to a power, then apply that power to the numerator and the denominator. . If n is a positive integer and y ≠ 0 , then In other words, given a fraction raised to a power, we can apply that exponent to the numerator and the denominator. This rule requires that the denominator is nonzero. We will make this assumption for the remainder of the section.   Example 12: Simplify: ( 3 a b ) 3 . Solution: First, apply the power rule for a quotient and then the power rule for a product. Answer: 27 a 3 b 3   In practice, we often combine these two steps by applying the exponent to all factors in the numerator and the denominator.   Example 13: Simplify: ( a b 2 2 c 3 ) 5 . Solution: Apply the exponent 5 to all of the factors in the numerator and the denominator. Answer:   a 5 b 10 32 c 15   Example 14: Simplify: ( 5 x 5 ( 2 x − 1 ) 4 3 y 7 ) 2 . Solution: Answer: 25 x 10 ( 2 x − 1 ) 8 9 y 14   It is a good practice to simplify within parentheses before using the power rules; this is consistent with the order of operations.   Example 15: Simplify: ( − 2 x 3 y 4 z x y 2 ) 4 . Solution: Answer: 16 x 8 y 8 z 4   To summarize, we have developed two new rules that are useful when grouping symbols are used in conjunction with exponents. If given a positive integer n, where y is a nonzero number, then Power rule for a product: ( x y ) n = x n y n Power rule for a quotient: ( x y ) n = x n y n   Try this! Simplify: ( 4 x 2 ( x − y ) 3 3 y z 5 ) 3 . Answer: 64 x 6 ( x − y ) 9 27 y 3 z 15 Video Solution Power Rules for Products and Quotients Now we consider raising grouped products to a power. For example, After expanding, we have four factors of the product xy. This is equivalent to raising each of the original factors to the fourth power. In general, this describes the power rule for a product ( x y ) n = x n y n ; if a product is raised to a power, then apply that power to each factor in the product. . If n is a positive integer, then   Example 8: Simplify: ( 2 a b ) 7 . Solution: We must apply the exponent 7 to all the factors, including the coefficient, 2. If a coefficient is raised to a relatively small power, then present the real number equivalent, as we did in this example: 2 7 = 128 . Answer: 128 a 7 b 7   In many cases, the process of simplifying expressions involving exponents requires the use of several rules of exponents.   Example 9: Simplify: ( 3 x y 3 ) 4 . Solution: Answer: 81 x 4 y 12   Example 10: Simplify: ( 4 x 2 y 5 z ) 3 . Solution: Answer: 64 x 6 y 15 z 3   Example 11: Simplify: [ 5 ( x + y ) 3 ] 3 . Solution: Answer: 125 ( x + y ) 9   Next, consider a quotient raised to a power. Here we obtain four factors of the quotient, which is equivalent to the numerator and the denominator both raised to the fourth power. In general, this describes the power rule for a quotient ( x y ) n = x n y n ; if a quotient is raised to a power, then apply that power to the numerator and the denominator. . If n is a positive integer and y ≠ 0 , then In other words, given a fraction raised to a power, we can apply that exponent to the numerator and the denominator. This rule requires that the denominator is nonzero. We will make this assumption for the remainder of the section.   Example 12: Simplify: ( 3 a b ) 3 . Solution: First, apply the power rule for a quotient and then the power rule for a product. Answer: 27 a 3 b 3   In practice, we often combine these two steps by applying the exponent to all factors in the numerator and the denominator.   Example 13: Simplify: ( a b 2 2 c 3 ) 5 . Solution: Apply the exponent 5 to all of the factors in the numerator and the denominator. Answer:   a 5 b 10 32 c 15   Example 14: Simplify: ( 5 x 5 ( 2 x − 1 ) 4 3 y 7 ) 2 . Solution: Answer: 25 x 10 ( 2 x − 1 ) 8 9 y 14   It is a good practice to simplify within parentheses before using the power rules; this is consistent with the order of operations.   Example 15: Simplify: ( − 2 x 3 y 4 z x y 2 ) 4 . Solution: Answer: 16 x 8 y 8 z 4   To summarize, we have developed two new rules that are useful when grouping symbols are used in conjunction with exponents. If given a positive integer n, where y is a nonzero number, then Power rule for a product: ( x y ) n = x n y n Power rule for a quotient: ( x y ) n = x n y n   Try this! Simplify: ( 4 x 2 ( x − y ) 3 3 y z 5 ) 3 . Answer: 64 x 6 ( x − y ) 9 27 y 3 z 15 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_1_3	Zero as an Exponent Using the quotient rule for exponents, we can define what it means to have 0 as an exponent. Consider the following calculation: Eight divided by 8 is clearly equal to 1, and when the quotient rule for exponents is applied, we see that a 0 exponent results. This leads us to the definition of zero as an exponent x 0 = 1 ; any nonzero base raised to the 0 power is defined to be 1. , where x ≠ 0 : It is important to note that 0 0 is undefined. If the base is negative, then the result is still +1. In other words, any nonzero base raised to the 0 power is defined to be 1. In the following examples, assume all variables are nonzero.   Example 16: Simplify: a. ( − 5 ) 0 b. − 5 0 Solution: a. Any nonzero quantity raised to the 0 power is equal to 1. b. In the example − 5 0 , the base is 5, not −5. Answers: a. 1; b. −1   Example 17: Simplify: ( 5 x 3 y 0 z 2 ) 2 . Solution: It is good practice to simplify within the parentheses first. Answer: 25 x 6 z 4   Example 18: Simplify: ( − 8 a 10 b 5 5 c 12 d 14 ) 0 . Solution: Answer: 1   Try this! Simplify: 5 x 0 and ( 5 x ) 0 . Answer: 5 x 0 = 5 and ( 5 x ) 0 = 1 Video Solution Zero as an Exponent Using the quotient rule for exponents, we can define what it means to have 0 as an exponent. Consider the following calculation: Eight divided by 8 is clearly equal to 1, and when the quotient rule for exponents is applied, we see that a 0 exponent results. This leads us to the definition of zero as an exponent x 0 = 1 ; any nonzero base raised to the 0 power is defined to be 1. , where x ≠ 0 : It is important to note that 0 0 is undefined. If the base is negative, then the result is still +1. In other words, any nonzero base raised to the 0 power is defined to be 1. In the following examples, assume all variables are nonzero.   Example 16: Simplify: a. ( − 5 ) 0 b. − 5 0 Solution: a. Any nonzero quantity raised to the 0 power is equal to 1. b. In the example − 5 0 , the base is 5, not −5. Answers: a. 1; b. −1   Example 17: Simplify: ( 5 x 3 y 0 z 2 ) 2 . Solution: It is good practice to simplify within the parentheses first. Answer: 25 x 6 z 4   Example 18: Simplify: ( − 8 a 10 b 5 5 c 12 d 14 ) 0 . Solution: Answer: 1   Try this! Simplify: 5 x 0 and ( 5 x ) 0 . Answer: 5 x 0 = 5 and ( 5 x ) 0 = 1 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_2	 || Definitions A polynomial An algebraic expression consisting of terms with real number coefficients and variables with whole number exponents. is a special algebraic expression with terms that consist of real number coefficients and variable factors with whole number exponents. Polynomials do not have variables in the denominator of any term. The degree of a term The exponent of the variable; if there is more than one variable in the term, the degree of the term is the sum their exponents. in a polynomial is defined to be the exponent of the variable, or if there is more than one variable in the term, the degree is the sum of their exponents. Recall that x 0 = 1 ; any constant term can be written as a product of x 0 and itself. Hence the degree of a constant term is 0. Term Degree 3 x 2 2 6 x 2 y 2 + 1 = 3 7 a 2 b 3 2 + 3 = 5 8 0 , since 8 = 8 x 0 2 x 1, since x = x 1 The degree of a polynomial The largest degree of all of its terms. is the largest degree of all of its terms. Polynomial Degree 4 x 5 − 3 x 3 + 2 x − 1 5 6 x 2 y − 5 x y 3 + 7 4 , because 5 x y 3 has degree 4. 1 2 x + 5 4 1, because x = x 1 We classify polynomials by the number of terms and the degree as follows: Expression Classification Degree 5 x 7 Monomial Polynomial with one term. (one term) 7 8 x 6 − 1 Binomial Polynomial with two terms. (two terms) 6 − 3 x 2 + x − 1 Trinomial Polynomial with three terms. (three terms) 2 5 x 3 − 2 x 2 + 3 x − 6 Polynomial An algebraic expression consisting of terms with real number coefficients and variables with whole number exponents. (many terms) 3 In this text, we will call polynomials with four or more terms simply polynomials.   Example 1: Classify and state the degree: 7 x 2 − 4 x 5 − 1 . Solution: Here there are three terms. The highest variable exponent is 5. Therefore, this is a trinomial of degree 5. Answer: Trinomial; degree 5   Example 2: Classify and state the degree: 12 a 5 b c 3 . Solution: Since the expression consists of only multiplication, it is one term, a monomial. The variable part can be written as a 5 b 1 c 3 ; hence its degree is 5 + 1 + 3 = 9 . Answer: Monomial; degree 9   Example 3: Classify and state the degree: 4 x 2 y − 6 x y 4 + 5 x 3 y 3 + 4 . Solution: The term 4 x 2 y has degree 3; − 6 x y 4 has degree 5; 5 x 3 y 3 has degree 6; and the constant term 4 has degree 0. Therefore, the polynomial has 4 terms with degree 6. Answer: Polynomial; degree 6   Of particular interest are polynomials with one variable A polynomial where each term has the form a n x n , where a n is any real number and n is any whole number. , where each term is of the form a n x n . Here a n is any real number and n is any whole number. Such polynomials have the standard form Typically, we arrange terms of polynomials in descending order based on the degree of each term. The leading coefficient The coefficient of the term with the largest degree. is the coefficient of the variable with the highest power, in this case, a n .   Example 4: Write in standard form: 3 x − 4 x 2 + 5 x 3 + 7 − 2 x 4 . Solution: Since terms are separated by addition, write the following: In this form, we can see that the subtraction in the original corresponds to negative coefficients. Because addition is commutative, we can write the terms in descending order based on the degree of each term as follows: Answer: − 2 x 4 + 5 x 3 − 4 x 2 + 3 x + 7   We can further classify polynomials with one variable by their degree as follows: Polynomial Name 5 Constant (degree 0) 2 x + 1 Linear (degree 1) 3 x 2 + 5 x − 3 Quadratic (degree 2) x 3 + x 2 + x + 1 Cubic (degree 3) 7 x 4 + 3 x 3 − 7 x + 8 Fourth-degree polynomial In this text, we call any polynomial of degree n ≥ 4 an nth-degree polynomial. In other words, if the degree is 4, we call the polynomial a fourth-degree polynomial. If the degree is 5, we call it a fifth-degree polynomial, and so on.  || Evaluating Polynomials Given the values for the variables in a polynomial, we can substitute and simplify using the order of operations.   Example 5: Evaluate: 3 x − 1 , where x = − 3 2 . Solution: First, replace the variable with parentheses and then substitute the given value. Answer: −11/2   Example 6: Evaluate: 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 , where x = − 1 . Solution: Answer: 0   Example 7: Evaluate: − 2 a 2 b + a b 2 − 7 , where a = 3 and b = − 2 . Solution: Answer: 41   Example 8: The volume of a sphere in cubic units is given by the formula V = 4 3 π r 3 , where r is the radius. Calculate the volume of a sphere with radius r = 3 2 meters. Solution: Answer: 9 2 π cubic meters   Try this! Evaluate: x 3 − x 2 + 4 x − 2 , where x = − 3 . Answer: −50 Video Solution  || Polynomial Functions Polynomial functions with one variable are functions that can be written in the form where a n is any real number and n is any whole number. Some examples of the different classes of polynomial functions are listed below: Polynomial function Name f ( x ) = 5 Constant function A polynomial function with degree 0. (degree 0) f ( x ) = − 2 x + 1 Linear function A polynomial function with degree 1. (degree 1) f ( x ) = 5 x 2 + 4 x − 3 Quadratic function A polynomial function with degree 2. (degree 2) f ( x ) = x 3 − 1 Cubic function A polynomial function with degree 3. (degree 3) f ( x ) = 4 x 5 + 3 x 4 − 7 Polynomial function Since there are no restrictions on the values for x, the domain of any polynomial function consists of all real numbers.   Example 9: Calculate: f ( 5 ) , given f ( x ) = − 2 x 2 + 5 x + 10 . Solution: Recall that the function notation f ( 5 ) indicates we should evaluate the function when x = 5 . Replace every instance of the variable x with the value 5. Answer: f ( 5 ) = − 15   Example 10: Calculate: f ( − 1 ) , given f ( x ) = − x 3 + 2 x 2 − 4 x + 1 . Solution: Replace the variable x with −1. Answer: f ( − 1 ) = 8   Try this! Given g ( x ) = x 3 − 2 x 2 − x − 4 , calculate g ( − 1 ) . Answer: g ( − 1 ) = − 6 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_2_1	Definitions A polynomial An algebraic expression consisting of terms with real number coefficients and variables with whole number exponents. is a special algebraic expression with terms that consist of real number coefficients and variable factors with whole number exponents. Polynomials do not have variables in the denominator of any term. The degree of a term The exponent of the variable; if there is more than one variable in the term, the degree of the term is the sum their exponents. in a polynomial is defined to be the exponent of the variable, or if there is more than one variable in the term, the degree is the sum of their exponents. Recall that x 0 = 1 ; any constant term can be written as a product of x 0 and itself. Hence the degree of a constant term is 0. Term Degree 3 x 2 2 6 x 2 y 2 + 1 = 3 7 a 2 b 3 2 + 3 = 5 8 0 , since 8 = 8 x 0 2 x 1, since x = x 1 The degree of a polynomial The largest degree of all of its terms. is the largest degree of all of its terms. Polynomial Degree 4 x 5 − 3 x 3 + 2 x − 1 5 6 x 2 y − 5 x y 3 + 7 4 , because 5 x y 3 has degree 4. 1 2 x + 5 4 1, because x = x 1 We classify polynomials by the number of terms and the degree as follows: Expression Classification Degree 5 x 7 Monomial Polynomial with one term. (one term) 7 8 x 6 − 1 Binomial Polynomial with two terms. (two terms) 6 − 3 x 2 + x − 1 Trinomial Polynomial with three terms. (three terms) 2 5 x 3 − 2 x 2 + 3 x − 6 Polynomial An algebraic expression consisting of terms with real number coefficients and variables with whole number exponents. (many terms) 3 In this text, we will call polynomials with four or more terms simply polynomials.   Example 1: Classify and state the degree: 7 x 2 − 4 x 5 − 1 . Solution: Here there are three terms. The highest variable exponent is 5. Therefore, this is a trinomial of degree 5. Answer: Trinomial; degree 5   Example 2: Classify and state the degree: 12 a 5 b c 3 . Solution: Since the expression consists of only multiplication, it is one term, a monomial. The variable part can be written as a 5 b 1 c 3 ; hence its degree is 5 + 1 + 3 = 9 . Answer: Monomial; degree 9   Example 3: Classify and state the degree: 4 x 2 y − 6 x y 4 + 5 x 3 y 3 + 4 . Solution: The term 4 x 2 y has degree 3; − 6 x y 4 has degree 5; 5 x 3 y 3 has degree 6; and the constant term 4 has degree 0. Therefore, the polynomial has 4 terms with degree 6. Answer: Polynomial; degree 6   Of particular interest are polynomials with one variable A polynomial where each term has the form a n x n , where a n is any real number and n is any whole number. , where each term is of the form a n x n . Here a n is any real number and n is any whole number. Such polynomials have the standard form Typically, we arrange terms of polynomials in descending order based on the degree of each term. The leading coefficient The coefficient of the term with the largest degree. is the coefficient of the variable with the highest power, in this case, a n .   Example 4: Write in standard form: 3 x − 4 x 2 + 5 x 3 + 7 − 2 x 4 . Solution: Since terms are separated by addition, write the following: In this form, we can see that the subtraction in the original corresponds to negative coefficients. Because addition is commutative, we can write the terms in descending order based on the degree of each term as follows: Answer: − 2 x 4 + 5 x 3 − 4 x 2 + 3 x + 7   We can further classify polynomials with one variable by their degree as follows: Polynomial Name 5 Constant (degree 0) 2 x + 1 Linear (degree 1) 3 x 2 + 5 x − 3 Quadratic (degree 2) x 3 + x 2 + x + 1 Cubic (degree 3) 7 x 4 + 3 x 3 − 7 x + 8 Fourth-degree polynomial In this text, we call any polynomial of degree n ≥ 4 an nth-degree polynomial. In other words, if the degree is 4, we call the polynomial a fourth-degree polynomial. If the degree is 5, we call it a fifth-degree polynomial, and so on. Definitions A polynomial An algebraic expression consisting of terms with real number coefficients and variables with whole number exponents. is a special algebraic expression with terms that consist of real number coefficients and variable factors with whole number exponents. Polynomials do not have variables in the denominator of any term. The degree of a term The exponent of the variable; if there is more than one variable in the term, the degree of the term is the sum their exponents. in a polynomial is defined to be the exponent of the variable, or if there is more than one variable in the term, the degree is the sum of their exponents. Recall that x 0 = 1 ; any constant term can be written as a product of x 0 and itself. Hence the degree of a constant term is 0. Term Degree 3 x 2 2 6 x 2 y 2 + 1 = 3 7 a 2 b 3 2 + 3 = 5 8 0 , since 8 = 8 x 0 2 x 1, since x = x 1 The degree of a polynomial The largest degree of all of its terms. is the largest degree of all of its terms. Polynomial Degree 4 x 5 − 3 x 3 + 2 x − 1 5 6 x 2 y − 5 x y 3 + 7 4 , because 5 x y 3 has degree 4. 1 2 x + 5 4 1, because x = x 1 We classify polynomials by the number of terms and the degree as follows: Expression Classification Degree 5 x 7 Monomial Polynomial with one term. (one term) 7 8 x 6 − 1 Binomial Polynomial with two terms. (two terms) 6 − 3 x 2 + x − 1 Trinomial Polynomial with three terms. (three terms) 2 5 x 3 − 2 x 2 + 3 x − 6 Polynomial An algebraic expression consisting of terms with real number coefficients and variables with whole number exponents. (many terms) 3 In this text, we will call polynomials with four or more terms simply polynomials.   Example 1: Classify and state the degree: 7 x 2 − 4 x 5 − 1 . Solution: Here there are three terms. The highest variable exponent is 5. Therefore, this is a trinomial of degree 5. Answer: Trinomial; degree 5   Example 2: Classify and state the degree: 12 a 5 b c 3 . Solution: Since the expression consists of only multiplication, it is one term, a monomial. The variable part can be written as a 5 b 1 c 3 ; hence its degree is 5 + 1 + 3 = 9 . Answer: Monomial; degree 9   Example 3: Classify and state the degree: 4 x 2 y − 6 x y 4 + 5 x 3 y 3 + 4 . Solution: The term 4 x 2 y has degree 3; − 6 x y 4 has degree 5; 5 x 3 y 3 has degree 6; and the constant term 4 has degree 0. Therefore, the polynomial has 4 terms with degree 6. Answer: Polynomial; degree 6   Of particular interest are polynomials with one variable A polynomial where each term has the form a n x n , where a n is any real number and n is any whole number. , where each term is of the form a n x n . Here a n is any real number and n is any whole number. Such polynomials have the standard form Typically, we arrange terms of polynomials in descending order based on the degree of each term. The leading coefficient The coefficient of the term with the largest degree. is the coefficient of the variable with the highest power, in this case, a n .   Example 4: Write in standard form: 3 x − 4 x 2 + 5 x 3 + 7 − 2 x 4 . Solution: Since terms are separated by addition, write the following: In this form, we can see that the subtraction in the original corresponds to negative coefficients. Because addition is commutative, we can write the terms in descending order based on the degree of each term as follows: Answer: − 2 x 4 + 5 x 3 − 4 x 2 + 3 x + 7   We can further classify polynomials with one variable by their degree as follows: Polynomial Name 5 Constant (degree 0) 2 x + 1 Linear (degree 1) 3 x 2 + 5 x − 3 Quadratic (degree 2) x 3 + x 2 + x + 1 Cubic (degree 3) 7 x 4 + 3 x 3 − 7 x + 8 Fourth-degree polynomial In this text, we call any polynomial of degree n ≥ 4 an nth-degree polynomial. In other words, if the degree is 4, we call the polynomial a fourth-degree polynomial. If the degree is 5, we call it a fifth-degree polynomial, and so on.  || 
book2_chapter5_2_2	Evaluating Polynomials Given the values for the variables in a polynomial, we can substitute and simplify using the order of operations.   Example 5: Evaluate: 3 x − 1 , where x = − 3 2 . Solution: First, replace the variable with parentheses and then substitute the given value. Answer: −11/2   Example 6: Evaluate: 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 , where x = − 1 . Solution: Answer: 0   Example 7: Evaluate: − 2 a 2 b + a b 2 − 7 , where a = 3 and b = − 2 . Solution: Answer: 41   Example 8: The volume of a sphere in cubic units is given by the formula V = 4 3 π r 3 , where r is the radius. Calculate the volume of a sphere with radius r = 3 2 meters. Solution: Answer: 9 2 π cubic meters   Try this! Evaluate: x 3 − x 2 + 4 x − 2 , where x = − 3 . Answer: −50 Video Solution Evaluating Polynomials Given the values for the variables in a polynomial, we can substitute and simplify using the order of operations.   Example 5: Evaluate: 3 x − 1 , where x = − 3 2 . Solution: First, replace the variable with parentheses and then substitute the given value. Answer: −11/2   Example 6: Evaluate: 3 x 2 + 2 x − 1 , where x = − 1 . Solution: Answer: 0   Example 7: Evaluate: − 2 a 2 b + a b 2 − 7 , where a = 3 and b = − 2 . Solution: Answer: 41   Example 8: The volume of a sphere in cubic units is given by the formula V = 4 3 π r 3 , where r is the radius. Calculate the volume of a sphere with radius r = 3 2 meters. Solution: Answer: 9 2 π cubic meters   Try this! Evaluate: x 3 − x 2 + 4 x − 2 , where x = − 3 . Answer: −50 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_2_3	Polynomial Functions Polynomial functions with one variable are functions that can be written in the form where a n is any real number and n is any whole number. Some examples of the different classes of polynomial functions are listed below: Polynomial function Name f ( x ) = 5 Constant function A polynomial function with degree 0. (degree 0) f ( x ) = − 2 x + 1 Linear function A polynomial function with degree 1. (degree 1) f ( x ) = 5 x 2 + 4 x − 3 Quadratic function A polynomial function with degree 2. (degree 2) f ( x ) = x 3 − 1 Cubic function A polynomial function with degree 3. (degree 3) f ( x ) = 4 x 5 + 3 x 4 − 7 Polynomial function Since there are no restrictions on the values for x, the domain of any polynomial function consists of all real numbers.   Example 9: Calculate: f ( 5 ) , given f ( x ) = − 2 x 2 + 5 x + 10 . Solution: Recall that the function notation f ( 5 ) indicates we should evaluate the function when x = 5 . Replace every instance of the variable x with the value 5. Answer: f ( 5 ) = − 15   Example 10: Calculate: f ( − 1 ) , given f ( x ) = − x 3 + 2 x 2 − 4 x + 1 . Solution: Replace the variable x with −1. Answer: f ( − 1 ) = 8   Try this! Given g ( x ) = x 3 − 2 x 2 − x − 4 , calculate g ( − 1 ) . Answer: g ( − 1 ) = − 6 Video Solution Polynomial Functions Polynomial functions with one variable are functions that can be written in the form where a n is any real number and n is any whole number. Some examples of the different classes of polynomial functions are listed below: Polynomial function Name f ( x ) = 5 Constant function A polynomial function with degree 0. (degree 0) f ( x ) = − 2 x + 1 Linear function A polynomial function with degree 1. (degree 1) f ( x ) = 5 x 2 + 4 x − 3 Quadratic function A polynomial function with degree 2. (degree 2) f ( x ) = x 3 − 1 Cubic function A polynomial function with degree 3. (degree 3) f ( x ) = 4 x 5 + 3 x 4 − 7 Polynomial function Since there are no restrictions on the values for x, the domain of any polynomial function consists of all real numbers.   Example 9: Calculate: f ( 5 ) , given f ( x ) = − 2 x 2 + 5 x + 10 . Solution: Recall that the function notation f ( 5 ) indicates we should evaluate the function when x = 5 . Replace every instance of the variable x with the value 5. Answer: f ( 5 ) = − 15   Example 10: Calculate: f ( − 1 ) , given f ( x ) = − x 3 + 2 x 2 − 4 x + 1 . Solution: Replace the variable x with −1. Answer: f ( − 1 ) = 8   Try this! Given g ( x ) = x 3 − 2 x 2 − x − 4 , calculate g ( − 1 ) . Answer: g ( − 1 ) = − 6 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_3	 || Adding Polynomials Recall that we combine like terms, or terms with the same variable part, as a means to simplify expressions. To do this, add the coefficients of the terms to obtain a single term with the same variable part. For example, Notice that the variable part, x 2 , does not change. This, in addition to the commutative and associative properties of addition, allows us to add polynomials The process of combining all like terms of two or more polynomials. .   Example 1: Add: 3 x + ( 4 x − 5 ) . Solution: The property + ( a + b ) = a + b , which was derived using the distributive property, allows us to remove the parentheses so that we can add like terms. Answer: 7 x − 5   Example 2: Add: ( 3 x 2 + 3 x + 5 ) + ( 2 x 2 − x − 2 ) . Solution: Remove the parentheses and then combine like terms. Answer: 5 x 2 + 2 x + 3   Example 3: Add: ( − 5 x 2 y − 2 x y 2 + 7 x y ) + ( 4 x 2 y + 7 x y 2 − 3 x y ) . Solution: Remember that the variable parts have to be exactly the same before we can add the coefficients. Answer: − x 2 y + 5 x y 2 + 4 x y   It is common practice to present the terms of the simplified polynomial expression in descending order based on their degree. In other words, we typically present polynomials in standard form, with terms in order from highest to lowest degree.   Example 4: Add: ( a − 4 a 3 + a 5 − 8 ) + ( − 9 a 5 + a 4 − 7 a + 5 + a 3 ) . Solution: Answer: − 8 a 5 + a 4 − 3 a 3 − 6 a − 3   Try this! Add: ( 6 − 5 x 3 + x 2 − x ) + ( x 2 + x + 6 x 3 − 1 ) . Answer: x 3 + 2 x 2 + 5 Video Solution  || Subtracting Polynomials When subtracting polynomials The process of subtracting all the terms of one polynomial from another and combining like terms. , we see that the parentheses become very important. Recall that the distributive property allowed us to derive the following: In other words, when subtracting an algebraic expression, we remove the parentheses by subtracting each term.   Example 5: Subtract: 10 x − ( 3 x + 5 ) . Solution: Subtract each term within the parentheses and then combine like terms. Answer: 7 x − 5   Subtracting a quantity is equivalent to multiplying it by −1.   Example 6: Subtract: ( 3 x 2 + 3 x + 5 ) − ( 2 x 2 − x − 2 ) . Solution: Distribute the −1, remove the parentheses, and then combine like terms. Answer: x 2 + 4 x + 7   Multiplying the terms of a polynomial by −1 changes all the signs.   Example 7: Subtract: ( − 5 x 3 − 2 x 2 + 7 ) − ( 4 x 3 + 7 x 2 − 3 x + 2 ) . Solution: Distribute the −1, remove the parentheses, and then combine like terms. Answer: − 9 x 3 − 9 x 2 + 3 x + 5   Example 8: Subtract 6 x 2 − 3 x − 1 from 2 x 2 + 5 x − 2 . Solution: Since subtraction is not commutative, we must take care to set up the difference correctly. First, write the quantity ( 2 x 2 + 5 x − 2 ) ; from this, subtract the quantity ( 6 x 2 − 3 x − 1 ) . Answer: − 4 x 2 + 8 x − 1   Example 9: Simplify: ( 2 x 2 − 3 x + 5 ) − ( x 2 − 3 x + 1 ) + ( 5 x 2 − 4 x − 8 ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property, remove the parentheses, and then combine like terms. Answer: 6 x 2 − 4 x − 4   Try this! Subtract: ( 8 x 2 y − 5 x y 2 + 6 ) − ( x 2 y + 2 x y 2 − 1 ) . Answer: 7 x 2 y − 7 x y 2 + 7 Video Solution  || Adding and Subtracting Polynomial Functions We use function notation to indicate addition and subtraction of functions as follows: Addition of functions: ( f + g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) + g ( x ) Subtraction of functions: ( f − g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) − g ( x ) When using function notation, be careful to group the entire function and add or subtract accordingly.   Example 10: Calculate: ( f + g ) ( x ) , given f ( x ) = − x 2 − 3 x + 5 and g ( x ) = 3 x 2 + 2 x + 1 . Solution: The notation ( f + g ) ( x ) indicates that you should add the functions f ( x ) + g ( x ) and collect like terms. Answer: ( f + g ) ( x ) = 2 x 2 − x + 6   Example 11: Calculate: ( f − g ) ( x ) , given f ( x ) = 2 x − 3 and g ( x ) = − 2 x 2 + 2 x + 5 . Solution: The notation ( f − g ) ( x ) indicates that you should subtract the functions f ( x ) − g ( x ) : Answer: ( f − g ) ( x ) = 2 x 2 − 8   We may be asked to evaluate the sum or difference of two functions. We have the option to first find the sum or difference and use the resulting function to evaluate for the given variable, or to first evaluate each function and then find the sum or difference.   Example 12: Calculate: ( f − g ) ( 5 ) , given f ( x ) = x 2 + x − 7 and g ( x ) = 4 x + 10 . Solution: First, find ( f − g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) − g ( x ) . Therefore, Next, substitute 5 for the variable x. Answer: ( f − g ) ( 5 ) = − 7 Alternate Solution: Since ( f − g ) ( 5 ) = f ( 5 ) − g ( 5 ) , we can find f ( 5 ) and g ( 5 ) and then subtract the results. Therefore, we have Answer: ( f − g ) ( 5 ) = − 7  || 
book2_chapter5_3_1	Adding Polynomials Recall that we combine like terms, or terms with the same variable part, as a means to simplify expressions. To do this, add the coefficients of the terms to obtain a single term with the same variable part. For example, Notice that the variable part, x 2 , does not change. This, in addition to the commutative and associative properties of addition, allows us to add polynomials The process of combining all like terms of two or more polynomials. .   Example 1: Add: 3 x + ( 4 x − 5 ) . Solution: The property + ( a + b ) = a + b , which was derived using the distributive property, allows us to remove the parentheses so that we can add like terms. Answer: 7 x − 5   Example 2: Add: ( 3 x 2 + 3 x + 5 ) + ( 2 x 2 − x − 2 ) . Solution: Remove the parentheses and then combine like terms. Answer: 5 x 2 + 2 x + 3   Example 3: Add: ( − 5 x 2 y − 2 x y 2 + 7 x y ) + ( 4 x 2 y + 7 x y 2 − 3 x y ) . Solution: Remember that the variable parts have to be exactly the same before we can add the coefficients. Answer: − x 2 y + 5 x y 2 + 4 x y   It is common practice to present the terms of the simplified polynomial expression in descending order based on their degree. In other words, we typically present polynomials in standard form, with terms in order from highest to lowest degree.   Example 4: Add: ( a − 4 a 3 + a 5 − 8 ) + ( − 9 a 5 + a 4 − 7 a + 5 + a 3 ) . Solution: Answer: − 8 a 5 + a 4 − 3 a 3 − 6 a − 3   Try this! Add: ( 6 − 5 x 3 + x 2 − x ) + ( x 2 + x + 6 x 3 − 1 ) . Answer: x 3 + 2 x 2 + 5 Video Solution Adding Polynomials Recall that we combine like terms, or terms with the same variable part, as a means to simplify expressions. To do this, add the coefficients of the terms to obtain a single term with the same variable part. For example, Notice that the variable part, x 2 , does not change. This, in addition to the commutative and associative properties of addition, allows us to add polynomials The process of combining all like terms of two or more polynomials. .   Example 1: Add: 3 x + ( 4 x − 5 ) . Solution: The property + ( a + b ) = a + b , which was derived using the distributive property, allows us to remove the parentheses so that we can add like terms. Answer: 7 x − 5   Example 2: Add: ( 3 x 2 + 3 x + 5 ) + ( 2 x 2 − x − 2 ) . Solution: Remove the parentheses and then combine like terms. Answer: 5 x 2 + 2 x + 3   Example 3: Add: ( − 5 x 2 y − 2 x y 2 + 7 x y ) + ( 4 x 2 y + 7 x y 2 − 3 x y ) . Solution: Remember that the variable parts have to be exactly the same before we can add the coefficients. Answer: − x 2 y + 5 x y 2 + 4 x y   It is common practice to present the terms of the simplified polynomial expression in descending order based on their degree. In other words, we typically present polynomials in standard form, with terms in order from highest to lowest degree.   Example 4: Add: ( a − 4 a 3 + a 5 − 8 ) + ( − 9 a 5 + a 4 − 7 a + 5 + a 3 ) . Solution: Answer: − 8 a 5 + a 4 − 3 a 3 − 6 a − 3   Try this! Add: ( 6 − 5 x 3 + x 2 − x ) + ( x 2 + x + 6 x 3 − 1 ) . Answer: x 3 + 2 x 2 + 5 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_3_2	Subtracting Polynomials When subtracting polynomials The process of subtracting all the terms of one polynomial from another and combining like terms. , we see that the parentheses become very important. Recall that the distributive property allowed us to derive the following: In other words, when subtracting an algebraic expression, we remove the parentheses by subtracting each term.   Example 5: Subtract: 10 x − ( 3 x + 5 ) . Solution: Subtract each term within the parentheses and then combine like terms. Answer: 7 x − 5   Subtracting a quantity is equivalent to multiplying it by −1.   Example 6: Subtract: ( 3 x 2 + 3 x + 5 ) − ( 2 x 2 − x − 2 ) . Solution: Distribute the −1, remove the parentheses, and then combine like terms. Answer: x 2 + 4 x + 7   Multiplying the terms of a polynomial by −1 changes all the signs.   Example 7: Subtract: ( − 5 x 3 − 2 x 2 + 7 ) − ( 4 x 3 + 7 x 2 − 3 x + 2 ) . Solution: Distribute the −1, remove the parentheses, and then combine like terms. Answer: − 9 x 3 − 9 x 2 + 3 x + 5   Example 8: Subtract 6 x 2 − 3 x − 1 from 2 x 2 + 5 x − 2 . Solution: Since subtraction is not commutative, we must take care to set up the difference correctly. First, write the quantity ( 2 x 2 + 5 x − 2 ) ; from this, subtract the quantity ( 6 x 2 − 3 x − 1 ) . Answer: − 4 x 2 + 8 x − 1   Example 9: Simplify: ( 2 x 2 − 3 x + 5 ) − ( x 2 − 3 x + 1 ) + ( 5 x 2 − 4 x − 8 ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property, remove the parentheses, and then combine like terms. Answer: 6 x 2 − 4 x − 4   Try this! Subtract: ( 8 x 2 y − 5 x y 2 + 6 ) − ( x 2 y + 2 x y 2 − 1 ) . Answer: 7 x 2 y − 7 x y 2 + 7 Video Solution Subtracting Polynomials When subtracting polynomials The process of subtracting all the terms of one polynomial from another and combining like terms. , we see that the parentheses become very important. Recall that the distributive property allowed us to derive the following: In other words, when subtracting an algebraic expression, we remove the parentheses by subtracting each term.   Example 5: Subtract: 10 x − ( 3 x + 5 ) . Solution: Subtract each term within the parentheses and then combine like terms. Answer: 7 x − 5   Subtracting a quantity is equivalent to multiplying it by −1.   Example 6: Subtract: ( 3 x 2 + 3 x + 5 ) − ( 2 x 2 − x − 2 ) . Solution: Distribute the −1, remove the parentheses, and then combine like terms. Answer: x 2 + 4 x + 7   Multiplying the terms of a polynomial by −1 changes all the signs.   Example 7: Subtract: ( − 5 x 3 − 2 x 2 + 7 ) − ( 4 x 3 + 7 x 2 − 3 x + 2 ) . Solution: Distribute the −1, remove the parentheses, and then combine like terms. Answer: − 9 x 3 − 9 x 2 + 3 x + 5   Example 8: Subtract 6 x 2 − 3 x − 1 from 2 x 2 + 5 x − 2 . Solution: Since subtraction is not commutative, we must take care to set up the difference correctly. First, write the quantity ( 2 x 2 + 5 x − 2 ) ; from this, subtract the quantity ( 6 x 2 − 3 x − 1 ) . Answer: − 4 x 2 + 8 x − 1   Example 9: Simplify: ( 2 x 2 − 3 x + 5 ) − ( x 2 − 3 x + 1 ) + ( 5 x 2 − 4 x − 8 ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property, remove the parentheses, and then combine like terms. Answer: 6 x 2 − 4 x − 4   Try this! Subtract: ( 8 x 2 y − 5 x y 2 + 6 ) − ( x 2 y + 2 x y 2 − 1 ) . Answer: 7 x 2 y − 7 x y 2 + 7 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_3_3	Adding and Subtracting Polynomial Functions We use function notation to indicate addition and subtraction of functions as follows: Addition of functions: ( f + g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) + g ( x ) Subtraction of functions: ( f − g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) − g ( x ) When using function notation, be careful to group the entire function and add or subtract accordingly.   Example 10: Calculate: ( f + g ) ( x ) , given f ( x ) = − x 2 − 3 x + 5 and g ( x ) = 3 x 2 + 2 x + 1 . Solution: The notation ( f + g ) ( x ) indicates that you should add the functions f ( x ) + g ( x ) and collect like terms. Answer: ( f + g ) ( x ) = 2 x 2 − x + 6   Example 11: Calculate: ( f − g ) ( x ) , given f ( x ) = 2 x − 3 and g ( x ) = − 2 x 2 + 2 x + 5 . Solution: The notation ( f − g ) ( x ) indicates that you should subtract the functions f ( x ) − g ( x ) : Answer: ( f − g ) ( x ) = 2 x 2 − 8   We may be asked to evaluate the sum or difference of two functions. We have the option to first find the sum or difference and use the resulting function to evaluate for the given variable, or to first evaluate each function and then find the sum or difference.   Example 12: Calculate: ( f − g ) ( 5 ) , given f ( x ) = x 2 + x − 7 and g ( x ) = 4 x + 10 . Solution: First, find ( f − g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) − g ( x ) . Therefore, Next, substitute 5 for the variable x. Answer: ( f − g ) ( 5 ) = − 7 Alternate Solution: Since ( f − g ) ( 5 ) = f ( 5 ) − g ( 5 ) , we can find f ( 5 ) and g ( 5 ) and then subtract the results. Therefore, we have Answer: ( f − g ) ( 5 ) = − 7 Adding and Subtracting Polynomial Functions We use function notation to indicate addition and subtraction of functions as follows: Addition of functions: ( f + g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) + g ( x ) Subtraction of functions: ( f − g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) − g ( x ) When using function notation, be careful to group the entire function and add or subtract accordingly.   Example 10: Calculate: ( f + g ) ( x ) , given f ( x ) = − x 2 − 3 x + 5 and g ( x ) = 3 x 2 + 2 x + 1 . Solution: The notation ( f + g ) ( x ) indicates that you should add the functions f ( x ) + g ( x ) and collect like terms. Answer: ( f + g ) ( x ) = 2 x 2 − x + 6   Example 11: Calculate: ( f − g ) ( x ) , given f ( x ) = 2 x − 3 and g ( x ) = − 2 x 2 + 2 x + 5 . Solution: The notation ( f − g ) ( x ) indicates that you should subtract the functions f ( x ) − g ( x ) : Answer: ( f − g ) ( x ) = 2 x 2 − 8   We may be asked to evaluate the sum or difference of two functions. We have the option to first find the sum or difference and use the resulting function to evaluate for the given variable, or to first evaluate each function and then find the sum or difference.   Example 12: Calculate: ( f − g ) ( 5 ) , given f ( x ) = x 2 + x − 7 and g ( x ) = 4 x + 10 . Solution: First, find ( f − g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) − g ( x ) . Therefore, Next, substitute 5 for the variable x. Answer: ( f − g ) ( 5 ) = − 7 Alternate Solution: Since ( f − g ) ( 5 ) = f ( 5 ) − g ( 5 ) , we can find f ( 5 ) and g ( 5 ) and then subtract the results. Therefore, we have Answer: ( f − g ) ( 5 ) = − 7  || 
book2_chapter5_4	 || Multiplying by a Monomial Recall the product rule for exponents: if m and n are positive integers, then In other words, when multiplying two expressions with the same base, add the exponents. This rule applies when multiplying a monomial by a monomial. To find the product of monomials, multiply the coefficients and add the exponents of variable factors with the same base. For example, To multiply a polynomial by a monomial, apply the distributive property and then simplify each term.   Example 1: Multiply: − 5 x ( 4 x − 2 ) . Solution: In this case, multiply the monomial, − 5 x , by the binomial, 4 x − 2 . Apply the distributive property and then simplify. Answer: − 20 x 2 + 10 x   Example 2: Multiply: 2 x 2 ( 3 x 2 − 5 x + 1 ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and then simplify. Answer: 6 x 4 − 10 x 3 + 2 x 2   Example 3: Multiply: − 3 a b 2 ( a 2 b 3 + 2 a 3 b − 6 a b − 4 ) . Solution: Answer: − 3 a 3 b 5 − 6 a 4 b 3 + 18 a 2 b 3 + 12 a b 2   To summarize, multiplying a polynomial by a monomial involves the distributive property and the product rule for exponents. Multiply all of the terms of the polynomial by the monomial. For each term, multiply the coefficients and add exponents of variables where the bases are the same.   Try this! Multiply: − 5 x 2 y ( 2 x y 2 − 3 x y + 6 x 2 y − 1 ) . Answer: − 10 x 3 y 3 + 15 x 3 y 2 − 30 x 4 y 2 + 5 x 2 y Video Solution  || Multiplying by a Binomial In the same way that we used the distributive property to find the product of a monomial and a binomial, we will use it to to find the product of two binomials. Here we apply the distributive property multiple times to produce the final result. This same result is obtained in one step if we apply the distributive property to a and b separately as follows: This is often called the FOIL When multiplying binomials we apply the distributive property multiple times in such a way as to multiply the first terms, outer terms, inner terms, and last terms. method. We add the products of the first terms of each binomial ac, the outer terms ad, the inner terms bc, and finally the last terms bd. This mnemonic device only works for products of binomials; hence it is best to just remember that the distributive property applies.   Example 4: Multiply: ( 2 x + 3 ) ( 5 x − 2 ) . Solution: Distribute 2 x and then distribute 3. Simplify by combining like terms. Answer: 10 x 2 + 11 x − 6   Example 5: Multiply: ( 1 2 x − 1 4 ) ( 1 2 x + 1 4 ) . Solution: Distribute 1 2 x and then distribute − 1 4 . Answer: 1 4 x 2 − 1 16   Example 6: Multiply: ( 3 y 2 − 1 ) ( 2 y + 1 ) . Solution: Answer: 6 y 3 + 3 y 2 − 2 y − 1   After applying the distributive property, combine any like terms.   Example 7: Multiply: . Solution: After multiplying each term of the trinomial by and , simplify. Answer:   Example 8: Multiply: . Solution: Perform one product at a time. Answer:   At this point, it is worth pointing out a common mistake: The confusion comes from the product to a power rule of exponents, where we apply the power to all factors. Since there are two terms within the parentheses, that rule does not apply. Care should be taken to understand what is different in the following two examples:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || Product of Polynomials When multiplying polynomials, we apply the distributive property many times. Multiply all of the terms of each polynomial and then combine like terms.   Example 9: Multiply: . Solution: Multiply each term of the first trinomial by each term of the second trinomial and then combine like terms. Aligning like terms in columns, as we have here, aids in the simplification process. Answer:   Notice that when multiplying a trinomial by a trinomial, we obtain nine terms before simplifying. In fact, when multiplying an n-term polynomial by an m-term polynomial, we will obtain n × m terms. In the previous example, we were asked to multiply and found that Because it is easy to make a small calculation error, it is a good practice to trace through the steps mentally to verify that the operations were performed correctly. Alternatively, we can check by evaluating We can be fairly certain that we have multiplied the polynomials correctly if we check that a few values evaluate to the same results in the original expression and in the answer. any value for x in both expressions to verify that the results are the same. Here we choose x = 2: Because the results could coincidentally be the same, a check by evaluating does not necessarily prove that we have multiplied correctly. However, after verifying a few values, we can be fairly confident that the product is correct.   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || Special Products In this section, the goal is to recognize certain special products that occur often in our study of algebra. We will develop three formulas that will be very useful as we move along. The three should be memorized. We begin by considering the following two calculations: This leads us to two formulas that describe perfect square trinomials The trinomials obtained by squaring the binomials and : We can use these formulas to quickly square a binomial.   Example 10: Multiply: . Solution: Here and . Apply the formula: Answer:   This process should become routine enough to be performed mentally.   Example 11: Multiply: . Solution: Here and . Apply the appropriate formula as follows: Answer:   Our third special product follows: This product is called difference of squares where a and b represent algebraic expressions. : The binomials and are called conjugate binomials The binomials and . . Therefore, when conjugate binomials are multiplied, the middle term eliminates, and the product is itself a binomial.   Example 12: Multiply: . Solution: Answer:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || Multiplying Polynomial Functions We use function notation to indicate multiplication as follows: Multiplication of functions:   Example 13: Calculate: , given and . Solution: Multiply all terms of the trinomial by the monomial function . Answer:   Example 14: Calculate: , given and . Solution: First, determine . We have Next, substitute −1 for the variable x. Answer:   Because , we could alternatively calculate and separately and then multiply the results (try this as an exercise). However, if we were asked to evaluate multiple values for the function , it would be best to first determine the general form, as we have in the previous example.  || 
book2_chapter5_4_1	Multiplying by a Monomial Recall the product rule for exponents: if m and n are positive integers, then In other words, when multiplying two expressions with the same base, add the exponents. This rule applies when multiplying a monomial by a monomial. To find the product of monomials, multiply the coefficients and add the exponents of variable factors with the same base. For example, To multiply a polynomial by a monomial, apply the distributive property and then simplify each term.   Example 1: Multiply: − 5 x ( 4 x − 2 ) . Solution: In this case, multiply the monomial, − 5 x , by the binomial, 4 x − 2 . Apply the distributive property and then simplify. Answer: − 20 x 2 + 10 x   Example 2: Multiply: 2 x 2 ( 3 x 2 − 5 x + 1 ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and then simplify. Answer: 6 x 4 − 10 x 3 + 2 x 2   Example 3: Multiply: − 3 a b 2 ( a 2 b 3 + 2 a 3 b − 6 a b − 4 ) . Solution: Answer: − 3 a 3 b 5 − 6 a 4 b 3 + 18 a 2 b 3 + 12 a b 2   To summarize, multiplying a polynomial by a monomial involves the distributive property and the product rule for exponents. Multiply all of the terms of the polynomial by the monomial. For each term, multiply the coefficients and add exponents of variables where the bases are the same.   Try this! Multiply: − 5 x 2 y ( 2 x y 2 − 3 x y + 6 x 2 y − 1 ) . Answer: − 10 x 3 y 3 + 15 x 3 y 2 − 30 x 4 y 2 + 5 x 2 y Video Solution Multiplying by a Monomial Recall the product rule for exponents: if m and n are positive integers, then In other words, when multiplying two expressions with the same base, add the exponents. This rule applies when multiplying a monomial by a monomial. To find the product of monomials, multiply the coefficients and add the exponents of variable factors with the same base. For example, To multiply a polynomial by a monomial, apply the distributive property and then simplify each term.   Example 1: Multiply: − 5 x ( 4 x − 2 ) . Solution: In this case, multiply the monomial, − 5 x , by the binomial, 4 x − 2 . Apply the distributive property and then simplify. Answer: − 20 x 2 + 10 x   Example 2: Multiply: 2 x 2 ( 3 x 2 − 5 x + 1 ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and then simplify. Answer: 6 x 4 − 10 x 3 + 2 x 2   Example 3: Multiply: − 3 a b 2 ( a 2 b 3 + 2 a 3 b − 6 a b − 4 ) . Solution: Answer: − 3 a 3 b 5 − 6 a 4 b 3 + 18 a 2 b 3 + 12 a b 2   To summarize, multiplying a polynomial by a monomial involves the distributive property and the product rule for exponents. Multiply all of the terms of the polynomial by the monomial. For each term, multiply the coefficients and add exponents of variables where the bases are the same.   Try this! Multiply: − 5 x 2 y ( 2 x y 2 − 3 x y + 6 x 2 y − 1 ) . Answer: − 10 x 3 y 3 + 15 x 3 y 2 − 30 x 4 y 2 + 5 x 2 y Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_4_2	Multiplying by a Binomial In the same way that we used the distributive property to find the product of a monomial and a binomial, we will use it to to find the product of two binomials. Here we apply the distributive property multiple times to produce the final result. This same result is obtained in one step if we apply the distributive property to a and b separately as follows: This is often called the FOIL When multiplying binomials we apply the distributive property multiple times in such a way as to multiply the first terms, outer terms, inner terms, and last terms. method. We add the products of the first terms of each binomial ac, the outer terms ad, the inner terms bc, and finally the last terms bd. This mnemonic device only works for products of binomials; hence it is best to just remember that the distributive property applies.   Example 4: Multiply: ( 2 x + 3 ) ( 5 x − 2 ) . Solution: Distribute 2 x and then distribute 3. Simplify by combining like terms. Answer: 10 x 2 + 11 x − 6   Example 5: Multiply: ( 1 2 x − 1 4 ) ( 1 2 x + 1 4 ) . Solution: Distribute 1 2 x and then distribute − 1 4 . Answer: 1 4 x 2 − 1 16   Example 6: Multiply: ( 3 y 2 − 1 ) ( 2 y + 1 ) . Solution: Answer: 6 y 3 + 3 y 2 − 2 y − 1   After applying the distributive property, combine any like terms.   Example 7: Multiply: . Solution: After multiplying each term of the trinomial by and , simplify. Answer:   Example 8: Multiply: . Solution: Perform one product at a time. Answer:   At this point, it is worth pointing out a common mistake: The confusion comes from the product to a power rule of exponents, where we apply the power to all factors. Since there are two terms within the parentheses, that rule does not apply. Care should be taken to understand what is different in the following two examples:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution Multiplying by a Binomial In the same way that we used the distributive property to find the product of a monomial and a binomial, we will use it to to find the product of two binomials. Here we apply the distributive property multiple times to produce the final result. This same result is obtained in one step if we apply the distributive property to a and b separately as follows: This is often called the FOIL When multiplying binomials we apply the distributive property multiple times in such a way as to multiply the first terms, outer terms, inner terms, and last terms. method. We add the products of the first terms of each binomial ac, the outer terms ad, the inner terms bc, and finally the last terms bd. This mnemonic device only works for products of binomials; hence it is best to just remember that the distributive property applies.   Example 4: Multiply: ( 2 x + 3 ) ( 5 x − 2 ) . Solution: Distribute 2 x and then distribute 3. Simplify by combining like terms. Answer: 10 x 2 + 11 x − 6   Example 5: Multiply: ( 1 2 x − 1 4 ) ( 1 2 x + 1 4 ) . Solution: Distribute 1 2 x and then distribute − 1 4 . Answer: 1 4 x 2 − 1 16   Example 6: Multiply: ( 3 y 2 − 1 ) ( 2 y + 1 ) . Solution: Answer: 6 y 3 + 3 y 2 − 2 y − 1   After applying the distributive property, combine any like terms.   Example 7: Multiply: . Solution: After multiplying each term of the trinomial by and , simplify. Answer:   Example 8: Multiply: . Solution: Perform one product at a time. Answer:   At this point, it is worth pointing out a common mistake: The confusion comes from the product to a power rule of exponents, where we apply the power to all factors. Since there are two terms within the parentheses, that rule does not apply. Care should be taken to understand what is different in the following two examples:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_4_3	Product of Polynomials When multiplying polynomials, we apply the distributive property many times. Multiply all of the terms of each polynomial and then combine like terms.   Example 9: Multiply: . Solution: Multiply each term of the first trinomial by each term of the second trinomial and then combine like terms. Aligning like terms in columns, as we have here, aids in the simplification process. Answer:   Notice that when multiplying a trinomial by a trinomial, we obtain nine terms before simplifying. In fact, when multiplying an n-term polynomial by an m-term polynomial, we will obtain n × m terms. In the previous example, we were asked to multiply and found that Because it is easy to make a small calculation error, it is a good practice to trace through the steps mentally to verify that the operations were performed correctly. Alternatively, we can check by evaluating We can be fairly certain that we have multiplied the polynomials correctly if we check that a few values evaluate to the same results in the original expression and in the answer. any value for x in both expressions to verify that the results are the same. Here we choose x = 2: Because the results could coincidentally be the same, a check by evaluating does not necessarily prove that we have multiplied correctly. However, after verifying a few values, we can be fairly confident that the product is correct.   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution Product of Polynomials When multiplying polynomials, we apply the distributive property many times. Multiply all of the terms of each polynomial and then combine like terms.   Example 9: Multiply: . Solution: Multiply each term of the first trinomial by each term of the second trinomial and then combine like terms. Aligning like terms in columns, as we have here, aids in the simplification process. Answer:   Notice that when multiplying a trinomial by a trinomial, we obtain nine terms before simplifying. In fact, when multiplying an n-term polynomial by an m-term polynomial, we will obtain n × m terms. In the previous example, we were asked to multiply and found that Because it is easy to make a small calculation error, it is a good practice to trace through the steps mentally to verify that the operations were performed correctly. Alternatively, we can check by evaluating We can be fairly certain that we have multiplied the polynomials correctly if we check that a few values evaluate to the same results in the original expression and in the answer. any value for x in both expressions to verify that the results are the same. Here we choose x = 2: Because the results could coincidentally be the same, a check by evaluating does not necessarily prove that we have multiplied correctly. However, after verifying a few values, we can be fairly confident that the product is correct.   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_4_4	Special Products In this section, the goal is to recognize certain special products that occur often in our study of algebra. We will develop three formulas that will be very useful as we move along. The three should be memorized. We begin by considering the following two calculations: This leads us to two formulas that describe perfect square trinomials The trinomials obtained by squaring the binomials and : We can use these formulas to quickly square a binomial.   Example 10: Multiply: . Solution: Here and . Apply the formula: Answer:   This process should become routine enough to be performed mentally.   Example 11: Multiply: . Solution: Here and . Apply the appropriate formula as follows: Answer:   Our third special product follows: This product is called difference of squares where a and b represent algebraic expressions. : The binomials and are called conjugate binomials The binomials and . . Therefore, when conjugate binomials are multiplied, the middle term eliminates, and the product is itself a binomial.   Example 12: Multiply: . Solution: Answer:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution Special Products In this section, the goal is to recognize certain special products that occur often in our study of algebra. We will develop three formulas that will be very useful as we move along. The three should be memorized. We begin by considering the following two calculations: This leads us to two formulas that describe perfect square trinomials The trinomials obtained by squaring the binomials and : We can use these formulas to quickly square a binomial.   Example 10: Multiply: . Solution: Here and . Apply the formula: Answer:   This process should become routine enough to be performed mentally.   Example 11: Multiply: . Solution: Here and . Apply the appropriate formula as follows: Answer:   Our third special product follows: This product is called difference of squares where a and b represent algebraic expressions. : The binomials and are called conjugate binomials The binomials and . . Therefore, when conjugate binomials are multiplied, the middle term eliminates, and the product is itself a binomial.   Example 12: Multiply: . Solution: Answer:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_4_5	Multiplying Polynomial Functions We use function notation to indicate multiplication as follows: Multiplication of functions:   Example 13: Calculate: , given and . Solution: Multiply all terms of the trinomial by the monomial function . Answer:   Example 14: Calculate: , given and . Solution: First, determine . We have Next, substitute −1 for the variable x. Answer:   Because , we could alternatively calculate and separately and then multiply the results (try this as an exercise). However, if we were asked to evaluate multiple values for the function , it would be best to first determine the general form, as we have in the previous example. Multiplying Polynomial Functions We use function notation to indicate multiplication as follows: Multiplication of functions:   Example 13: Calculate: , given and . Solution: Multiply all terms of the trinomial by the monomial function . Answer:   Example 14: Calculate: , given and . Solution: First, determine . We have Next, substitute −1 for the variable x. Answer:   Because , we could alternatively calculate and separately and then multiply the results (try this as an exercise). However, if we were asked to evaluate multiple values for the function , it would be best to first determine the general form, as we have in the previous example.  || 
book2_chapter5_5	 || Dividing by a Monomial Recall the quotient rule for exponents: if x is nonzero and m and n are positive integers, then In other words, when dividing two expressions with the same base, subtract the exponents. This rule applies when dividing a monomial by a monomial. In this section, we will assume that all variables in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 1: Divide: 28 y 3 7 y . Solution: Divide the coefficients and subtract the exponents of the variable y. Answer: 4 y 2   Example 2: Divide: 24 x 7 y 5 8 x 3 y 2 . Solution: Divide the coefficients and apply the quotient rule by subtracting the exponents of the like bases. Answer: 3 x 4 y 3   When dividing a polynomial by a monomial, we may treat the monomial as a common denominator and break up the fraction using the following property: Applying this property results in terms that can be treated as quotients of monomials.   Example 3: Divide: − 5 x 4 + 25 x 3 − 15 x 2 5 x 2 . Solution: Break up the fraction by dividing each term in the numerator by the monomial in the denominator and then simplify each term. Answer: − x 2 + 5 x − 3   Check your division by multiplying the answer, the quotient The result after dividing. , by the monomial in the denominator, the divisor The denominator of a quotient. , to see if you obtain the original numerator, the dividend The numerator of a quotient. .   Example 4: Divide: 9 a 4 b − 7 a 3 b 2 + 3 a 2 b − 3 a 2 b . Solution: Answer: − 3 a 2 + 7 3 a b − 1 . The check is optional and is left to the reader.   Try this! Divide: ( 16 x 5 − 8 x 4 + 5 x 3 + 2 x 2 ) ÷ ( 2 x 2 ) . Answer: 8 x 3 − 4 x 2 + 5 2 x + 1 Video Solution  || Dividing by a Polynomial The same technique outlined for dividing by a monomial does not work for polynomials with two or more terms in the denominator. In this section, we will outline a process called polynomial long division The process of dividing two polynomials using the division algorithm. , which is based on the division algorithm for real numbers. For the sake of clarity, we will assume that all expressions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 5: Divide: x 3 + 3 x 2 − 8 x − 4 x − 2 . Solution: Here x − 2 is the divisor and x 3 + 3 x 2 − 8 x − 4 is the dividend. Step 1: To determine the first term of the quotient, divide the leading term of the dividend by the leading term of the divisor. Step 2: Multiply the first term of the quotient by the divisor, remembering to distribute, and line up like terms with the dividend. Step 3: Subtract the resulting quantity from the dividend. Take care to subtract both terms. Step 4: Bring down the remaining terms and repeat the process from step 1. Notice that the leading term is eliminated and that the result has a degree that is one less than the dividend. The complete process is illustrated below: Polynomial long division ends when the degree of the remainder The expression that is left after the division algorithm ends. is less than the degree of the divisor. Here the remainder is 0. Therefore, the binomial divides the polynomial evenly and the answer is the quotient shown above the division line. To check the answer, multiply the divisor by the quotient to see if you obtain the dividend: Answer: x 2 + 5 x + 2   Next, we demonstrate the case where there is a nonzero remainder. Just as with real numbers, the final answer adds the fraction where the remainder is the numerator and the divisor is the denominator to the quotient. In general, when dividing we have If we multiply both sides by the divisor we obtain   Example 6: Divide: 6 x 2 − 5 x + 3 2 x − 1 . Solution: Since the denominator is a binomial, begin by setting up polynomial long division. To start, determine what monomial times 2 x − 1 results in a leading term 6 x 2 . This is the quotient of the given leading terms: ( 6 x 2 ) ÷ ( 2 x ) = 3 x . Multiply 3 x times the divisor 2 x − 1 and line up the result with like terms of the dividend. Subtract the result from the dividend and bring down the constant term +3. Subtracting eliminates the leading term and − 5 x − ( − 3 x ) = − 5 x + 3 x = − 2 x . The quotient of − 2 x and 2 x is −1. Multiply 2 x − 1 by −1 and line up the result. Subtract again and notice that we are left with a remainder. The constant term 2 has degree 0, and thus the division ends. We may write Answer: 3 x − 1 + 2 2 x − 1 . To check that this result is correct, we multiply as follows:   Occasionally, some of the powers of the variables appear to be missing within a polynomial. This can lead to errors when lining up like terms. Therefore, when first learning how to divide polynomials using long division, fill in the missing terms with zero coefficients, called placeholders Terms with zero coefficients used to fill in all missing exponents within a polynomial. .   Example 7: Divide: 27 x 3 + 64 3 x + 4 . Solution: Notice that the binomial in the numerator does not have terms with degree 2 or 1. The division is simplified if we rewrite the expression with placeholders: Set up polynomial long division: We begin with 27 x 3 ÷ 3 x = 9 x 2 and work the rest of the division algorithm. Answer: 9 x 2 − 12 x + 16   Example 8: Divide: 3 x 4 − 2 x 3 + 6 x 2 + 23 x − 7 x 2 − 2 x + 5 . Solution: Begin the process by dividing the leading terms to determine the leading term of the quotient 3 x 4 ÷ x 2 = 3 x 2 . Take care to distribute and line up the like terms. Continue the process until the remainder has a degree less than 2. The remainder is x − 2 . Write the answer with the remainder: Answer: 3 x 2 + 4 x − 1 + x − 2 x 2 − 2 x + 5   Polynomial long division takes time and practice to master. Work lots of problems and remember that you may check your answers by multiplying the quotient by the divisor (and adding the remainder if present) to obtain the dividend.   Try this! Divide: 20 x 4 − 32 x 3 + 7 x 2 + 8 x − 10   5 x − 3 . Answer: 4 x 3 − 4 x 2 − x + 1 − 7 5 x − 3 Video Solution  || Dividing Polynomial Functions We may use function notation to indicate division as follows: Division of functions: ( f / g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) g ( x ) The quotient of two polynomial functions does not necessarily have a domain of all real numbers. The values for x that make the function in the denominator 0 are restricted from the domain. This will be discussed in more detail at a later time. For now, assume all functions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 9: Calculate: ( f / g ) ( x ) given f ( x ) = 6 x 5 − 36 x 4 + 12 x 3 − 6 x 2 and g ( x ) = − 6 x 2 . Solution: The notation indicates that we should divide: Answer: ( f / g ) ( x ) = − x 3 + 6 x 2 − 2 x + 1   Example 10: Calculate: ( f / g ) ( − 1 ) , given f ( x ) = − 3 x 3 + 7 x 2 − 11 x − 1 and g ( x ) = 3 x − 1 . Solution: First, determine ( f / g ) ( x ) . Therefore, Substitute −1 for the variable x . Answer: ( f / g ) ( − 1 ) = − 4  || 
book2_chapter5_5_1	Dividing by a Monomial Recall the quotient rule for exponents: if x is nonzero and m and n are positive integers, then In other words, when dividing two expressions with the same base, subtract the exponents. This rule applies when dividing a monomial by a monomial. In this section, we will assume that all variables in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 1: Divide: 28 y 3 7 y . Solution: Divide the coefficients and subtract the exponents of the variable y. Answer: 4 y 2   Example 2: Divide: 24 x 7 y 5 8 x 3 y 2 . Solution: Divide the coefficients and apply the quotient rule by subtracting the exponents of the like bases. Answer: 3 x 4 y 3   When dividing a polynomial by a monomial, we may treat the monomial as a common denominator and break up the fraction using the following property: Applying this property results in terms that can be treated as quotients of monomials.   Example 3: Divide: − 5 x 4 + 25 x 3 − 15 x 2 5 x 2 . Solution: Break up the fraction by dividing each term in the numerator by the monomial in the denominator and then simplify each term. Answer: − x 2 + 5 x − 3   Check your division by multiplying the answer, the quotient The result after dividing. , by the monomial in the denominator, the divisor The denominator of a quotient. , to see if you obtain the original numerator, the dividend The numerator of a quotient. .   Example 4: Divide: 9 a 4 b − 7 a 3 b 2 + 3 a 2 b − 3 a 2 b . Solution: Answer: − 3 a 2 + 7 3 a b − 1 . The check is optional and is left to the reader.   Try this! Divide: ( 16 x 5 − 8 x 4 + 5 x 3 + 2 x 2 ) ÷ ( 2 x 2 ) . Answer: 8 x 3 − 4 x 2 + 5 2 x + 1 Video Solution Dividing by a Monomial Recall the quotient rule for exponents: if x is nonzero and m and n are positive integers, then In other words, when dividing two expressions with the same base, subtract the exponents. This rule applies when dividing a monomial by a monomial. In this section, we will assume that all variables in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 1: Divide: 28 y 3 7 y . Solution: Divide the coefficients and subtract the exponents of the variable y. Answer: 4 y 2   Example 2: Divide: 24 x 7 y 5 8 x 3 y 2 . Solution: Divide the coefficients and apply the quotient rule by subtracting the exponents of the like bases. Answer: 3 x 4 y 3   When dividing a polynomial by a monomial, we may treat the monomial as a common denominator and break up the fraction using the following property: Applying this property results in terms that can be treated as quotients of monomials.   Example 3: Divide: − 5 x 4 + 25 x 3 − 15 x 2 5 x 2 . Solution: Break up the fraction by dividing each term in the numerator by the monomial in the denominator and then simplify each term. Answer: − x 2 + 5 x − 3   Check your division by multiplying the answer, the quotient The result after dividing. , by the monomial in the denominator, the divisor The denominator of a quotient. , to see if you obtain the original numerator, the dividend The numerator of a quotient. .   Example 4: Divide: 9 a 4 b − 7 a 3 b 2 + 3 a 2 b − 3 a 2 b . Solution: Answer: − 3 a 2 + 7 3 a b − 1 . The check is optional and is left to the reader.   Try this! Divide: ( 16 x 5 − 8 x 4 + 5 x 3 + 2 x 2 ) ÷ ( 2 x 2 ) . Answer: 8 x 3 − 4 x 2 + 5 2 x + 1 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_5_2	Dividing by a Polynomial The same technique outlined for dividing by a monomial does not work for polynomials with two or more terms in the denominator. In this section, we will outline a process called polynomial long division The process of dividing two polynomials using the division algorithm. , which is based on the division algorithm for real numbers. For the sake of clarity, we will assume that all expressions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 5: Divide: x 3 + 3 x 2 − 8 x − 4 x − 2 . Solution: Here x − 2 is the divisor and x 3 + 3 x 2 − 8 x − 4 is the dividend. Step 1: To determine the first term of the quotient, divide the leading term of the dividend by the leading term of the divisor. Step 2: Multiply the first term of the quotient by the divisor, remembering to distribute, and line up like terms with the dividend. Step 3: Subtract the resulting quantity from the dividend. Take care to subtract both terms. Step 4: Bring down the remaining terms and repeat the process from step 1. Notice that the leading term is eliminated and that the result has a degree that is one less than the dividend. The complete process is illustrated below: Polynomial long division ends when the degree of the remainder The expression that is left after the division algorithm ends. is less than the degree of the divisor. Here the remainder is 0. Therefore, the binomial divides the polynomial evenly and the answer is the quotient shown above the division line. To check the answer, multiply the divisor by the quotient to see if you obtain the dividend: Answer: x 2 + 5 x + 2   Next, we demonstrate the case where there is a nonzero remainder. Just as with real numbers, the final answer adds the fraction where the remainder is the numerator and the divisor is the denominator to the quotient. In general, when dividing we have If we multiply both sides by the divisor we obtain   Example 6: Divide: 6 x 2 − 5 x + 3 2 x − 1 . Solution: Since the denominator is a binomial, begin by setting up polynomial long division. To start, determine what monomial times 2 x − 1 results in a leading term 6 x 2 . This is the quotient of the given leading terms: ( 6 x 2 ) ÷ ( 2 x ) = 3 x . Multiply 3 x times the divisor 2 x − 1 and line up the result with like terms of the dividend. Subtract the result from the dividend and bring down the constant term +3. Subtracting eliminates the leading term and − 5 x − ( − 3 x ) = − 5 x + 3 x = − 2 x . The quotient of − 2 x and 2 x is −1. Multiply 2 x − 1 by −1 and line up the result. Subtract again and notice that we are left with a remainder. The constant term 2 has degree 0, and thus the division ends. We may write Answer: 3 x − 1 + 2 2 x − 1 . To check that this result is correct, we multiply as follows:   Occasionally, some of the powers of the variables appear to be missing within a polynomial. This can lead to errors when lining up like terms. Therefore, when first learning how to divide polynomials using long division, fill in the missing terms with zero coefficients, called placeholders Terms with zero coefficients used to fill in all missing exponents within a polynomial. .   Example 7: Divide: 27 x 3 + 64 3 x + 4 . Solution: Notice that the binomial in the numerator does not have terms with degree 2 or 1. The division is simplified if we rewrite the expression with placeholders: Set up polynomial long division: We begin with 27 x 3 ÷ 3 x = 9 x 2 and work the rest of the division algorithm. Answer: 9 x 2 − 12 x + 16   Example 8: Divide: 3 x 4 − 2 x 3 + 6 x 2 + 23 x − 7 x 2 − 2 x + 5 . Solution: Begin the process by dividing the leading terms to determine the leading term of the quotient 3 x 4 ÷ x 2 = 3 x 2 . Take care to distribute and line up the like terms. Continue the process until the remainder has a degree less than 2. The remainder is x − 2 . Write the answer with the remainder: Answer: 3 x 2 + 4 x − 1 + x − 2 x 2 − 2 x + 5   Polynomial long division takes time and practice to master. Work lots of problems and remember that you may check your answers by multiplying the quotient by the divisor (and adding the remainder if present) to obtain the dividend.   Try this! Divide: 20 x 4 − 32 x 3 + 7 x 2 + 8 x − 10   5 x − 3 . Answer: 4 x 3 − 4 x 2 − x + 1 − 7 5 x − 3 Video Solution Dividing by a Polynomial The same technique outlined for dividing by a monomial does not work for polynomials with two or more terms in the denominator. In this section, we will outline a process called polynomial long division The process of dividing two polynomials using the division algorithm. , which is based on the division algorithm for real numbers. For the sake of clarity, we will assume that all expressions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 5: Divide: x 3 + 3 x 2 − 8 x − 4 x − 2 . Solution: Here x − 2 is the divisor and x 3 + 3 x 2 − 8 x − 4 is the dividend. Step 1: To determine the first term of the quotient, divide the leading term of the dividend by the leading term of the divisor. Step 2: Multiply the first term of the quotient by the divisor, remembering to distribute, and line up like terms with the dividend. Step 3: Subtract the resulting quantity from the dividend. Take care to subtract both terms. Step 4: Bring down the remaining terms and repeat the process from step 1. Notice that the leading term is eliminated and that the result has a degree that is one less than the dividend. The complete process is illustrated below: Polynomial long division ends when the degree of the remainder The expression that is left after the division algorithm ends. is less than the degree of the divisor. Here the remainder is 0. Therefore, the binomial divides the polynomial evenly and the answer is the quotient shown above the division line. To check the answer, multiply the divisor by the quotient to see if you obtain the dividend: Answer: x 2 + 5 x + 2   Next, we demonstrate the case where there is a nonzero remainder. Just as with real numbers, the final answer adds the fraction where the remainder is the numerator and the divisor is the denominator to the quotient. In general, when dividing we have If we multiply both sides by the divisor we obtain   Example 6: Divide: 6 x 2 − 5 x + 3 2 x − 1 . Solution: Since the denominator is a binomial, begin by setting up polynomial long division. To start, determine what monomial times 2 x − 1 results in a leading term 6 x 2 . This is the quotient of the given leading terms: ( 6 x 2 ) ÷ ( 2 x ) = 3 x . Multiply 3 x times the divisor 2 x − 1 and line up the result with like terms of the dividend. Subtract the result from the dividend and bring down the constant term +3. Subtracting eliminates the leading term and − 5 x − ( − 3 x ) = − 5 x + 3 x = − 2 x . The quotient of − 2 x and 2 x is −1. Multiply 2 x − 1 by −1 and line up the result. Subtract again and notice that we are left with a remainder. The constant term 2 has degree 0, and thus the division ends. We may write Answer: 3 x − 1 + 2 2 x − 1 . To check that this result is correct, we multiply as follows:   Occasionally, some of the powers of the variables appear to be missing within a polynomial. This can lead to errors when lining up like terms. Therefore, when first learning how to divide polynomials using long division, fill in the missing terms with zero coefficients, called placeholders Terms with zero coefficients used to fill in all missing exponents within a polynomial. .   Example 7: Divide: 27 x 3 + 64 3 x + 4 . Solution: Notice that the binomial in the numerator does not have terms with degree 2 or 1. The division is simplified if we rewrite the expression with placeholders: Set up polynomial long division: We begin with 27 x 3 ÷ 3 x = 9 x 2 and work the rest of the division algorithm. Answer: 9 x 2 − 12 x + 16   Example 8: Divide: 3 x 4 − 2 x 3 + 6 x 2 + 23 x − 7 x 2 − 2 x + 5 . Solution: Begin the process by dividing the leading terms to determine the leading term of the quotient 3 x 4 ÷ x 2 = 3 x 2 . Take care to distribute and line up the like terms. Continue the process until the remainder has a degree less than 2. The remainder is x − 2 . Write the answer with the remainder: Answer: 3 x 2 + 4 x − 1 + x − 2 x 2 − 2 x + 5   Polynomial long division takes time and practice to master. Work lots of problems and remember that you may check your answers by multiplying the quotient by the divisor (and adding the remainder if present) to obtain the dividend.   Try this! Divide: 20 x 4 − 32 x 3 + 7 x 2 + 8 x − 10   5 x − 3 . Answer: 4 x 3 − 4 x 2 − x + 1 − 7 5 x − 3 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_5_3	Dividing Polynomial Functions We may use function notation to indicate division as follows: Division of functions: ( f / g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) g ( x ) The quotient of two polynomial functions does not necessarily have a domain of all real numbers. The values for x that make the function in the denominator 0 are restricted from the domain. This will be discussed in more detail at a later time. For now, assume all functions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 9: Calculate: ( f / g ) ( x ) given f ( x ) = 6 x 5 − 36 x 4 + 12 x 3 − 6 x 2 and g ( x ) = − 6 x 2 . Solution: The notation indicates that we should divide: Answer: ( f / g ) ( x ) = − x 3 + 6 x 2 − 2 x + 1   Example 10: Calculate: ( f / g ) ( − 1 ) , given f ( x ) = − 3 x 3 + 7 x 2 − 11 x − 1 and g ( x ) = 3 x − 1 . Solution: First, determine ( f / g ) ( x ) . Therefore, Substitute −1 for the variable x . Answer: ( f / g ) ( − 1 ) = − 4 Dividing Polynomial Functions We may use function notation to indicate division as follows: Division of functions: ( f / g ) ( x ) = f ( x ) g ( x ) The quotient of two polynomial functions does not necessarily have a domain of all real numbers. The values for x that make the function in the denominator 0 are restricted from the domain. This will be discussed in more detail at a later time. For now, assume all functions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 9: Calculate: ( f / g ) ( x ) given f ( x ) = 6 x 5 − 36 x 4 + 12 x 3 − 6 x 2 and g ( x ) = − 6 x 2 . Solution: The notation indicates that we should divide: Answer: ( f / g ) ( x ) = − x 3 + 6 x 2 − 2 x + 1   Example 10: Calculate: ( f / g ) ( − 1 ) , given f ( x ) = − 3 x 3 + 7 x 2 − 11 x − 1 and g ( x ) = 3 x − 1 . Solution: First, determine ( f / g ) ( x ) . Therefore, Substitute −1 for the variable x . Answer: ( f / g ) ( − 1 ) = − 4  || 
book2_chapter5_6	 || Negative Exponents In this section, we define what it means to have negative integer exponents. We begin with the following equivalent fractions: Notice that 4, 8, and 32 are all powers of 2. Hence we can write 4 = 2 2 , 8 = 2 3 , and 32 = 2 5 . If the exponent of the term in the denominator is larger than the exponent of the term in the numerator, then the application of the quotient rule for exponents results in a negative exponent. In this case, we have the following: We conclude that 2 − 3 = 1 2 3 . This is true in general and leads to the definition of negative exponents x − n = 1 x n , given any integer n, where x is nonzero. . Given any integer n and x ≠ 0 , then Here x ≠ 0 because 1 0 is undefined. For clarity, in this section, assume all variables are nonzero. Simplifying expressions with negative exponents requires that we rewrite the expression with positive exponents.   Example 1: Simplify: 10 − 2 . Solution: Answer: 1 100   Example 2: Simplify: ( − 3 ) − 1 . Solution: Answer: − 1 3   Example 3: Simplify: 1 y − 3 . Solution: Answer: y 3   At this point we highlight two very important examples, If the grouped quantity is raised to a negative exponent, then apply the definition and write the entire grouped quantity in the denominator. If there is no grouping, then apply the definition only to the base preceding the exponent.   Example 4: Simplify: ( 2 a b ) − 3 . Solution: First, apply the definition of −3 as an exponent and then apply the power of a product rule. Answer: 1 8 a 3 b 3   Example 5: Simplify: ( − 3 x y 3 ) − 2 . Solution: Answer: 1 9 x 2 y 6   Example 6: Simplify: x − 3 y − 4 . Solution: Answer: y 4 x 3   The previous example suggests a property of quotients with negative exponents x − n y − m = y m x n , given any integers m and n, where x ≠ 0 and y ≠ 0 . . If given any integers m and n, where x ≠ 0 and y ≠ 0 , then In other words, negative exponents in the numerator can be written as positive exponents in the denominator, and negative exponents in the denominator can be written as positive exponents in the numerator.   Example 7: Simplify: − 2 x − 5 y 3 z − 2 . Solution: Take care with the coefficient −2; recognize that this is the base and that the exponent is actually +1: − 2 = ( − 2 ) 1 . Hence the rules of negative exponents do not apply to this coefficient; leave it in the numerator. Answer: − 2 y 3 z 2 x 5   Example 8: Simplify: ( − 3 x − 4 ) − 3 y − 2 . Solution: Apply the power of a product rule before applying negative exponents. Answer: − x 12 y 2 27   Example 9: Simplify: ( 3 x 2 ) − 4 ( − 2 y − 1 z 3 ) − 2 . Solution: Answer: 4 z 6 81 x 8 y 2   Example 10: Simplify: ( 5 x 2 y ) 3 x − 5 y − 3 . Solution: First, apply the power of a product rule and then the quotient rule. Answer: 125 x 11 y 6   To summarize, we have the following rules for negative integer exponents with nonzero bases: Negative exponents: x − n = 1 x n Quotients with negative exponents: x − n y − m = y m x n   Try this! Simplify: ( − 5 x y − 3 ) − 2 5 x 4 y − 4 . Answer: y 10 125 x 6 Video Solution  || Scientific Notation Real numbers expressed in scientific notation Real numbers expressed in the form a × 10 n , where n is an integer and 1 ≤ a < 10 . have the form where n is an integer and 1 ≤ a < 10 . This form is particularly useful when the numbers are very large or very small. For example, It is cumbersome to write all the zeros in both of these cases. Scientific notation is an alternative, compact representation of these numbers. The factor 10 n indicates the power of 10 to multiply the coefficient by to convert back to decimal form: This is equivalent to moving the decimal in the coefficient fifteen places to the right. A negative exponent indicates that the number is very small: This is equivalent to moving the decimal in the coefficient eleven places to the left. Converting a decimal number to scientific notation involves moving the decimal as well. Consider all of the equivalent forms of 0.00563 with factors of 10 that follow: While all of these are equal, 5.63 × 10 − 3 is the only form considered to be expressed in scientific notation. This is because the coefficient 5.63 is between 1 and 10 as required by the definition. Notice that we can convert 5.63 × 10 − 3 back to decimal form, as a check, by moving the decimal to the left three places.   Example 11: Write 1,075,000,000,000 using scientific notation. Solution: Here we count twelve decimal places to the left of the decimal point to obtain the number 1.075. Answer: 1.075 × 10 12   Example 12: Write 0.000003045 using scientific notation. Solution: Here we count six decimal places to the right to obtain 3.045. Answer: 3.045 × 10 − 6   Often we will need to perform operations when using numbers in scientific notation. All the rules of exponents developed so far also apply to numbers in scientific notation.   Example 13: Multiply: ( 4.36 × 10 − 5 ) ( 5.3 × 10 12 ) . Solution: Use the fact that multiplication is commutative and apply the product rule for exponents. Answer: 2.3108 × 10 8   Example 14: Divide: ( 3.24 × 10 8 ) ÷ ( 9.0 × 10 − 3 ) . Solution: Answer: 3.6 × 10 10   Example 15: The speed of light is approximately 6.7 × 10 8 miles per hour. Express this speed in miles per second. Solution: A unit analysis indicates that we must divide the number by 3,600. Answer: The speed of light is approximately 1.9 × 10 5 miles per second.   Example 16: By what factor is the radius of the sun larger than the radius of earth? Solution: We want to find the number that when multiplied times the radius of earth equals the radius of the sun. Source: NASA and European Space Agency, from http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/multimedia/display.cfm?IM_ID=188. Therefore, Answer: The radius of the sun is approximately 110 times that of earth.   Try this! Divide: ( 6.75 × 10 − 8 ) ÷ ( 9 × 10 − 17 ) . Answer: 7.5 × 10 8 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_6_1	Negative Exponents In this section, we define what it means to have negative integer exponents. We begin with the following equivalent fractions: Notice that 4, 8, and 32 are all powers of 2. Hence we can write 4 = 2 2 , 8 = 2 3 , and 32 = 2 5 . If the exponent of the term in the denominator is larger than the exponent of the term in the numerator, then the application of the quotient rule for exponents results in a negative exponent. In this case, we have the following: We conclude that 2 − 3 = 1 2 3 . This is true in general and leads to the definition of negative exponents x − n = 1 x n , given any integer n, where x is nonzero. . Given any integer n and x ≠ 0 , then Here x ≠ 0 because 1 0 is undefined. For clarity, in this section, assume all variables are nonzero. Simplifying expressions with negative exponents requires that we rewrite the expression with positive exponents.   Example 1: Simplify: 10 − 2 . Solution: Answer: 1 100   Example 2: Simplify: ( − 3 ) − 1 . Solution: Answer: − 1 3   Example 3: Simplify: 1 y − 3 . Solution: Answer: y 3   At this point we highlight two very important examples, If the grouped quantity is raised to a negative exponent, then apply the definition and write the entire grouped quantity in the denominator. If there is no grouping, then apply the definition only to the base preceding the exponent.   Example 4: Simplify: ( 2 a b ) − 3 . Solution: First, apply the definition of −3 as an exponent and then apply the power of a product rule. Answer: 1 8 a 3 b 3   Example 5: Simplify: ( − 3 x y 3 ) − 2 . Solution: Answer: 1 9 x 2 y 6   Example 6: Simplify: x − 3 y − 4 . Solution: Answer: y 4 x 3   The previous example suggests a property of quotients with negative exponents x − n y − m = y m x n , given any integers m and n, where x ≠ 0 and y ≠ 0 . . If given any integers m and n, where x ≠ 0 and y ≠ 0 , then In other words, negative exponents in the numerator can be written as positive exponents in the denominator, and negative exponents in the denominator can be written as positive exponents in the numerator.   Example 7: Simplify: − 2 x − 5 y 3 z − 2 . Solution: Take care with the coefficient −2; recognize that this is the base and that the exponent is actually +1: − 2 = ( − 2 ) 1 . Hence the rules of negative exponents do not apply to this coefficient; leave it in the numerator. Answer: − 2 y 3 z 2 x 5   Example 8: Simplify: ( − 3 x − 4 ) − 3 y − 2 . Solution: Apply the power of a product rule before applying negative exponents. Answer: − x 12 y 2 27   Example 9: Simplify: ( 3 x 2 ) − 4 ( − 2 y − 1 z 3 ) − 2 . Solution: Answer: 4 z 6 81 x 8 y 2   Example 10: Simplify: ( 5 x 2 y ) 3 x − 5 y − 3 . Solution: First, apply the power of a product rule and then the quotient rule. Answer: 125 x 11 y 6   To summarize, we have the following rules for negative integer exponents with nonzero bases: Negative exponents: x − n = 1 x n Quotients with negative exponents: x − n y − m = y m x n   Try this! Simplify: ( − 5 x y − 3 ) − 2 5 x 4 y − 4 . Answer: y 10 125 x 6 Video Solution Negative Exponents In this section, we define what it means to have negative integer exponents. We begin with the following equivalent fractions: Notice that 4, 8, and 32 are all powers of 2. Hence we can write 4 = 2 2 , 8 = 2 3 , and 32 = 2 5 . If the exponent of the term in the denominator is larger than the exponent of the term in the numerator, then the application of the quotient rule for exponents results in a negative exponent. In this case, we have the following: We conclude that 2 − 3 = 1 2 3 . This is true in general and leads to the definition of negative exponents x − n = 1 x n , given any integer n, where x is nonzero. . Given any integer n and x ≠ 0 , then Here x ≠ 0 because 1 0 is undefined. For clarity, in this section, assume all variables are nonzero. Simplifying expressions with negative exponents requires that we rewrite the expression with positive exponents.   Example 1: Simplify: 10 − 2 . Solution: Answer: 1 100   Example 2: Simplify: ( − 3 ) − 1 . Solution: Answer: − 1 3   Example 3: Simplify: 1 y − 3 . Solution: Answer: y 3   At this point we highlight two very important examples, If the grouped quantity is raised to a negative exponent, then apply the definition and write the entire grouped quantity in the denominator. If there is no grouping, then apply the definition only to the base preceding the exponent.   Example 4: Simplify: ( 2 a b ) − 3 . Solution: First, apply the definition of −3 as an exponent and then apply the power of a product rule. Answer: 1 8 a 3 b 3   Example 5: Simplify: ( − 3 x y 3 ) − 2 . Solution: Answer: 1 9 x 2 y 6   Example 6: Simplify: x − 3 y − 4 . Solution: Answer: y 4 x 3   The previous example suggests a property of quotients with negative exponents x − n y − m = y m x n , given any integers m and n, where x ≠ 0 and y ≠ 0 . . If given any integers m and n, where x ≠ 0 and y ≠ 0 , then In other words, negative exponents in the numerator can be written as positive exponents in the denominator, and negative exponents in the denominator can be written as positive exponents in the numerator.   Example 7: Simplify: − 2 x − 5 y 3 z − 2 . Solution: Take care with the coefficient −2; recognize that this is the base and that the exponent is actually +1: − 2 = ( − 2 ) 1 . Hence the rules of negative exponents do not apply to this coefficient; leave it in the numerator. Answer: − 2 y 3 z 2 x 5   Example 8: Simplify: ( − 3 x − 4 ) − 3 y − 2 . Solution: Apply the power of a product rule before applying negative exponents. Answer: − x 12 y 2 27   Example 9: Simplify: ( 3 x 2 ) − 4 ( − 2 y − 1 z 3 ) − 2 . Solution: Answer: 4 z 6 81 x 8 y 2   Example 10: Simplify: ( 5 x 2 y ) 3 x − 5 y − 3 . Solution: First, apply the power of a product rule and then the quotient rule. Answer: 125 x 11 y 6   To summarize, we have the following rules for negative integer exponents with nonzero bases: Negative exponents: x − n = 1 x n Quotients with negative exponents: x − n y − m = y m x n   Try this! Simplify: ( − 5 x y − 3 ) − 2 5 x 4 y − 4 . Answer: y 10 125 x 6 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter5_6_2	Scientific Notation Real numbers expressed in scientific notation Real numbers expressed in the form a × 10 n , where n is an integer and 1 ≤ a < 10 . have the form where n is an integer and 1 ≤ a < 10 . This form is particularly useful when the numbers are very large or very small. For example, It is cumbersome to write all the zeros in both of these cases. Scientific notation is an alternative, compact representation of these numbers. The factor 10 n indicates the power of 10 to multiply the coefficient by to convert back to decimal form: This is equivalent to moving the decimal in the coefficient fifteen places to the right. A negative exponent indicates that the number is very small: This is equivalent to moving the decimal in the coefficient eleven places to the left. Converting a decimal number to scientific notation involves moving the decimal as well. Consider all of the equivalent forms of 0.00563 with factors of 10 that follow: While all of these are equal, 5.63 × 10 − 3 is the only form considered to be expressed in scientific notation. This is because the coefficient 5.63 is between 1 and 10 as required by the definition. Notice that we can convert 5.63 × 10 − 3 back to decimal form, as a check, by moving the decimal to the left three places.   Example 11: Write 1,075,000,000,000 using scientific notation. Solution: Here we count twelve decimal places to the left of the decimal point to obtain the number 1.075. Answer: 1.075 × 10 12   Example 12: Write 0.000003045 using scientific notation. Solution: Here we count six decimal places to the right to obtain 3.045. Answer: 3.045 × 10 − 6   Often we will need to perform operations when using numbers in scientific notation. All the rules of exponents developed so far also apply to numbers in scientific notation.   Example 13: Multiply: ( 4.36 × 10 − 5 ) ( 5.3 × 10 12 ) . Solution: Use the fact that multiplication is commutative and apply the product rule for exponents. Answer: 2.3108 × 10 8   Example 14: Divide: ( 3.24 × 10 8 ) ÷ ( 9.0 × 10 − 3 ) . Solution: Answer: 3.6 × 10 10   Example 15: The speed of light is approximately 6.7 × 10 8 miles per hour. Express this speed in miles per second. Solution: A unit analysis indicates that we must divide the number by 3,600. Answer: The speed of light is approximately 1.9 × 10 5 miles per second.   Example 16: By what factor is the radius of the sun larger than the radius of earth? Solution: We want to find the number that when multiplied times the radius of earth equals the radius of the sun. Source: NASA and European Space Agency, from http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/multimedia/display.cfm?IM_ID=188. Therefore, Answer: The radius of the sun is approximately 110 times that of earth.   Try this! Divide: ( 6.75 × 10 − 8 ) ÷ ( 9 × 10 − 17 ) . Answer: 7.5 × 10 8 Video Solution Scientific Notation Real numbers expressed in scientific notation Real numbers expressed in the form a × 10 n , where n is an integer and 1 ≤ a < 10 . have the form where n is an integer and 1 ≤ a < 10 . This form is particularly useful when the numbers are very large or very small. For example, It is cumbersome to write all the zeros in both of these cases. Scientific notation is an alternative, compact representation of these numbers. The factor 10 n indicates the power of 10 to multiply the coefficient by to convert back to decimal form: This is equivalent to moving the decimal in the coefficient fifteen places to the right. A negative exponent indicates that the number is very small: This is equivalent to moving the decimal in the coefficient eleven places to the left. Converting a decimal number to scientific notation involves moving the decimal as well. Consider all of the equivalent forms of 0.00563 with factors of 10 that follow: While all of these are equal, 5.63 × 10 − 3 is the only form considered to be expressed in scientific notation. This is because the coefficient 5.63 is between 1 and 10 as required by the definition. Notice that we can convert 5.63 × 10 − 3 back to decimal form, as a check, by moving the decimal to the left three places.   Example 11: Write 1,075,000,000,000 using scientific notation. Solution: Here we count twelve decimal places to the left of the decimal point to obtain the number 1.075. Answer: 1.075 × 10 12   Example 12: Write 0.000003045 using scientific notation. Solution: Here we count six decimal places to the right to obtain 3.045. Answer: 3.045 × 10 − 6   Often we will need to perform operations when using numbers in scientific notation. All the rules of exponents developed so far also apply to numbers in scientific notation.   Example 13: Multiply: ( 4.36 × 10 − 5 ) ( 5.3 × 10 12 ) . Solution: Use the fact that multiplication is commutative and apply the product rule for exponents. Answer: 2.3108 × 10 8   Example 14: Divide: ( 3.24 × 10 8 ) ÷ ( 9.0 × 10 − 3 ) . Solution: Answer: 3.6 × 10 10   Example 15: The speed of light is approximately 6.7 × 10 8 miles per hour. Express this speed in miles per second. Solution: A unit analysis indicates that we must divide the number by 3,600. Answer: The speed of light is approximately 1.9 × 10 5 miles per second.   Example 16: By what factor is the radius of the sun larger than the radius of earth? Solution: We want to find the number that when multiplied times the radius of earth equals the radius of the sun. Source: NASA and European Space Agency, from http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/multimedia/display.cfm?IM_ID=188. Therefore, Answer: The radius of the sun is approximately 110 times that of earth.   Try this! Divide: ( 6.75 × 10 − 8 ) ÷ ( 9 × 10 − 17 ) . Answer: 7.5 × 10 8 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6	 ||  || GCF of Natural Numbers The process of writing a number or expression as a product is called factoring The process of writing a number or expression as a product. . If we write 60 = 5 ⋅ 12, we say that the product 5 ⋅ 12 is a factorization Any combination of factors, multiplied together, resulting in the product. of 60 and that 5 and 12 are factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. . Typically, there are many ways to factor a number. For example, Recall that a prime number is defined as a natural number with exactly two natural number factors, 1 and itself. The first ten prime numbers follow: Any natural number greater than 1 can be uniquely written as a product of prime numbers. This product is called the prime factorization The unique factorization of a natural number written as a product of primes. . The prime factorization of 60 can be determined by continuing to factor until only a product of prime numbers remains. Since the prime factorization is unique, it does not matter how we choose to initially factor the number; the end result will be the same. The prime factorization of 60 follows: Recall that the greatest common factor (GCF) The product of all the common prime factors. of any two natural numbers is the product of all the common prime factors.   Example 1: Find the GCF of 60 and 140. Solution: First, determine the prime factorizations of both integers. The product of the common prime factors is 2 2 ⋅ 5 ; hence the GCF ( 60 ,   140 ) = 2 2 ⋅ 5 = 20 . To see that it is the greatest common factor, we can write the following: Answer: The greatest common factor of 60 and 140 is 20.   Example 2: Find the GCF of 504 and 1,080. Solution: First, determine the prime factorizations of both integers. The product of the common prime factors is 2 3 ⋅ 3 2 . The GCF ( 504 ,   1080 ) = 2 3 ⋅ 3 2 = 72 . Note that we multiplied the common prime factors with the smallest exponent. The numbers 7 and 15 share no common natural number factor other than 1; we say that they are relatively prime Expressions that share no common factors other than 1. . Answer: The greatest common factor of 504 and 1,080 is 72.  || GCF of Monomials We next consider factorizations of monomials. For example, 6 x and x 4 are factors of 6 x 5 because 6 x 5 = 6 x ⋅ x 4 . Typically, there are many ways to factor a monomial. Some factorizations of 6 x 5 follow: Given two or more monomials, it will be useful to find the greatest common monomial factor of each. For example, consider 6 x 5 y 3 z and 8 x 2 y 3 z 2 . The variable part of these two monomials look very much like the prime factorization of natural numbers and, in fact, can be treated the same way. Steps for finding the GCF of monomials The product of the GCF of the coefficients and all common variable factors. are outlined in the following example.   Example 3: Find the GCF of 6 x 5 y 3 z and 8 x 2 y 3 z 2 . Solution: Step 1: Find the GCF of the coefficients. In this case, the G C F ( 6 ,   8 ) = 2 . Step 2: Determine the common variable factors with smallest exponents. In this case, the common variables with the smallest exponents are x 2 , y 3 , and z 1 . Step 3: The GCF of the monomials is the product of the common variable factors and the GCF of the coefficients. Therefore, Answer: 2 x 2 y 3 z   It is worth pointing out that the GCF in the previous example divides both expressions evenly: Furthermore, we can write the following: The factors 3 x 3 and 4 z share no common monomial factors other than 1; they are relatively prime.   Example 4: Determine the GCF of the following expressions: 30 x 6 y and 18 x 4 y 2 z . Solution: The prime factorizations of the coefficients are Thus the GCF(30, 18) = 2 ⋅ 3 = 6. Next, consider the variable part: The variable factors in common are x 4 and y. The factor z is not in common and we have Answer: 6 x 4 y   Example 5: Determine the GCF of the following three expressions: 12 a 5 b 2 ( a + b ) 5 , 60 a 4 b 3 c ( a + b ) 3 , and 24 a 2 b 7 c 3 ( a + b ) 2 . Solution: First, determine the GCF of the coefficients. The GCF ( 12, 60, 24 ) = 2 2 ⋅ 3 = 12 . Next, determine the common factors of the variable part: The variable factors in common are a 2 , b 2 , and ( a + b ) 2 . Therefore, Answer: 12 a 2 b 2 ( a + b ) 2 . Note that the variable c is not common to all three expressions and thus is not included in the GCF.   Try this! Determine the GCF of the following: 60 x 4 y 3 ( x + 2 y ) 7 , 45 x 2 y 5 ( x + 2 y ) 4 , and 30 x 7 y 7 ( x + 2 y ) 3 . Answer: 15 x 2 y 3 ( x + 2 y ) 3 Video Solution  || Factoring out the GCF We have seen that application of the distributive property is the key to multiplying polynomials. The process of factoring a polynomial The process of rewriting a polynomial as a product of polynomial factors. involves using the distributive property in reverse to write each polynomial as a product of polynomial factors. To demonstrate this idea, we multiply and factor side by side. Factoring utilizes the GCF of the terms. In the previous example, we see that the distributive property allows us to write the polynomial 6 x 5 + 8 x 2 as a product of the two factors 2 x 2 and ( 3 x 3 + 4 ) . Note that in this case, 2 x 2 is the GCF of the terms of the polynomial: Factoring out the GCF The process of rewriting a polynomial as a product using the GCF of all of its terms. involves rewriting a polynomial as a product where a factor is the GCF of all of its terms: The steps for factoring out the GCF of a polynomial The greatest common factor of all the terms of the polynomial. are outlined in the following example.   Example 6: Factor out the GCF: 7 x 4 + 21 x 3 − 14 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Identify the GCF of all the terms. In this case, the GCF(7, 21, 14) = 7, and the common variable factor with the smallest exponent is x 2 . The GCF of the polynomial is 7 x 2 . Step 2: Determine the terms of the missing factor by dividing each term of the original expression by the GCF. (This step is usually performed mentally.) Step 3: Apply the distributive property (in reverse) using the terms found in the previous step. Step 4: As a check, multiply using the distributive property to verify that the product equals the original expression. (This step is optional and can be performed mentally.) Answer: 7 x 2 ( x 2 + 3 x − 2 )   Example 7: Factor out the GCF: 48 a − 16 b + 4 c . Solution: There are no variable factors in common and the GCF(48, 16, 4) = 4. Answer: 4 ( 12 a − 4 b + c )   Example 8: Factor out the GCF: 25 x 3 + 15 x 2 + 5 x . Solution: The GCF(25, 15, 5) = 5, and the common variable factor with smallest exponents is x 1 . The GCF of all the terms is 5 x . Answer: 5 x ( 5 x 2 + 3 x + 1 )   If the GCF is the same as one of the terms, then, after the GCF is factored out, a constant term 1 will remain. In the previous example, we can see that 5 x 5 x = 1 . The importance of remembering the constant term becomes clear when performing the check using the distributive property: The constant term 1 allows us to obtain the same original expression after we distribute.   Example 9: Factor out the GCF: 15 x 6 y 4 + 10 x 5 y 3 z 2 − 20 x y 6 z 3 . Solution: The G C F ( 10 ,   15 ,   20 ) = 5 , and the common variables with smallest exponent are x 1 and y 3 . Therefore, the GCF of the terms is 5 x y 3 . The first term does not have a variable factor of z and thus cannot be a part of the greatest common factor. If we divide each term by 5 x y 3 , we obtain and can write Answer: 5 x y 3 ( 3 x 5 y + 2 x 4 z 2 − 4 y 3 z 3 )   Example 10: Factor out the GCF: 24 a 6 b 2 c 5 + 8 a 7 b 5 c . Solution: The GCF(24, 8) = 8, and the variable factors with smallest exponents are a 6 , b 2 , and c . Therefore, the GCF of all the terms is 8 a 6 b 2 c . Answer: 8 a 6 b 2 c ( 3 c 4 + a b 3 )   Of course, not all polynomials with integer coefficients can be factored as a product of polynomials with integer coefficients other than 1 and itself. If this is the case, then we say that it is a prime polynomial A polynomial with integer coefficients that cannot be factored as a product of polynomials with integer coefficients other than 1 and itself. .   Example 11: Factor: 3 x − 5 . Solution: Prime: there are no polynomial factors other than 1 and itself. Answer: Prime   Try this! Factor out the GCF: 16 x 4 y 3 − 8 x 2 y 5 − 4 x 2 y . Answer: 4 x 2 y ( 4 x 2 y 2 − 2 y 4 − 1 ) Video Solution  || Factor by Grouping In this section, we outline a technique for factoring polynomials with four terms. First, review some preliminary examples where the terms have a common binomial factor.   Example 12: Factor: 5 x ( x − 3 ) + 2 ( x − 3 ) . Solution: This expression is a binomial with terms 5 x ( x − 3 ) and 2 ( x − 3 ) . In this case, ( x − 3 ) is a common factor. Begin by factoring this common factor out: To determine the terms of the remaining factor, divide each term by ( x − 3 ) : This step is typically performed mentally. We have Answer: ( x − 3 ) ( 5 x + 2 )   Recall that 1 is always a common factor. If the GCF is the same as a term, then the factor 1 remains after we factor out that GCF.   Example 13: Factor: 3 x ( 4 x + 1 ) − ( 4 x + 1 ) . Solution: Rewrite the second term − ( 4 x + 1 ) as − 1 ( 4 x + 1 ) and then factor out the common binomial factor ( 4 x + 1 ) . Answer: ( 4 x + 1 ) ( 3 x − 1 )   Remember that the goal for this section is to develop a technique that enables us to factor polynomials with four terms into a product of binomials. The intermediate step of this process looks like the previous two examples. For example, we wish to factor Begin by grouping the first two terms and the last two terms. Then factor out the GCF of each grouping: In this form, it is a binomial with a common binomial factor, ( x − 3 ) . The steps that follow outline a technique for factoring four-term polynomials called factor by grouping A technique for factoring polynomials with four terms. .   Example 14: Factor: 2 x 3 + 4 x 2 + 3 x + 6 . Solution: Group terms in such a way as to obtain a binomial with common factors. Step 1: Group the first two and last two terms and then factor out the GCF of each. The GCF of the first two terms is 2 x 2 , and the GCF of the second two terms is 3. Step 2: At this point, the polynomial is a binomial. Factor out any factors common to both terms. Here ( x + 2 ) is a common factor. Step 3: Optional check: multiply to verify that we obtain the original expression. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( 2 x 2 + 3 )   Example 15: Factor: 2 a 3 − 3 a 2 + 2 a − 3 . Solution: The GCF of the first two terms is a 2 and the GCF of the second two terms is 1. Answer: ( 2 a − 3 ) ( a 2 + 1 ) . The check is left to the reader.   Example 16: Factor: 6 x 4 − 24 x 3 − 5 x + 20 . Solution: The GCF for the first group is 6 x 3 . We have to choose 5 or −5 to factor out of the second group. Factoring out a +5 does not result in a common binomial factor. If we choose to factor out −5, then we obtain a common binomial factor and can proceed. Note that when factoring out a negative number, we change the signs of the factored terms. Answer: ( x − 4 ) ( 6 x 3 − 5 ) . The check is left to the reader. Tip The sign of the leading coefficient in the second grouping usually indicates whether or not to factor out a negative factor. If that coefficient is positive, factor out a positive factor. If it is negative, factor out a negative factor. When all the terms of a polynomial have a GCF other than 1, it is a best practice to factor that out before factoring by grouping.   Example 17: Factor: 3 y 4 + 9 y 2 − 6 y 3 − 18 y . Solution: Here we notice that the greatest common factor of all the terms is 3 y . Begin by factoring out the GCF and then factor the result by grouping. Answer: 3 y ( y 2 + 3 ) ( y − 2 )   Sometimes we must first rearrange the terms in order to obtain a common factor.   Example 18: Factor: a b − 2 a 2 b + a 3 − 2 b 3 . Solution: Simply factoring the GCF out of the first group and last group does not yield a common binomial factor. We must rearrange the terms, searching for a grouping that produces a common factor. In this example, we have a workable grouping if we switch the terms a 3 and a b . Answer: ( a − 2 b ) ( a 2 + b )   Not all factorable four-term polynomials can be factored with this technique. For example, This four-term polynomial cannot be grouped in any way as to produce a common binomial factor. Despite this, the polynomial is not prime and can be written as a product of polynomials. It can be factored as follows: Factoring such polynomials is something that we will learn to do as we move further along in our study of algebra. For now, we will limit our attempt to factor four-term polynomials to using the factor by grouping technique.   Try this! Factor: x 3 − x 2 y − x y + y 2 . Answer: ( x − y ) ( x 2 − y ) Video Solution  ||  || Factoring Trinomials of the Form x^2 + bx + c Some trinomials of the form x 2 + b x + c can be factored as a product of binomials. For example, We can verify this factorization by multiplying: Factoring trinomials requires that we work the distributive process in reverse. Notice that the product of the first terms of each binomial is equal to the first term of the trinomial. The middle term of the trinomial, 7x, is the sum of the products of the outer and inner terms of the binomials: And the product of the last terms of each binomial is equal to the last term of the trinomial. This can be visually interpreted as follows: If a trinomial of this type factors, then these relationships will be true: This gives us In short, if the leading coefficient of a factorable trinomial is one, then the factors of the last term must add up to the coefficient of the middle term. This observation is the key to factoring trinomials using the technique known as trial and error Describes the method of factoring a trinomial by systematically checking factors to see if their product is the original trinomial. (or guess and check Used when referring to the trial and error method for factoring trinomials. ). The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Factor: x 2 + 7 x + 12 . Solution: Note that the polynomial to be factored has three terms; it is a trinomial with a leading coefficient of 1. Use trial and error to factor as follows: Step 1: Write two sets of blank parentheses. If a trinomial of this form factors, then it will factor into two linear binomial factors. Step 2: Write the factors of the first term in the first space of each set of parentheses. In this case, factor x 2 = x ⋅ x . Step 3: Determine the factors of the last term whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term. To do this, list all of the factorizations of 12 and search for factors whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, 7. Choose 12 = 3 ⋅ 4 because 3 + 4 = 7. Step 4: Write in the last term of each binomial using the factors determined in the previous step. Step 5: Check by multiplying the two binomials. Answer: ( x + 3 ) ( x + 4 )   Since multiplication is commutative, the order of the factors does not matter. If the last term of the trinomial is positive, then either both of the constant factors must be negative or both must be positive. Therefore, when looking at the list of factorizations of the last term, we are searching for sums that are equal to the coefficient of the middle term.   Example 2: Factor: x 2 − 9 x + 20 . Solution: First, factor x 2 = x ⋅ x . Next, determine which factors of 20 add up to −9: In this case, choose −4 and −5 because ( − 4 ) ( − 5 ) = + 20 and − 4 + ( − 5 ) = − 9 . Check. Answer: ( x − 4 ) ( x − 5 )   If the last term of the trinomial is negative, then one of its factors must be negative. In this case, search the list of factorizations of the last term for differences that equal the coefficient of the middle term.   Example 3: Factor: x 2 − 4 x − 12 . Solution: Begin by factoring the first term x 2 = x ⋅ x . The factors of 12 are listed below. In this example, we are looking for factors whose difference is −4. Here choose the factors 2 and −6 because the coefficient of the middle term, −4, is obtained if we add 2 + ( − 6 ) . Multiply to check. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x − 6 )   Often our first guess will not produce a correct factorization. This process may require repeated trials. For this reason, the check is very important and is not optional.   Example 4: Factor: x 2 + 5 x − 6 . Solution: The first term of this trinomial x 2 factors as x ⋅ x . Consider the factors of 6: Suppose we choose the factors 2 and 3 because 2 + 3 = 5, the coefficient of the middle term. Then we have the following incorrect factorization: When we multiply to check, we find the error. In this case, the middle term is correct but the last term is not. Since the last term in the original expression is negative, we need to choose factors that are opposite in sign. Therefore, we must try again. This time we choose the factors −1 and 6 because − 1 + 6 = 5 . Now the check shows that this factorization is correct. Answer: ( x − 1 ) ( x + 6 )   If we choose the factors wisely, then we can reduce much of the guesswork in this process. However, if a guess is not correct, do not get discouraged; just try a different set of factors.   Example 5: Factor: x 2 + 3 x + 20 . Solution: Here there are no factors of 20 whose sum is 3. Therefore, the original trinomial cannot be factored as a product of two binomials. This trinomial is prime. Answer: Prime   Try this! Factor: x 2 − 13 x − 30 . Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x − 15 ) Video Solution The techniques described can also be used to factor trinomials with more than one variable.   Example 6: Factor: x 2 − 14 x y − 72 y 2 . Solution: The first term x 2 factors as x ⋅ x . Next, look for factors of the coefficient of the last term, 72, whose sum is −14. Therefore, the coefficient of the last term can be factored − 72 = 4 ( − 18 ) , where 4 + ( − 18 ) = − 14 . Because the last term has a variable factor of y 2 , factor 72 y 2 as 4 y ( − 18 y ) and try the following factorization: Multiply to check. Visually, we have the following: Answer: ( x + 4 y ) ( x − 18 y )   Try this! Factor: x 2 y 2 + 9 x y − 10 . Answer: ( x y − 1 ) ( x y + 10 ) Video Solution  || Factoring Using the AC Method An alternate technique for factoring trinomials, called the AC method Method for factoring trinomials by replacing the middle term with two terms that allow us to factor the resulting four-term polynomial by grouping. , makes use of the grouping method for factoring four-term polynomials. If a trinomial in the form a x 2 + b x + c can be factored, then the middle term, bx, can be replaced with two terms with coefficients whose sum is b and product ac. This substitution results in an equivalent expression with four terms that can be factored by grouping. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 7: Factor using the AC method: x 2 − x − 30 . Solution: In this example a = 1, b = −1, and c = −30. Step 1: Determine the product ac. Step 2: Find factors of ac whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, b. We can see that the sum of the factors 5 and −6 is equal to the coefficient of the middle term, −1. Step 3: Use the factors as coefficients for the terms that replace the middle term. Here − x = − 6 x + 5 x . Write Step 4: Factor the equivalent expression by grouping. Answer: ( x − 6 ) ( x + 5 )   Notice that the AC method is consistent with the trial and error method. Both methods require that b = m + n , where c = m n . In the example above, − 30 = ( − 6 ) ( 5 ) and − 1 = ( − 6 ) + 5 . The only difference between the methods, when the leading coefficient is 1, is in the process used to obtain the final factorization.   Example 8: Factor: y 2 − 14 x + 48 . Solution: Here ac = 48 and we search for factors whose sum is −14. Therefore, − 14 x = − 6 x − 8 x . Substitute the new terms and factor by grouping. Answer: ( x − 6 ) ( x − 8 ) . The check is left to the reader.   At this point, it is recommended that the reader stop and factor as many trinomials of the form x 2 + b x + c as time allows before moving on to the next section. Factoring trinomials is one of the more important skills that we learn in this course and should be mastered.  ||  || Factoring Trinomials of the Form ax^2 + bx + c Factoring trinomials of the form a x 2 + b x + c can be challenging because the middle term is affected by the factors of both a and c. To illustrate this, consider the following factored trinomial: We can multiply to verify that this is the correct factorization. As we have seen before, the product of the first terms of each binomial is equal to the first term of the trinomial. The middle term of the trinomial is the sum of the products of the outer and inner terms of the binomials. The product of the last terms of each binomial is equal to the last term of the trinomial. Visually, we have the following: In general, This gives us, In short, when the leading coefficient of a trinomial is something other than 1, there will be more to consider when determining the factors using the trial and error method. The key lies in the understanding of how the middle term is obtained. Multiply ( 2 x + 5 ) ( 3 x + 7 ) and carefully follow the formation of the middle term. If we think of the FOIL method for multiplying binomials, then the middle term results from the sum of the inner product and the outer product. In this case, 14 x + 15 x = 29 x , as illustrated below: For this reason, we need to look for products of the factors of the first and last terms whose sum is equal to the coefficient of the middle term. For example, to factor 6 x 2 + 29 x + 35 , look at the factors of 6 and 35. The combination that produces the coefficient of the middle term is 2 ⋅ 7 + 3 ⋅ 5 = 14 + 15 = 29 . Make sure that the outer terms have coefficients 2 and 7, and that the inner terms have coefficients 5 and 3. Use this information to factor the trinomial:   Example 1: Factor: 3 x 2 + 7 x + 2 . Solution: Since the leading coefficient and the last term are both prime, there is only one way to factor each. Begin by writing the factors of the first term, 3 x 2 , as follows: The middle and last term are both positive; therefore, the factors of 2 are chosen as positive numbers. In this case, the only choice is in which grouping to place these factors. Determine which grouping is correct by multiplying each expression. Notice that these products differ only in their middle terms. Also, notice that the middle term is the sum of the inner and outer product, as illustrated below: Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( 3 x + 1 )   Example 2: Factor: 12 x 2 + 38 x + 20 . Solution: First, consider the factors of the first and last terms. We search for products of factors whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, 38. For brevity, the thought process is illustrated starting with the factors 2 and 6. Factoring begins at this point with the first term. We search for factors of 20 that along with the factors of 12 produce a middle term of 38x. Here the last combination produces a middle term of 38x. Answer: ( 2 x + 5 ) ( 6 x + 4 )   Example 3: Factor: 10 x 2 − 23 x + 6 . Solution: First, consider the factors of the first and last terms. We are searching for products of factors whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, −23. Factoring begins at this point with two sets of blank parentheses: Since the last term is positive and the middle term is negative, we know that both factors of the last term must be negative. Here we list all possible combinations with the factors of 10 x 2 = 2 x ⋅ 5 x . There is no combination that produces a middle term of − 23 x . We then move on to the factors of 10 x 2 = 10 x ⋅ x and list all possible combinations: And we can write Answer: ( 10 x − 3 ) ( x − 2 ) . The complete check is left to the reader.   We can reduce much of the guesswork involved in factoring trinomials if we consider all of the factors of the first and last terms and their products.   Example 4: Factor: 5 x 2 + 38 x − 16 . Solution: We begin with the factors of 5 and 16. Since the leading coefficient is prime, we can begin with the following: We look for products of the factors of 5 and 16 that could possibly add to 38. Since the last term is negative, we must look for factors with opposite signs. Here we can see that the products 2 and 40 add up to 38 if they have opposite signs: Therefore, use −2 and 8 as the factors of 16, making sure that the inner and outer products are − 2 x and 40 x : Answer: ( x + 8   ) ( 5 x − 2 ) . The complete check is left to the reader.   After lots of practice, the process described in the previous example can be performed mentally.   Try this! Factor: 12 x 2 − 31 x − 30 . Answer: ( 3 x − 10 ) ( 4 x + 3 ) Video Solution When given trinomials with multiple variables, the process is similar.   Example 5: Factor: 9 x 2 + 30 x y + 25 y 2 . Solution: Search for factors of the first and last terms such that the sum of the inner and outer products equals the middle term. Add the following products to obtain the middle term: 3 x ⋅ 5 y + 3 x ⋅ 5 y = 30 x y . In this example, we have a perfect square trinomial. Check. Answer: ( 3 x + 5 y ) 2   Try this! Factor: 16 x 2 − 24 x y + 9 y 2 . Answer: ( 4 x − 3 y ) 2 Video Solution  || Factoring Trinomials with Common Factors It is a good practice to first factor out the GCF, if there is one. Doing this produces a trinomial factor with smaller coefficients. As we have seen, trinomials with smaller coefficients require much less effort to factor. This commonly overlooked step is worth identifying early.   Example 6: Factor: 12 x 2 − 27 x + 6 . Solution: Begin by factoring out the GCF. After factoring out 3, the coefficients of the resulting trinomial are smaller and have fewer factors. After some thought, we can see that the combination that gives the coefficient of the middle term is 4 ( − 2 ) + 1 ( − 1 ) = − 8 − 1 = − 9 . Check. The factor 3 is part of the factored form of the original expression; be sure to include it in the answer. Answer: 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) ( x − 2 )   It is a good practice to consistently work with trinomials where the leading coefficient is positive.   Example 7: Factor: − x 2 + 2 x + 15 . Solution: In this example, the leading coefficient is −1. Before beginning the factoring process, factor out the −1: At this point, factor the remaining trinomial as usual, remembering to write the −1 as a factor in your final answer. Because 3 + (−5) = −2, use 3 and 5 as the factors of 15. Answer: − 1 ( x + 3 ) ( x − 5 ) . The check is left to the reader.   Example 8: Factor: − 60 a 2 − 5 a + 30 . Solution: The GCF of all the terms is 5. However, in this case factor out −5 because this produces a trinomial factor where the leading coefficient is positive. Focus on the factors of 12 and 6 that combine to give the middle coefficient, 1. After much thought, we find that 3 ⋅ 3 − 4 ⋅ 2 = 9 − 8 = 1 . Factor the remaining trinomial. Answer: − 5 ( 4 a + 3 ) ( 3 a − 2 ) . The check is left to the reader.   Try this! Factor: 24 + 2 x − x 2 . Answer: − 1 ( x − 6 ) ( x + 4 ) Video Solution  || Factoring Using the AC Method In this section, we factor trinomials of the form a x 2 + b x + c using the AC method described previously.   Example 9: Factor using the AC method: 18 x 2 − 21 x + 5 . Solution: Here a = 18, b = −21, and c = 5. Factor 90 and search for factors whose sum is −21. In this case, the sum of the factors −6 and −15 equals the middle coefficient, −21. Therefore, − 21 x = − 6 x − 15 x , and we can write Factor the equivalent expression by grouping. Answer: ( 3 x − 1 ) ( 6 x − 5 )   Example 10: Factor using the AC method: 9 x 2 − 61 x − 14 . Solution: Here a = 9, b = −61, and c = −14. We factor −126 as follows: The sum of factors 2 and −63 equals the middle coefficient, −61. Replace − 61 x with 2 x − 63 x : Answer: ( x − 7 ) ( 9 x + 2 ) . The check is left to the reader.  ||  || Difference of Squares A binomial is a polynomial with two terms. We begin with our first special binomial called difference of squares a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) , where a and b represent algebraic expressions. : To verify the above formula, multiply: We use this formula to factor certain special binomials.   Example 1: Factor: x 2 − 16 . Solution: Step 1: Identify the binomial as difference of squares and determine the square factors of each term. Here we can write The terms are squares of x and 4. Hence a = x and b = 4 . Step 2: Substitute into the difference of squares formula. Step 3: Multiply to check. This step is optional. Answer: ( x + 4 ) ( x − 4 )   It is worth taking some extra time at this point to review all of the squares of integers from 1 to 12. Recognizing these perfect square integers helps speed the factoring process.   Example 2: Factor: 9 x 2 − 121 . Solution: The subtraction indicates that this is a difference. Furthermore, we recognize that the terms are squares. In this case, a = 3 x and b = 11 . Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. Answer: ( 3 x + 11 ) ( 3 x − 11 )   It may be the case that the terms of the binomial have a common factor. If so, it will be difficult to identify the perfect squares until we first factor out the GCF.   Example 3: Factor: 12 y 2 − 75 . Solution: The terms are not perfect squares. However, notice that they do have a common factor. First, factor out the GCF, 3. The resulting binomial factor is a difference of squares with a = 2 y and b = 5 . Answer: 3 ( 2 y + 5 ) ( 2 y − 5 )   Example 4: Factor: 49 x 2 − 100 y 2 . Solution: Here we have a binomial with two variables and recognize that it is a difference of squares. Therefore, a = 7 x and b = 10 y . Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. Answer: ( 7 x + 10 y ) ( 7 x − 10 y )   Try this! Factor: 36 x 2 − 1 . Answer: ( 6 x + 1 ) ( 6 x − 1 ) Video Solution Given any real number b, a polynomial of the form x 2 + b 2 is prime. Furthermore, the sum of squares a 2 + b 2 does not have a general factored equivalent. a 2 + b 2 does not have a general factored equivalent. Care should be taken not to confuse this with a perfect square trinomial: Therefore, When the degree of the special binomial is greater than two, we may need to apply the difference of squares formula multiple times. A polynomial is completely factored when none of the factors can be factored any further.   Example 5: Factor completely: x 4 − 16 . Solution: First, identify what is being squared: To do this, recall the power rule for exponents, ( x m ) n = x m n . When exponents are raised to a power, multiply them. With this in mind, determine that ( x 2 ) 2 = x 4 and write Therefore, a = x 2 and b = 4 . Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. At this point, notice that the factor ( x 2 − 4 ) is itself a difference of two squares and thus can be further factored using a = x and b = 2 . The factor ( x 2 + 4 ) is a sum of squares, which cannot be factored using real numbers. Answer: ( x 2 + 4 ) ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 )   Try this! Factor completely: 81 x 4 − 1 . Answer: ( 9 x 2 + 1 ) ( 3 x + 1 ) ( 3 x − 1 ) Video Solution  || Sum and Difference of Cubes Two other special binomials of interest are the sum a 3 + b 3 = ( a + b ) ( a 2 − a b + b 2 ) , where a and b represent algebraic expressions. and difference of cubes a 3 − b 3 = ( a − b ) ( a 2 + a b + b 2 ) , where a and b represent algebraic expressions. : We can verify these formulas by multiplying: The process for factoring the sum and difference of cubes is very similar to that for the difference of squares. We first identify a and b and then substitute into the appropriate formula. The separate formulas for sum and difference of cubes allow us to always choose a and b to be positive.   Example 6: Factor: x 3 + 8 . Solution: The plus sign and the fact that the terms are cubes indicate to us that this is a sum of cubes. Next, identify what is being cubed. In this case, a = x and b = 2 . Substitute into the sum of cubes formula. The resulting trinomial is prime and the factoring is complete. We can check this factorization by multiplying. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x 2 − 2 x + 4 )   It is helpful to review the perfect cubes of integers from 1 to 12. This will aid you in identifying sums and differences of cubes.   Example 7: Factor: y 3 − 125 . Solution: In this case, we have a difference of cubes. We can write Substitute a = y and b = 5 into the formula for difference of cubes. Answer: ( y − 5 ) ( y 2 + 5 y + 25 )   Always look for common factors when factoring. If the terms of the binomial have a GCF other than 1, then factor that out first.   Example 8: Factor: 54 x 4 + 128 x . Solution: Begin by factoring out the GCF 2 x . The resulting binomial factor is a sum of cubes, where a = 3 x and b = 4 . Answer: 2 x ( 3 x + 4 ) ( 9 x 2 − 12 x + 16 )   Example 9: Factor: x 3 y 3 − 1 . Solution: This binomial is a difference of cubes with two variables. Identify what is being cubed. Here a = x y and b = 1 . Substitute into the appropriate formula and simplify. Answer: ( x y − 1 ) ( x 2 y 2 + x y + 1 )   Try this! Factor: 8 x 3 + 343 . Answer: ( 2 x + 7 ) ( 4 x 2 − 14 x + 49 ) Video Solution When factoring, always look for resulting factors to factor further.   Example 10: Factor completely: x 6 − 64 . Solution: When confronted with a binomial that is both a difference of squares and cubes, as this is, make it a rule to factor using difference of squares first. Therefore, a = x 3 and b = 8 . Substitute into the difference of squares formula. The resulting two binomial factors are a sum and a difference of cubes. Each can be factored further. Therefore, we have The trinomial factors are prime and the expression is completely factored. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x 2 − 2 x + 4 ) ( x − 2 ) ( x 2 + 2 x + 4 )   As an exercise, factor the previous example as a difference of cubes first and then compare the results. Why do you think we make it a rule to factor using difference of squares first?   Try this! Factor: x 6 − y 6 . Answer: ( x + y ) ( x 2 − x y + y 2 ) ( x − y ) ( x 2 + x y + y 2 ) Video Solution  ||  || General Factoring Strategy We have learned various techniques for factoring polynomials with up to four terms. The challenge is to identify the type of polynomial and then decide which method to apply. The following outlines a general guideline for factoring polynomials: Check for common factors. If the terms have common factors, then factor out the greatest common factor (GCF) and look at the resulting polynomial factors to factor further. Determine the number of terms in the polynomial. a. Factor four-term polynomials by grouping. b. Factor trinomials (three terms) using “trial and error” or the AC method. c. Factor binomials (two terms) using the following special products: Difference of squares: a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) Sum of squares: a 2 + b 2       no general formula Difference of cubes: a 3 − b 3 = ( a − b ) ( a 2 + a b + b 2 ) Sum of cubes: a 3 + b 3 = ( a + b ) ( a 2 − a b + b 2 ) Look for factors that can be factored further. Check by multiplying. Note If a binomial is both a difference of squares and a difference of cubes, then first factor it as difference of squares and then as a sum and difference of cubes to obtain a more complete factorization. Not all polynomials with integer coefficients factor. When this is the case, we say that the polynomial is prime. If an expression has a GCF, then factor this out first. Doing so is often overlooked and typically results in factors that are easier to work with. Also, look for the resulting factors to factor further; many factoring problems require more than one step. A polynomial is completely factored when none of the factors can be factored further.   Example 1: Factor: 6 x 4 − 3 x 3 − 24 x 2 + 12 x . Solution: This four-term polynomial has a GCF of 3 x . Factor this out first. Now factor the resulting four-term polynomial by grouping. The factor ( x 2 − 4 ) is a difference of squares and can be factored further. Answer: 3 x ( 2 x − 1 ) ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 )   Example 2: Factor: 18 x 3 y − 60 x 2 y + 50 x y . Solution: This trinomial has a GCF of 2 x y . Factor this out first. The trinomial factor can be factored further using the trial and error method. Use the factors 9 = 3 ⋅ 3 and 25 = ( − 5 ) ⋅ ( − 5 ) . These combine to generate the correct coefficient for the middle term: 3 ( − 5 ) + 3 ( − 5 ) = − 15 − 15 = − 30 . Check. Answer: 2 x y ( 3 x − 5 ) 2   Example 3: Factor: 5 a 3 b 4 + 10 a 2 b 3 − 75 a b 2 . Solution: This trinomial has a GCF of 5 a b 2 . Factor this out first. The resulting trinomial factor can be factored as follows: Answer: 5 a b 2 ( a b + 5 ) ( a b − 3 )   Try this! Factor: 3 x 3 y − 12 x 2 y 2 + 12 x y 3 . Answer: 3 x y ( x − 2 y ) 2 Video Solution   Example 4: Factor: 16 y 4 − 1 . Solution: This binomial does not have a GCF. Therefore, begin factoring by identifying it as a difference of squares. Here a = 4 y 2 and b = 1. Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. The factor ( 4 y 2 + 1 ) is a sum of squares and is prime. However, ( 4 y 2 − 1 ) is a difference of squares and can be factored further. Answer: ( 4 y 2 + 1 ) ( 2 y + 1 ) ( 2 y − 1 )   Example 5: Factor: x 6 − 64 y 6 . Solution: This binomial is a difference of squares and a difference of cubes. When this is the case, first factor it as a difference of squares. We can write Each factor can be further factored either as a sum or difference of cubes, respectively. Therefore, Answer: ( x + 2 y ) ( x 2 − 2 x y + 4 y 2 ) ( x − 2 y ) ( x 2 + 2 x y + 4 y 2 )   Example 6: Factor: x 2 − ( 2 x − 1 ) 2 . Solution: First, identify this expression as a difference of squares. Here use a = x and b = 2 x − 1 in the formula for a difference of squares. Answer: ( 3 x − 1 ) ( − x + 1 )   Try this! Factor: x 4 + 2 x 3 + 27 x + 54 . Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x + 3 ) ( x 2 − 3 x + 9 ) Video Solution  ||  || Solving Quadratic Equations by Factoring Learning how to solve equations is one of our main goals in algebra. Up to this point, we have solved linear equations, which are of degree 1. In this section, we will learn a technique that can be used to solve certain equations of degree 2. A quadratic equation A polynomial equation with one variable of degree 2. is any equation that can be written in the standard form A quadratic equation written in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0. where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . The following are some examples of quadratic equations, all of which will be solved in this section: A solution of a quadratic equation in standard form is called a root A solution to a quadratic equation in standard form. . Quadratic equations can have two real solutions, one real solution, or no real solution. The quadratic equation x 2 + x − 6 = 0 has two solutions, namely, x = − 3 and x = 2 .   Example 1: Verify that x = − 3 and x = 2 are solutions to x 2 + x − 6 = 0 . Solution: To verify solutions, substitute the values for x and then simplify to see if a true statement results. Answer: Both values produce true statements. Therefore, they are both solutions to the equation.   Our goal is to develop algebraic techniques for finding solutions to quadratic equations. The first technique requires the zero-product property Any product is equal to zero if and only if at least one of the factors is zero. : In other words, if any product is equal to zero, then one or both of the variable factors must be equal to zero.   Example 2: Solve: ( x − 8 ) ( x + 7 ) = 0 . Solution: This equation consists of a product of two quantities equal to zero; therefore, the zero-product property applies. One or both of the quantities must be zero. To verify that these are solutions, substitute them for the variable x. Notice that each solution produces a factor that is equal to zero. Answer: The solutions are 8 and −7.   The quadratic equation may not be given in its factored form.   Example 3: Solve: x 2 + 3 x − 10 = 0 . Solution: The goal is to produce a product that is equal to zero. We can do that by factoring the trinomial on the left side of the equation. Next, apply the zero-product property and set each factor equal to zero. This leaves us with two linear equations, each of which can be solved for x . Check the solutions by substituting into the original equation to verify that we obtain true statements. Answer: The solutions are −5 and 2.   Using the zero-product property after factoring a quadratic equation in standard form is the key to this technique. However, the quadratic equation may not be given in standard form, and so there may be some preliminary steps before factoring. The steps required to solve by factoring The process of solving an equation that is equal to zero by factoring it and then setting each variable factor equal to zero. are outlined in the following example.   Example 4: Solve: 2 x 2 + 10 x + 20 = − 3 x + 5 . Solution: Step 1: Express the quadratic equation in standard form. For the zero-product property to apply, the quadratic expression must be equal to zero. Use the addition and subtraction properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms and obtain zero on one side of the equation. In this example, add 3 x to and subtract 5 from both sides. Step 2: Factor the quadratic expression. Step 3: Apply the zero-product property and set each variable factor equal to zero. Step 4: Solve the resulting linear equations. Answer: The solutions are −5 and −3/2. The check is optional.   Example 5: Solve: 9 x 2 + 1 = 6 x . Solution: Write this in standard form by subtracting 6 x from both sides. Once the equation is in standard form, equal to zero, factor. This is a perfect square trinomial. Hence setting each factor equal to zero results in a repeated solution. A repeated solution is called a double root A root that is repeated twice. and does not have to be written twice. Answer: The solution is 1/3.   Try this! Solve: x 2 − 3 x = 28 . Answer: x = − 4 or x = 7 Video Solution Not all quadratic equations in standard form are trinomials. We often encounter binomials.   Example 6: Solve: x 2 − 9 = 0 . Solution: This quadratic equation is given in standard form, where the binomial on the left side is a difference of squares. Factor as follows: Next, set each factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are 3 and −3, which can also be written as ± 3 .   Example 7: Solve: 5 x 2 = 15 x . Solution: By inspection, we see that x = 0 is a solution to this quadratic equation. Since dividing by zero is undefined, we want to avoid dividing both sides of this equation by x. In general, we wish to avoid dividing both sides of any equation by a variable or an expression containing a variable. We will discuss this in more detail later. The first step is to rewrite this equation in standard form with zero on one side. Next, factor the expression. Notice that the binomial on the left has a GCF of 5 x . Set each factor to equal to zero. Answer: The solutions are 0 and 3.   Example 8: Solve: ( 2 x + 1 ) ( x + 5 ) = 11 . Solution: This quadratic equation appears to be factored; hence it might be tempting to set each factor equal to 11. However, this would lead to incorrect results. We must rewrite the equation in standard form, equal to zero, so that we can apply the zero-product property. Once it is in standard form, we can factor and then set each factor equal to zero. Answer: The solutions are 1/2 and −6.   Example 9: Solve: 15 x 2 − 25 x + 10 = 0 . Solution: We begin by factoring out the GCF of 5. Then factor the resulting trinomial. Next, we set each variable factor equal to zero and solve for x. Notice that the factor 5 is not a variable factor and thus did not contribute to the solution set. Answer: The solutions are 2/3 and 1.   Example 10: Factor: 5 2 x 2 + 7 6 x − 1 3 = 0 . Solution: Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD, which is equal to 6. At this point, we have an equivalent equation with integer coefficients and can factor as usual. Begin with the factors of 15 and 2. The coefficient of the middle term is 7 = 3 ( − 1 ) + 5 ( 2 ) . Factor as follows: Set each factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are −2/3 and 1/5.   Try this! Solve: 4 x 2 − 9 = 0 . Answer: −3/2 and 3/2 Video Solution  || Finding Equations with Given Solutions The zero-product property states, And, in fact, the converse is true as well: When this is the case, we can write the following: We use this property to find equations, given the solutions. To do this, the steps for solving by factoring are performed in reverse.   Example 11: Find a quadratic equation with solutions −7 and 2. Solution: Given the solutions, we can determine two linear factors. The product of these linear factors is equal to zero when x = − 7 or x = 2 : Multiply the binomials and present the equation in standard form. Answer: x 2 + 5 x − 14 = 0 . We may check our equation by substituting the given answers to see if we obtain a true statement. Also, the equation found above is not unique and so the check becomes essential when our equation looks different from someone else’s. This is left as an exercise.   Example 12: Find a quadratic equation with integer coefficients, given solutions 1/2 and −3/4. Solution: To avoid fractional coefficients, we first clear the fractions by multiplying both sides by the denominator. Apply the zero-product property and multiply. Answer: 8 x 2 + 2 x − 3 = 0   Try this! Find a quadratic equation with integer coefficients, given solutions −1 and 2/3. Answer: 3 x 2 + x − 2 = 0 Video Solution  || Solving Polynomial Equations by Factoring The zero-product property is true for any number of factors that make up an equation. If an expression is equal to zero and can be factored into linear factors, then we will be able to set each factor equal to zero and solve for each equation.   Example 13: Solve: 3 x ( x − 5 ) ( 3 x − 2 ) = 0 . Solution: Set each variable factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are 0, 5, and 2/3.   Of course, we cannot expect the equation to be given in factored form.   Example 14: Solve: x 3 + 2 x 2 − 9 x − 18 = 0 . Solution: Begin by factoring the left side completely. Set each factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are −2, −3, and 3.   Notice that the degree of the polynomial is 3 and we obtained three solutions. In general, for any polynomial equation with one variable of degree n, the fundamental theorem of algebra Guarantees that there will be as many (or fewer) real solutions to a polynomial with one variable as its degree. guarantees n real solutions or fewer. We have seen that many polynomials do not factor. This does not imply that equations involving these unfactorable polynomials do not have real solutions. In fact, many polynomial equations that do not factor do have real solutions. We will learn how to solve these types of equations as we continue in our study of algebra.   Try this! Solve: − 10 x 3 − 18 x 2 + 4 x = 0 . Answer: −2, 0, 1/5 Video Solution  ||  || Number Problems The algebraic setups of the word problems that we have previously encountered led to linear equations. When we translate the applications to algebraic setups in this section, the setups lead to quadratic equations. Just as before, we want to avoid relying on the “guess and check” method for solving applications. Using algebra to solve problems simplifies the process and is more reliable.   Example 1: One integer is 4 less than twice another integer, and their product is 96. Set up an algebraic equation and solve it to find the two integers. Solution: First, identify the variables. Avoid two variables by using the relationship between the two unknowns. The key phrase, “their product is 96,” indicates that we should multiply and set the product equal to 96. Once we have the problem translated to a mathematical equation, we then solve. In this case, we can solve by factoring. The first step is to write the equation in standard form: Next, factor completely and set each variable factor equal to zero. The problem calls for two integers whose product is +96. The product of two positive numbers is positive and the product of two negative numbers is positive. Hence we can have two sets of solutions. Use 2 n − 4 to determine the other integers. Answer: Two sets of integers solve this problem: {8, 12} and {−6, −16}. Notice that (8)(12) = 96 and (−6)(−16) = 96; our solutions check out.   With quadratic equations, we often obtain two solutions for the identified unknown. Although it may be the case that both are solutions to the equation, they may not be solutions to the problem. If a solution does not solve the original application, then we disregard it. Recall that consecutive odd and even integers both are separated by two units.   Example 2: The product of two consecutive positive odd integers is 99. Find the integers. Solution: The key phase, “product…is 99,” indicates that we should multiply and set the product equal to 99. Rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form and solve by factoring. Because the problem asks for positive integers, n = 9 is the only solution. Back substitute to determine the next odd integer. Answer: The consecutive positive odd integers are 9 and 11.   Example 3: Given two consecutive positive odd integers, the product of the larger and twice the smaller is equal to 70. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase “twice the smaller” can be translated to 2 n . The phrase “product…is 70” indicates that we should multiply this by the larger odd integer and set the product equal to 70. Solve by factoring. Because the problem asks for positive integers, n = 5 is the only solution. Back substitute into n + 2 to determine the next odd integer. Answer: The positive odd integers are 5 and 7.   Try this! The product of two consecutive positive even integers is 168. Find the integers. Answer: The positive even integers are 12 and 14. Video Solution  || Geometry Problems When working with geometry problems, it is helpful to draw a picture. Below are some area formulas that you are expected to know. (Recall that π ≈ 3.14 .) Area of a rectangle A = l w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. : A = l ⋅ w Area of a square A = s 2 , where s represents the length of each side. : A = s 2 Area of a triangle A = 1 2 b h , where b represents the length of the base and h represents the height. : A = 1 2 b h Area of a circle A = π r 2 , where r represents the radius and the constant π ≈ 3.14 . : A = π r 2   Example 4: The floor of a rectangular room has a length that is 4 feet more than twice its width. If the total area of the floor is 240 square feet, then find the dimensions of the floor. Solution: Use the formula A = l ⋅ w and the fact that the area is 240 square feet to set up an algebraic equation. Solve by factoring. At this point we have two possibilities for the width of the rectangle. However, since a negative width is not defined, choose the positive solution, w = 10 . Back substitute to find the length. Answer: The width is 10 feet and the length is 24 feet.   It is important to include the correct units in the final presentation of the answer. In the previous example, it would not make much sense to say the width is 10. Make sure to indicate that the width is 10 feet.   Example 5: The height of a triangle is 3 inches less than twice the length of its base. If the total area of the triangle is 7 square inches, then find the lengths of the base and height. Solution: Use the formula A = 1 2 b h and the fact that the area is 7 square inches to set up an algebraic equation. To avoid fractional coefficients, multiply both sides by 2 and then rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form. Factor and then set each factor equal to zero. In this case, disregard the negative answer; the length of the base is 7/2 inches long. Use 2 b − 3 to determine the height of the triangle. Answer: The base measures 7/2 = 3½ inches and the height is 4 inches.   Try this! The base of a triangle is 5 units less than twice the height. If the area is 75 square units, then what is the length of the base and height? Answer: The height is 10 units and the base is 15 units. Video Solution Recall that a right triangle is a triangle where one of the angles measures 90°. The side opposite of the right angle is the longest side of the triangle and is called the hypotenuse. The Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . gives us a relationship between the legs and hypotenuse of any right triangle, where a and b are the lengths of the legs and c is the length of the hypotenuse: Given certain relationships, we use this theorem when determining the lengths of sides of right triangles.   Example 6: The hypotenuse of a right triangle is 10 inches. If the short leg is 2 inches less than the long leg, then find the lengths of the legs. Solution: Given that the hypotenuse measures 10 inches, substitute its value into the Pythagorean theorem and obtain a quadratic equation in terms of x. Multiply and rewrite the equation in standard form. Once it is in standard form, factor and set each variable factor equal to zero. Because lengths cannot be negative, disregard the negative answer. In this case, the long leg measures 8 inches. Use x − 2 to determine the length of the short leg. Answer: The short leg measures 6 inches and the long leg measures 8 inches.   Example 7: One leg of a right triangle measures 3 centimeters. The hypotenuse of the right triangle measures 3 centimeters less than twice the length of the unknown leg. Find the measure of all the sides of the triangle. Solution: To set up an algebraic equation, we use the Pythagorean theorem. Solve by factoring. Disregard 0. The length of the unknown leg is 4 centimeters. Use 2 x − 3 to determine the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: The sides of the triangle measure 3 centimeters, 4 centimeters, and 5 centimeters.   Try this! The hypotenuse of a right triangle measures 13 units. If one leg is 2 units more than twice that of the other, then find the length of each leg. Answer: The two legs measure 5 units and 12 units. Video Solution  || Projectile Problems The height of an object launched upward, ignoring the effects of air resistance, can be modeled with the following formula: Using function notation, which is more appropriate, we have With this formula, the height can be calculated at any given time t after the object is launched. The coefficients represent the following: − 1 2 g The letter g represents the acceleration due to gravity. v 0 “v-naught” represents the initial velocity of the object. s 0 “s-naught” represents the initial height from which the object is launched. We consider only problems where the acceleration due to gravity can be expressed as g = 32  ft / sec 2 . Therefore, in this section time will be measured in seconds and the height in feet. Certainly though, the formula is valid using units other than these.   Example 8: The height of a projectile launched upward at a speed of 32 feet/second from a height of 128 feet is given by the function h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 32 t + 128 . How long does it take to hit the ground? Solution: An inefficient method for finding the time to hit the ground is to simply start guessing at times and evaluating. To do this, construct a chart. Use the table to sketch the height of the projectile over time. We see that at 4 seconds, the projectile hits the ground. Note that when this occurs, the height is equal to 0. Now we need to solve this problem algebraically. To find the solution algebraically, use the fact that the height is 0 when the object hits the ground. We need to find the time, t, when h ( t ) = 0 . Solve the equation by factoring. Now set each variable factor to zero. As expected, the projectile hits the ground at t = 4 seconds. Disregard −2 as a solution because negative time is not defined. Answer: The projectile hits the ground 4 seconds after it is launched.   Example 9: The height of a certain book dropped from the top of a 144-foot building is given by h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 144 . How long does it take to hit the ground? Solution: Find the time t when the height h ( t ) = 0 . Answer: The book takes 3 seconds to hit the ground when dropped from the top of a 144-foot building.   Try this! The height of a projectile, shot straight up into the air from the ground, is given by h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 80 t . How long does it take to come back down to the ground? Answer: It will take 5 seconds to come back down to the ground. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_1	 || GCF of Natural Numbers The process of writing a number or expression as a product is called factoring The process of writing a number or expression as a product. . If we write 60 = 5 ⋅ 12, we say that the product 5 ⋅ 12 is a factorization Any combination of factors, multiplied together, resulting in the product. of 60 and that 5 and 12 are factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. . Typically, there are many ways to factor a number. For example, Recall that a prime number is defined as a natural number with exactly two natural number factors, 1 and itself. The first ten prime numbers follow: Any natural number greater than 1 can be uniquely written as a product of prime numbers. This product is called the prime factorization The unique factorization of a natural number written as a product of primes. . The prime factorization of 60 can be determined by continuing to factor until only a product of prime numbers remains. Since the prime factorization is unique, it does not matter how we choose to initially factor the number; the end result will be the same. The prime factorization of 60 follows: Recall that the greatest common factor (GCF) The product of all the common prime factors. of any two natural numbers is the product of all the common prime factors.   Example 1: Find the GCF of 60 and 140. Solution: First, determine the prime factorizations of both integers. The product of the common prime factors is 2 2 ⋅ 5 ; hence the GCF ( 60 ,   140 ) = 2 2 ⋅ 5 = 20 . To see that it is the greatest common factor, we can write the following: Answer: The greatest common factor of 60 and 140 is 20.   Example 2: Find the GCF of 504 and 1,080. Solution: First, determine the prime factorizations of both integers. The product of the common prime factors is 2 3 ⋅ 3 2 . The GCF ( 504 ,   1080 ) = 2 3 ⋅ 3 2 = 72 . Note that we multiplied the common prime factors with the smallest exponent. The numbers 7 and 15 share no common natural number factor other than 1; we say that they are relatively prime Expressions that share no common factors other than 1. . Answer: The greatest common factor of 504 and 1,080 is 72.  || GCF of Monomials We next consider factorizations of monomials. For example, 6 x and x 4 are factors of 6 x 5 because 6 x 5 = 6 x ⋅ x 4 . Typically, there are many ways to factor a monomial. Some factorizations of 6 x 5 follow: Given two or more monomials, it will be useful to find the greatest common monomial factor of each. For example, consider 6 x 5 y 3 z and 8 x 2 y 3 z 2 . The variable part of these two monomials look very much like the prime factorization of natural numbers and, in fact, can be treated the same way. Steps for finding the GCF of monomials The product of the GCF of the coefficients and all common variable factors. are outlined in the following example.   Example 3: Find the GCF of 6 x 5 y 3 z and 8 x 2 y 3 z 2 . Solution: Step 1: Find the GCF of the coefficients. In this case, the G C F ( 6 ,   8 ) = 2 . Step 2: Determine the common variable factors with smallest exponents. In this case, the common variables with the smallest exponents are x 2 , y 3 , and z 1 . Step 3: The GCF of the monomials is the product of the common variable factors and the GCF of the coefficients. Therefore, Answer: 2 x 2 y 3 z   It is worth pointing out that the GCF in the previous example divides both expressions evenly: Furthermore, we can write the following: The factors 3 x 3 and 4 z share no common monomial factors other than 1; they are relatively prime.   Example 4: Determine the GCF of the following expressions: 30 x 6 y and 18 x 4 y 2 z . Solution: The prime factorizations of the coefficients are Thus the GCF(30, 18) = 2 ⋅ 3 = 6. Next, consider the variable part: The variable factors in common are x 4 and y. The factor z is not in common and we have Answer: 6 x 4 y   Example 5: Determine the GCF of the following three expressions: 12 a 5 b 2 ( a + b ) 5 , 60 a 4 b 3 c ( a + b ) 3 , and 24 a 2 b 7 c 3 ( a + b ) 2 . Solution: First, determine the GCF of the coefficients. The GCF ( 12, 60, 24 ) = 2 2 ⋅ 3 = 12 . Next, determine the common factors of the variable part: The variable factors in common are a 2 , b 2 , and ( a + b ) 2 . Therefore, Answer: 12 a 2 b 2 ( a + b ) 2 . Note that the variable c is not common to all three expressions and thus is not included in the GCF.   Try this! Determine the GCF of the following: 60 x 4 y 3 ( x + 2 y ) 7 , 45 x 2 y 5 ( x + 2 y ) 4 , and 30 x 7 y 7 ( x + 2 y ) 3 . Answer: 15 x 2 y 3 ( x + 2 y ) 3 Video Solution  || Factoring out the GCF We have seen that application of the distributive property is the key to multiplying polynomials. The process of factoring a polynomial The process of rewriting a polynomial as a product of polynomial factors. involves using the distributive property in reverse to write each polynomial as a product of polynomial factors. To demonstrate this idea, we multiply and factor side by side. Factoring utilizes the GCF of the terms. In the previous example, we see that the distributive property allows us to write the polynomial 6 x 5 + 8 x 2 as a product of the two factors 2 x 2 and ( 3 x 3 + 4 ) . Note that in this case, 2 x 2 is the GCF of the terms of the polynomial: Factoring out the GCF The process of rewriting a polynomial as a product using the GCF of all of its terms. involves rewriting a polynomial as a product where a factor is the GCF of all of its terms: The steps for factoring out the GCF of a polynomial The greatest common factor of all the terms of the polynomial. are outlined in the following example.   Example 6: Factor out the GCF: 7 x 4 + 21 x 3 − 14 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Identify the GCF of all the terms. In this case, the GCF(7, 21, 14) = 7, and the common variable factor with the smallest exponent is x 2 . The GCF of the polynomial is 7 x 2 . Step 2: Determine the terms of the missing factor by dividing each term of the original expression by the GCF. (This step is usually performed mentally.) Step 3: Apply the distributive property (in reverse) using the terms found in the previous step. Step 4: As a check, multiply using the distributive property to verify that the product equals the original expression. (This step is optional and can be performed mentally.) Answer: 7 x 2 ( x 2 + 3 x − 2 )   Example 7: Factor out the GCF: 48 a − 16 b + 4 c . Solution: There are no variable factors in common and the GCF(48, 16, 4) = 4. Answer: 4 ( 12 a − 4 b + c )   Example 8: Factor out the GCF: 25 x 3 + 15 x 2 + 5 x . Solution: The GCF(25, 15, 5) = 5, and the common variable factor with smallest exponents is x 1 . The GCF of all the terms is 5 x . Answer: 5 x ( 5 x 2 + 3 x + 1 )   If the GCF is the same as one of the terms, then, after the GCF is factored out, a constant term 1 will remain. In the previous example, we can see that 5 x 5 x = 1 . The importance of remembering the constant term becomes clear when performing the check using the distributive property: The constant term 1 allows us to obtain the same original expression after we distribute.   Example 9: Factor out the GCF: 15 x 6 y 4 + 10 x 5 y 3 z 2 − 20 x y 6 z 3 . Solution: The G C F ( 10 ,   15 ,   20 ) = 5 , and the common variables with smallest exponent are x 1 and y 3 . Therefore, the GCF of the terms is 5 x y 3 . The first term does not have a variable factor of z and thus cannot be a part of the greatest common factor. If we divide each term by 5 x y 3 , we obtain and can write Answer: 5 x y 3 ( 3 x 5 y + 2 x 4 z 2 − 4 y 3 z 3 )   Example 10: Factor out the GCF: 24 a 6 b 2 c 5 + 8 a 7 b 5 c . Solution: The GCF(24, 8) = 8, and the variable factors with smallest exponents are a 6 , b 2 , and c . Therefore, the GCF of all the terms is 8 a 6 b 2 c . Answer: 8 a 6 b 2 c ( 3 c 4 + a b 3 )   Of course, not all polynomials with integer coefficients can be factored as a product of polynomials with integer coefficients other than 1 and itself. If this is the case, then we say that it is a prime polynomial A polynomial with integer coefficients that cannot be factored as a product of polynomials with integer coefficients other than 1 and itself. .   Example 11: Factor: 3 x − 5 . Solution: Prime: there are no polynomial factors other than 1 and itself. Answer: Prime   Try this! Factor out the GCF: 16 x 4 y 3 − 8 x 2 y 5 − 4 x 2 y . Answer: 4 x 2 y ( 4 x 2 y 2 − 2 y 4 − 1 ) Video Solution  || Factor by Grouping In this section, we outline a technique for factoring polynomials with four terms. First, review some preliminary examples where the terms have a common binomial factor.   Example 12: Factor: 5 x ( x − 3 ) + 2 ( x − 3 ) . Solution: This expression is a binomial with terms 5 x ( x − 3 ) and 2 ( x − 3 ) . In this case, ( x − 3 ) is a common factor. Begin by factoring this common factor out: To determine the terms of the remaining factor, divide each term by ( x − 3 ) : This step is typically performed mentally. We have Answer: ( x − 3 ) ( 5 x + 2 )   Recall that 1 is always a common factor. If the GCF is the same as a term, then the factor 1 remains after we factor out that GCF.   Example 13: Factor: 3 x ( 4 x + 1 ) − ( 4 x + 1 ) . Solution: Rewrite the second term − ( 4 x + 1 ) as − 1 ( 4 x + 1 ) and then factor out the common binomial factor ( 4 x + 1 ) . Answer: ( 4 x + 1 ) ( 3 x − 1 )   Remember that the goal for this section is to develop a technique that enables us to factor polynomials with four terms into a product of binomials. The intermediate step of this process looks like the previous two examples. For example, we wish to factor Begin by grouping the first two terms and the last two terms. Then factor out the GCF of each grouping: In this form, it is a binomial with a common binomial factor, ( x − 3 ) . The steps that follow outline a technique for factoring four-term polynomials called factor by grouping A technique for factoring polynomials with four terms. .   Example 14: Factor: 2 x 3 + 4 x 2 + 3 x + 6 . Solution: Group terms in such a way as to obtain a binomial with common factors. Step 1: Group the first two and last two terms and then factor out the GCF of each. The GCF of the first two terms is 2 x 2 , and the GCF of the second two terms is 3. Step 2: At this point, the polynomial is a binomial. Factor out any factors common to both terms. Here ( x + 2 ) is a common factor. Step 3: Optional check: multiply to verify that we obtain the original expression. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( 2 x 2 + 3 )   Example 15: Factor: 2 a 3 − 3 a 2 + 2 a − 3 . Solution: The GCF of the first two terms is a 2 and the GCF of the second two terms is 1. Answer: ( 2 a − 3 ) ( a 2 + 1 ) . The check is left to the reader.   Example 16: Factor: 6 x 4 − 24 x 3 − 5 x + 20 . Solution: The GCF for the first group is 6 x 3 . We have to choose 5 or −5 to factor out of the second group. Factoring out a +5 does not result in a common binomial factor. If we choose to factor out −5, then we obtain a common binomial factor and can proceed. Note that when factoring out a negative number, we change the signs of the factored terms. Answer: ( x − 4 ) ( 6 x 3 − 5 ) . The check is left to the reader. Tip The sign of the leading coefficient in the second grouping usually indicates whether or not to factor out a negative factor. If that coefficient is positive, factor out a positive factor. If it is negative, factor out a negative factor. When all the terms of a polynomial have a GCF other than 1, it is a best practice to factor that out before factoring by grouping.   Example 17: Factor: 3 y 4 + 9 y 2 − 6 y 3 − 18 y . Solution: Here we notice that the greatest common factor of all the terms is 3 y . Begin by factoring out the GCF and then factor the result by grouping. Answer: 3 y ( y 2 + 3 ) ( y − 2 )   Sometimes we must first rearrange the terms in order to obtain a common factor.   Example 18: Factor: a b − 2 a 2 b + a 3 − 2 b 3 . Solution: Simply factoring the GCF out of the first group and last group does not yield a common binomial factor. We must rearrange the terms, searching for a grouping that produces a common factor. In this example, we have a workable grouping if we switch the terms a 3 and a b . Answer: ( a − 2 b ) ( a 2 + b )   Not all factorable four-term polynomials can be factored with this technique. For example, This four-term polynomial cannot be grouped in any way as to produce a common binomial factor. Despite this, the polynomial is not prime and can be written as a product of polynomials. It can be factored as follows: Factoring such polynomials is something that we will learn to do as we move further along in our study of algebra. For now, we will limit our attempt to factor four-term polynomials to using the factor by grouping technique.   Try this! Factor: x 3 − x 2 y − x y + y 2 . Answer: ( x − y ) ( x 2 − y ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_1_1	GCF of Natural Numbers The process of writing a number or expression as a product is called factoring The process of writing a number or expression as a product. . If we write 60 = 5 ⋅ 12, we say that the product 5 ⋅ 12 is a factorization Any combination of factors, multiplied together, resulting in the product. of 60 and that 5 and 12 are factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. . Typically, there are many ways to factor a number. For example, Recall that a prime number is defined as a natural number with exactly two natural number factors, 1 and itself. The first ten prime numbers follow: Any natural number greater than 1 can be uniquely written as a product of prime numbers. This product is called the prime factorization The unique factorization of a natural number written as a product of primes. . The prime factorization of 60 can be determined by continuing to factor until only a product of prime numbers remains. Since the prime factorization is unique, it does not matter how we choose to initially factor the number; the end result will be the same. The prime factorization of 60 follows: Recall that the greatest common factor (GCF) The product of all the common prime factors. of any two natural numbers is the product of all the common prime factors.   Example 1: Find the GCF of 60 and 140. Solution: First, determine the prime factorizations of both integers. The product of the common prime factors is 2 2 ⋅ 5 ; hence the GCF ( 60 ,   140 ) = 2 2 ⋅ 5 = 20 . To see that it is the greatest common factor, we can write the following: Answer: The greatest common factor of 60 and 140 is 20.   Example 2: Find the GCF of 504 and 1,080. Solution: First, determine the prime factorizations of both integers. The product of the common prime factors is 2 3 ⋅ 3 2 . The GCF ( 504 ,   1080 ) = 2 3 ⋅ 3 2 = 72 . Note that we multiplied the common prime factors with the smallest exponent. The numbers 7 and 15 share no common natural number factor other than 1; we say that they are relatively prime Expressions that share no common factors other than 1. . Answer: The greatest common factor of 504 and 1,080 is 72. GCF of Natural Numbers The process of writing a number or expression as a product is called factoring The process of writing a number or expression as a product. . If we write 60 = 5 ⋅ 12, we say that the product 5 ⋅ 12 is a factorization Any combination of factors, multiplied together, resulting in the product. of 60 and that 5 and 12 are factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. . Typically, there are many ways to factor a number. For example, Recall that a prime number is defined as a natural number with exactly two natural number factors, 1 and itself. The first ten prime numbers follow: Any natural number greater than 1 can be uniquely written as a product of prime numbers. This product is called the prime factorization The unique factorization of a natural number written as a product of primes. . The prime factorization of 60 can be determined by continuing to factor until only a product of prime numbers remains. Since the prime factorization is unique, it does not matter how we choose to initially factor the number; the end result will be the same. The prime factorization of 60 follows: Recall that the greatest common factor (GCF) The product of all the common prime factors. of any two natural numbers is the product of all the common prime factors.   Example 1: Find the GCF of 60 and 140. Solution: First, determine the prime factorizations of both integers. The product of the common prime factors is 2 2 ⋅ 5 ; hence the GCF ( 60 ,   140 ) = 2 2 ⋅ 5 = 20 . To see that it is the greatest common factor, we can write the following: Answer: The greatest common factor of 60 and 140 is 20.   Example 2: Find the GCF of 504 and 1,080. Solution: First, determine the prime factorizations of both integers. The product of the common prime factors is 2 3 ⋅ 3 2 . The GCF ( 504 ,   1080 ) = 2 3 ⋅ 3 2 = 72 . Note that we multiplied the common prime factors with the smallest exponent. The numbers 7 and 15 share no common natural number factor other than 1; we say that they are relatively prime Expressions that share no common factors other than 1. . Answer: The greatest common factor of 504 and 1,080 is 72.  || 
book2_chapter6_1_2	GCF of Monomials We next consider factorizations of monomials. For example, 6 x and x 4 are factors of 6 x 5 because 6 x 5 = 6 x ⋅ x 4 . Typically, there are many ways to factor a monomial. Some factorizations of 6 x 5 follow: Given two or more monomials, it will be useful to find the greatest common monomial factor of each. For example, consider 6 x 5 y 3 z and 8 x 2 y 3 z 2 . The variable part of these two monomials look very much like the prime factorization of natural numbers and, in fact, can be treated the same way. Steps for finding the GCF of monomials The product of the GCF of the coefficients and all common variable factors. are outlined in the following example.   Example 3: Find the GCF of 6 x 5 y 3 z and 8 x 2 y 3 z 2 . Solution: Step 1: Find the GCF of the coefficients. In this case, the G C F ( 6 ,   8 ) = 2 . Step 2: Determine the common variable factors with smallest exponents. In this case, the common variables with the smallest exponents are x 2 , y 3 , and z 1 . Step 3: The GCF of the monomials is the product of the common variable factors and the GCF of the coefficients. Therefore, Answer: 2 x 2 y 3 z   It is worth pointing out that the GCF in the previous example divides both expressions evenly: Furthermore, we can write the following: The factors 3 x 3 and 4 z share no common monomial factors other than 1; they are relatively prime.   Example 4: Determine the GCF of the following expressions: 30 x 6 y and 18 x 4 y 2 z . Solution: The prime factorizations of the coefficients are Thus the GCF(30, 18) = 2 ⋅ 3 = 6. Next, consider the variable part: The variable factors in common are x 4 and y. The factor z is not in common and we have Answer: 6 x 4 y   Example 5: Determine the GCF of the following three expressions: 12 a 5 b 2 ( a + b ) 5 , 60 a 4 b 3 c ( a + b ) 3 , and 24 a 2 b 7 c 3 ( a + b ) 2 . Solution: First, determine the GCF of the coefficients. The GCF ( 12, 60, 24 ) = 2 2 ⋅ 3 = 12 . Next, determine the common factors of the variable part: The variable factors in common are a 2 , b 2 , and ( a + b ) 2 . Therefore, Answer: 12 a 2 b 2 ( a + b ) 2 . Note that the variable c is not common to all three expressions and thus is not included in the GCF.   Try this! Determine the GCF of the following: 60 x 4 y 3 ( x + 2 y ) 7 , 45 x 2 y 5 ( x + 2 y ) 4 , and 30 x 7 y 7 ( x + 2 y ) 3 . Answer: 15 x 2 y 3 ( x + 2 y ) 3 Video Solution GCF of Monomials We next consider factorizations of monomials. For example, 6 x and x 4 are factors of 6 x 5 because 6 x 5 = 6 x ⋅ x 4 . Typically, there are many ways to factor a monomial. Some factorizations of 6 x 5 follow: Given two or more monomials, it will be useful to find the greatest common monomial factor of each. For example, consider 6 x 5 y 3 z and 8 x 2 y 3 z 2 . The variable part of these two monomials look very much like the prime factorization of natural numbers and, in fact, can be treated the same way. Steps for finding the GCF of monomials The product of the GCF of the coefficients and all common variable factors. are outlined in the following example.   Example 3: Find the GCF of 6 x 5 y 3 z and 8 x 2 y 3 z 2 . Solution: Step 1: Find the GCF of the coefficients. In this case, the G C F ( 6 ,   8 ) = 2 . Step 2: Determine the common variable factors with smallest exponents. In this case, the common variables with the smallest exponents are x 2 , y 3 , and z 1 . Step 3: The GCF of the monomials is the product of the common variable factors and the GCF of the coefficients. Therefore, Answer: 2 x 2 y 3 z   It is worth pointing out that the GCF in the previous example divides both expressions evenly: Furthermore, we can write the following: The factors 3 x 3 and 4 z share no common monomial factors other than 1; they are relatively prime.   Example 4: Determine the GCF of the following expressions: 30 x 6 y and 18 x 4 y 2 z . Solution: The prime factorizations of the coefficients are Thus the GCF(30, 18) = 2 ⋅ 3 = 6. Next, consider the variable part: The variable factors in common are x 4 and y. The factor z is not in common and we have Answer: 6 x 4 y   Example 5: Determine the GCF of the following three expressions: 12 a 5 b 2 ( a + b ) 5 , 60 a 4 b 3 c ( a + b ) 3 , and 24 a 2 b 7 c 3 ( a + b ) 2 . Solution: First, determine the GCF of the coefficients. The GCF ( 12, 60, 24 ) = 2 2 ⋅ 3 = 12 . Next, determine the common factors of the variable part: The variable factors in common are a 2 , b 2 , and ( a + b ) 2 . Therefore, Answer: 12 a 2 b 2 ( a + b ) 2 . Note that the variable c is not common to all three expressions and thus is not included in the GCF.   Try this! Determine the GCF of the following: 60 x 4 y 3 ( x + 2 y ) 7 , 45 x 2 y 5 ( x + 2 y ) 4 , and 30 x 7 y 7 ( x + 2 y ) 3 . Answer: 15 x 2 y 3 ( x + 2 y ) 3 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_1_3	Factoring out the GCF We have seen that application of the distributive property is the key to multiplying polynomials. The process of factoring a polynomial The process of rewriting a polynomial as a product of polynomial factors. involves using the distributive property in reverse to write each polynomial as a product of polynomial factors. To demonstrate this idea, we multiply and factor side by side. Factoring utilizes the GCF of the terms. In the previous example, we see that the distributive property allows us to write the polynomial 6 x 5 + 8 x 2 as a product of the two factors 2 x 2 and ( 3 x 3 + 4 ) . Note that in this case, 2 x 2 is the GCF of the terms of the polynomial: Factoring out the GCF The process of rewriting a polynomial as a product using the GCF of all of its terms. involves rewriting a polynomial as a product where a factor is the GCF of all of its terms: The steps for factoring out the GCF of a polynomial The greatest common factor of all the terms of the polynomial. are outlined in the following example.   Example 6: Factor out the GCF: 7 x 4 + 21 x 3 − 14 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Identify the GCF of all the terms. In this case, the GCF(7, 21, 14) = 7, and the common variable factor with the smallest exponent is x 2 . The GCF of the polynomial is 7 x 2 . Step 2: Determine the terms of the missing factor by dividing each term of the original expression by the GCF. (This step is usually performed mentally.) Step 3: Apply the distributive property (in reverse) using the terms found in the previous step. Step 4: As a check, multiply using the distributive property to verify that the product equals the original expression. (This step is optional and can be performed mentally.) Answer: 7 x 2 ( x 2 + 3 x − 2 )   Example 7: Factor out the GCF: 48 a − 16 b + 4 c . Solution: There are no variable factors in common and the GCF(48, 16, 4) = 4. Answer: 4 ( 12 a − 4 b + c )   Example 8: Factor out the GCF: 25 x 3 + 15 x 2 + 5 x . Solution: The GCF(25, 15, 5) = 5, and the common variable factor with smallest exponents is x 1 . The GCF of all the terms is 5 x . Answer: 5 x ( 5 x 2 + 3 x + 1 )   If the GCF is the same as one of the terms, then, after the GCF is factored out, a constant term 1 will remain. In the previous example, we can see that 5 x 5 x = 1 . The importance of remembering the constant term becomes clear when performing the check using the distributive property: The constant term 1 allows us to obtain the same original expression after we distribute.   Example 9: Factor out the GCF: 15 x 6 y 4 + 10 x 5 y 3 z 2 − 20 x y 6 z 3 . Solution: The G C F ( 10 ,   15 ,   20 ) = 5 , and the common variables with smallest exponent are x 1 and y 3 . Therefore, the GCF of the terms is 5 x y 3 . The first term does not have a variable factor of z and thus cannot be a part of the greatest common factor. If we divide each term by 5 x y 3 , we obtain and can write Answer: 5 x y 3 ( 3 x 5 y + 2 x 4 z 2 − 4 y 3 z 3 )   Example 10: Factor out the GCF: 24 a 6 b 2 c 5 + 8 a 7 b 5 c . Solution: The GCF(24, 8) = 8, and the variable factors with smallest exponents are a 6 , b 2 , and c . Therefore, the GCF of all the terms is 8 a 6 b 2 c . Answer: 8 a 6 b 2 c ( 3 c 4 + a b 3 )   Of course, not all polynomials with integer coefficients can be factored as a product of polynomials with integer coefficients other than 1 and itself. If this is the case, then we say that it is a prime polynomial A polynomial with integer coefficients that cannot be factored as a product of polynomials with integer coefficients other than 1 and itself. .   Example 11: Factor: 3 x − 5 . Solution: Prime: there are no polynomial factors other than 1 and itself. Answer: Prime   Try this! Factor out the GCF: 16 x 4 y 3 − 8 x 2 y 5 − 4 x 2 y . Answer: 4 x 2 y ( 4 x 2 y 2 − 2 y 4 − 1 ) Video Solution Factoring out the GCF We have seen that application of the distributive property is the key to multiplying polynomials. The process of factoring a polynomial The process of rewriting a polynomial as a product of polynomial factors. involves using the distributive property in reverse to write each polynomial as a product of polynomial factors. To demonstrate this idea, we multiply and factor side by side. Factoring utilizes the GCF of the terms. In the previous example, we see that the distributive property allows us to write the polynomial 6 x 5 + 8 x 2 as a product of the two factors 2 x 2 and ( 3 x 3 + 4 ) . Note that in this case, 2 x 2 is the GCF of the terms of the polynomial: Factoring out the GCF The process of rewriting a polynomial as a product using the GCF of all of its terms. involves rewriting a polynomial as a product where a factor is the GCF of all of its terms: The steps for factoring out the GCF of a polynomial The greatest common factor of all the terms of the polynomial. are outlined in the following example.   Example 6: Factor out the GCF: 7 x 4 + 21 x 3 − 14 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Identify the GCF of all the terms. In this case, the GCF(7, 21, 14) = 7, and the common variable factor with the smallest exponent is x 2 . The GCF of the polynomial is 7 x 2 . Step 2: Determine the terms of the missing factor by dividing each term of the original expression by the GCF. (This step is usually performed mentally.) Step 3: Apply the distributive property (in reverse) using the terms found in the previous step. Step 4: As a check, multiply using the distributive property to verify that the product equals the original expression. (This step is optional and can be performed mentally.) Answer: 7 x 2 ( x 2 + 3 x − 2 )   Example 7: Factor out the GCF: 48 a − 16 b + 4 c . Solution: There are no variable factors in common and the GCF(48, 16, 4) = 4. Answer: 4 ( 12 a − 4 b + c )   Example 8: Factor out the GCF: 25 x 3 + 15 x 2 + 5 x . Solution: The GCF(25, 15, 5) = 5, and the common variable factor with smallest exponents is x 1 . The GCF of all the terms is 5 x . Answer: 5 x ( 5 x 2 + 3 x + 1 )   If the GCF is the same as one of the terms, then, after the GCF is factored out, a constant term 1 will remain. In the previous example, we can see that 5 x 5 x = 1 . The importance of remembering the constant term becomes clear when performing the check using the distributive property: The constant term 1 allows us to obtain the same original expression after we distribute.   Example 9: Factor out the GCF: 15 x 6 y 4 + 10 x 5 y 3 z 2 − 20 x y 6 z 3 . Solution: The G C F ( 10 ,   15 ,   20 ) = 5 , and the common variables with smallest exponent are x 1 and y 3 . Therefore, the GCF of the terms is 5 x y 3 . The first term does not have a variable factor of z and thus cannot be a part of the greatest common factor. If we divide each term by 5 x y 3 , we obtain and can write Answer: 5 x y 3 ( 3 x 5 y + 2 x 4 z 2 − 4 y 3 z 3 )   Example 10: Factor out the GCF: 24 a 6 b 2 c 5 + 8 a 7 b 5 c . Solution: The GCF(24, 8) = 8, and the variable factors with smallest exponents are a 6 , b 2 , and c . Therefore, the GCF of all the terms is 8 a 6 b 2 c . Answer: 8 a 6 b 2 c ( 3 c 4 + a b 3 )   Of course, not all polynomials with integer coefficients can be factored as a product of polynomials with integer coefficients other than 1 and itself. If this is the case, then we say that it is a prime polynomial A polynomial with integer coefficients that cannot be factored as a product of polynomials with integer coefficients other than 1 and itself. .   Example 11: Factor: 3 x − 5 . Solution: Prime: there are no polynomial factors other than 1 and itself. Answer: Prime   Try this! Factor out the GCF: 16 x 4 y 3 − 8 x 2 y 5 − 4 x 2 y . Answer: 4 x 2 y ( 4 x 2 y 2 − 2 y 4 − 1 ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_1_4	Factor by Grouping In this section, we outline a technique for factoring polynomials with four terms. First, review some preliminary examples where the terms have a common binomial factor.   Example 12: Factor: 5 x ( x − 3 ) + 2 ( x − 3 ) . Solution: This expression is a binomial with terms 5 x ( x − 3 ) and 2 ( x − 3 ) . In this case, ( x − 3 ) is a common factor. Begin by factoring this common factor out: To determine the terms of the remaining factor, divide each term by ( x − 3 ) : This step is typically performed mentally. We have Answer: ( x − 3 ) ( 5 x + 2 )   Recall that 1 is always a common factor. If the GCF is the same as a term, then the factor 1 remains after we factor out that GCF.   Example 13: Factor: 3 x ( 4 x + 1 ) − ( 4 x + 1 ) . Solution: Rewrite the second term − ( 4 x + 1 ) as − 1 ( 4 x + 1 ) and then factor out the common binomial factor ( 4 x + 1 ) . Answer: ( 4 x + 1 ) ( 3 x − 1 )   Remember that the goal for this section is to develop a technique that enables us to factor polynomials with four terms into a product of binomials. The intermediate step of this process looks like the previous two examples. For example, we wish to factor Begin by grouping the first two terms and the last two terms. Then factor out the GCF of each grouping: In this form, it is a binomial with a common binomial factor, ( x − 3 ) . The steps that follow outline a technique for factoring four-term polynomials called factor by grouping A technique for factoring polynomials with four terms. .   Example 14: Factor: 2 x 3 + 4 x 2 + 3 x + 6 . Solution: Group terms in such a way as to obtain a binomial with common factors. Step 1: Group the first two and last two terms and then factor out the GCF of each. The GCF of the first two terms is 2 x 2 , and the GCF of the second two terms is 3. Step 2: At this point, the polynomial is a binomial. Factor out any factors common to both terms. Here ( x + 2 ) is a common factor. Step 3: Optional check: multiply to verify that we obtain the original expression. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( 2 x 2 + 3 )   Example 15: Factor: 2 a 3 − 3 a 2 + 2 a − 3 . Solution: The GCF of the first two terms is a 2 and the GCF of the second two terms is 1. Answer: ( 2 a − 3 ) ( a 2 + 1 ) . The check is left to the reader.   Example 16: Factor: 6 x 4 − 24 x 3 − 5 x + 20 . Solution: The GCF for the first group is 6 x 3 . We have to choose 5 or −5 to factor out of the second group. Factoring out a +5 does not result in a common binomial factor. If we choose to factor out −5, then we obtain a common binomial factor and can proceed. Note that when factoring out a negative number, we change the signs of the factored terms. Answer: ( x − 4 ) ( 6 x 3 − 5 ) . The check is left to the reader. Tip The sign of the leading coefficient in the second grouping usually indicates whether or not to factor out a negative factor. If that coefficient is positive, factor out a positive factor. If it is negative, factor out a negative factor. When all the terms of a polynomial have a GCF other than 1, it is a best practice to factor that out before factoring by grouping.   Example 17: Factor: 3 y 4 + 9 y 2 − 6 y 3 − 18 y . Solution: Here we notice that the greatest common factor of all the terms is 3 y . Begin by factoring out the GCF and then factor the result by grouping. Answer: 3 y ( y 2 + 3 ) ( y − 2 )   Sometimes we must first rearrange the terms in order to obtain a common factor.   Example 18: Factor: a b − 2 a 2 b + a 3 − 2 b 3 . Solution: Simply factoring the GCF out of the first group and last group does not yield a common binomial factor. We must rearrange the terms, searching for a grouping that produces a common factor. In this example, we have a workable grouping if we switch the terms a 3 and a b . Answer: ( a − 2 b ) ( a 2 + b )   Not all factorable four-term polynomials can be factored with this technique. For example, This four-term polynomial cannot be grouped in any way as to produce a common binomial factor. Despite this, the polynomial is not prime and can be written as a product of polynomials. It can be factored as follows: Factoring such polynomials is something that we will learn to do as we move further along in our study of algebra. For now, we will limit our attempt to factor four-term polynomials to using the factor by grouping technique.   Try this! Factor: x 3 − x 2 y − x y + y 2 . Answer: ( x − y ) ( x 2 − y ) Video Solution Factor by Grouping In this section, we outline a technique for factoring polynomials with four terms. First, review some preliminary examples where the terms have a common binomial factor.   Example 12: Factor: 5 x ( x − 3 ) + 2 ( x − 3 ) . Solution: This expression is a binomial with terms 5 x ( x − 3 ) and 2 ( x − 3 ) . In this case, ( x − 3 ) is a common factor. Begin by factoring this common factor out: To determine the terms of the remaining factor, divide each term by ( x − 3 ) : This step is typically performed mentally. We have Answer: ( x − 3 ) ( 5 x + 2 )   Recall that 1 is always a common factor. If the GCF is the same as a term, then the factor 1 remains after we factor out that GCF.   Example 13: Factor: 3 x ( 4 x + 1 ) − ( 4 x + 1 ) . Solution: Rewrite the second term − ( 4 x + 1 ) as − 1 ( 4 x + 1 ) and then factor out the common binomial factor ( 4 x + 1 ) . Answer: ( 4 x + 1 ) ( 3 x − 1 )   Remember that the goal for this section is to develop a technique that enables us to factor polynomials with four terms into a product of binomials. The intermediate step of this process looks like the previous two examples. For example, we wish to factor Begin by grouping the first two terms and the last two terms. Then factor out the GCF of each grouping: In this form, it is a binomial with a common binomial factor, ( x − 3 ) . The steps that follow outline a technique for factoring four-term polynomials called factor by grouping A technique for factoring polynomials with four terms. .   Example 14: Factor: 2 x 3 + 4 x 2 + 3 x + 6 . Solution: Group terms in such a way as to obtain a binomial with common factors. Step 1: Group the first two and last two terms and then factor out the GCF of each. The GCF of the first two terms is 2 x 2 , and the GCF of the second two terms is 3. Step 2: At this point, the polynomial is a binomial. Factor out any factors common to both terms. Here ( x + 2 ) is a common factor. Step 3: Optional check: multiply to verify that we obtain the original expression. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( 2 x 2 + 3 )   Example 15: Factor: 2 a 3 − 3 a 2 + 2 a − 3 . Solution: The GCF of the first two terms is a 2 and the GCF of the second two terms is 1. Answer: ( 2 a − 3 ) ( a 2 + 1 ) . The check is left to the reader.   Example 16: Factor: 6 x 4 − 24 x 3 − 5 x + 20 . Solution: The GCF for the first group is 6 x 3 . We have to choose 5 or −5 to factor out of the second group. Factoring out a +5 does not result in a common binomial factor. If we choose to factor out −5, then we obtain a common binomial factor and can proceed. Note that when factoring out a negative number, we change the signs of the factored terms. Answer: ( x − 4 ) ( 6 x 3 − 5 ) . The check is left to the reader. Tip The sign of the leading coefficient in the second grouping usually indicates whether or not to factor out a negative factor. If that coefficient is positive, factor out a positive factor. If it is negative, factor out a negative factor. When all the terms of a polynomial have a GCF other than 1, it is a best practice to factor that out before factoring by grouping.   Example 17: Factor: 3 y 4 + 9 y 2 − 6 y 3 − 18 y . Solution: Here we notice that the greatest common factor of all the terms is 3 y . Begin by factoring out the GCF and then factor the result by grouping. Answer: 3 y ( y 2 + 3 ) ( y − 2 )   Sometimes we must first rearrange the terms in order to obtain a common factor.   Example 18: Factor: a b − 2 a 2 b + a 3 − 2 b 3 . Solution: Simply factoring the GCF out of the first group and last group does not yield a common binomial factor. We must rearrange the terms, searching for a grouping that produces a common factor. In this example, we have a workable grouping if we switch the terms a 3 and a b . Answer: ( a − 2 b ) ( a 2 + b )   Not all factorable four-term polynomials can be factored with this technique. For example, This four-term polynomial cannot be grouped in any way as to produce a common binomial factor. Despite this, the polynomial is not prime and can be written as a product of polynomials. It can be factored as follows: Factoring such polynomials is something that we will learn to do as we move further along in our study of algebra. For now, we will limit our attempt to factor four-term polynomials to using the factor by grouping technique.   Try this! Factor: x 3 − x 2 y − x y + y 2 . Answer: ( x − y ) ( x 2 − y ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_2	 || Factoring Trinomials of the Form x^2 + bx + c Some trinomials of the form x 2 + b x + c can be factored as a product of binomials. For example, We can verify this factorization by multiplying: Factoring trinomials requires that we work the distributive process in reverse. Notice that the product of the first terms of each binomial is equal to the first term of the trinomial. The middle term of the trinomial, 7x, is the sum of the products of the outer and inner terms of the binomials: And the product of the last terms of each binomial is equal to the last term of the trinomial. This can be visually interpreted as follows: If a trinomial of this type factors, then these relationships will be true: This gives us In short, if the leading coefficient of a factorable trinomial is one, then the factors of the last term must add up to the coefficient of the middle term. This observation is the key to factoring trinomials using the technique known as trial and error Describes the method of factoring a trinomial by systematically checking factors to see if their product is the original trinomial. (or guess and check Used when referring to the trial and error method for factoring trinomials. ). The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Factor: x 2 + 7 x + 12 . Solution: Note that the polynomial to be factored has three terms; it is a trinomial with a leading coefficient of 1. Use trial and error to factor as follows: Step 1: Write two sets of blank parentheses. If a trinomial of this form factors, then it will factor into two linear binomial factors. Step 2: Write the factors of the first term in the first space of each set of parentheses. In this case, factor x 2 = x ⋅ x . Step 3: Determine the factors of the last term whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term. To do this, list all of the factorizations of 12 and search for factors whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, 7. Choose 12 = 3 ⋅ 4 because 3 + 4 = 7. Step 4: Write in the last term of each binomial using the factors determined in the previous step. Step 5: Check by multiplying the two binomials. Answer: ( x + 3 ) ( x + 4 )   Since multiplication is commutative, the order of the factors does not matter. If the last term of the trinomial is positive, then either both of the constant factors must be negative or both must be positive. Therefore, when looking at the list of factorizations of the last term, we are searching for sums that are equal to the coefficient of the middle term.   Example 2: Factor: x 2 − 9 x + 20 . Solution: First, factor x 2 = x ⋅ x . Next, determine which factors of 20 add up to −9: In this case, choose −4 and −5 because ( − 4 ) ( − 5 ) = + 20 and − 4 + ( − 5 ) = − 9 . Check. Answer: ( x − 4 ) ( x − 5 )   If the last term of the trinomial is negative, then one of its factors must be negative. In this case, search the list of factorizations of the last term for differences that equal the coefficient of the middle term.   Example 3: Factor: x 2 − 4 x − 12 . Solution: Begin by factoring the first term x 2 = x ⋅ x . The factors of 12 are listed below. In this example, we are looking for factors whose difference is −4. Here choose the factors 2 and −6 because the coefficient of the middle term, −4, is obtained if we add 2 + ( − 6 ) . Multiply to check. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x − 6 )   Often our first guess will not produce a correct factorization. This process may require repeated trials. For this reason, the check is very important and is not optional.   Example 4: Factor: x 2 + 5 x − 6 . Solution: The first term of this trinomial x 2 factors as x ⋅ x . Consider the factors of 6: Suppose we choose the factors 2 and 3 because 2 + 3 = 5, the coefficient of the middle term. Then we have the following incorrect factorization: When we multiply to check, we find the error. In this case, the middle term is correct but the last term is not. Since the last term in the original expression is negative, we need to choose factors that are opposite in sign. Therefore, we must try again. This time we choose the factors −1 and 6 because − 1 + 6 = 5 . Now the check shows that this factorization is correct. Answer: ( x − 1 ) ( x + 6 )   If we choose the factors wisely, then we can reduce much of the guesswork in this process. However, if a guess is not correct, do not get discouraged; just try a different set of factors.   Example 5: Factor: x 2 + 3 x + 20 . Solution: Here there are no factors of 20 whose sum is 3. Therefore, the original trinomial cannot be factored as a product of two binomials. This trinomial is prime. Answer: Prime   Try this! Factor: x 2 − 13 x − 30 . Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x − 15 ) Video Solution The techniques described can also be used to factor trinomials with more than one variable.   Example 6: Factor: x 2 − 14 x y − 72 y 2 . Solution: The first term x 2 factors as x ⋅ x . Next, look for factors of the coefficient of the last term, 72, whose sum is −14. Therefore, the coefficient of the last term can be factored − 72 = 4 ( − 18 ) , where 4 + ( − 18 ) = − 14 . Because the last term has a variable factor of y 2 , factor 72 y 2 as 4 y ( − 18 y ) and try the following factorization: Multiply to check. Visually, we have the following: Answer: ( x + 4 y ) ( x − 18 y )   Try this! Factor: x 2 y 2 + 9 x y − 10 . Answer: ( x y − 1 ) ( x y + 10 ) Video Solution  || Factoring Using the AC Method An alternate technique for factoring trinomials, called the AC method Method for factoring trinomials by replacing the middle term with two terms that allow us to factor the resulting four-term polynomial by grouping. , makes use of the grouping method for factoring four-term polynomials. If a trinomial in the form a x 2 + b x + c can be factored, then the middle term, bx, can be replaced with two terms with coefficients whose sum is b and product ac. This substitution results in an equivalent expression with four terms that can be factored by grouping. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 7: Factor using the AC method: x 2 − x − 30 . Solution: In this example a = 1, b = −1, and c = −30. Step 1: Determine the product ac. Step 2: Find factors of ac whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, b. We can see that the sum of the factors 5 and −6 is equal to the coefficient of the middle term, −1. Step 3: Use the factors as coefficients for the terms that replace the middle term. Here − x = − 6 x + 5 x . Write Step 4: Factor the equivalent expression by grouping. Answer: ( x − 6 ) ( x + 5 )   Notice that the AC method is consistent with the trial and error method. Both methods require that b = m + n , where c = m n . In the example above, − 30 = ( − 6 ) ( 5 ) and − 1 = ( − 6 ) + 5 . The only difference between the methods, when the leading coefficient is 1, is in the process used to obtain the final factorization.   Example 8: Factor: y 2 − 14 x + 48 . Solution: Here ac = 48 and we search for factors whose sum is −14. Therefore, − 14 x = − 6 x − 8 x . Substitute the new terms and factor by grouping. Answer: ( x − 6 ) ( x − 8 ) . The check is left to the reader.   At this point, it is recommended that the reader stop and factor as many trinomials of the form x 2 + b x + c as time allows before moving on to the next section. Factoring trinomials is one of the more important skills that we learn in this course and should be mastered.  || 
book2_chapter6_2_1	Factoring Trinomials of the Form x^2 + bx + c Some trinomials of the form x 2 + b x + c can be factored as a product of binomials. For example, We can verify this factorization by multiplying: Factoring trinomials requires that we work the distributive process in reverse. Notice that the product of the first terms of each binomial is equal to the first term of the trinomial. The middle term of the trinomial, 7x, is the sum of the products of the outer and inner terms of the binomials: And the product of the last terms of each binomial is equal to the last term of the trinomial. This can be visually interpreted as follows: If a trinomial of this type factors, then these relationships will be true: This gives us In short, if the leading coefficient of a factorable trinomial is one, then the factors of the last term must add up to the coefficient of the middle term. This observation is the key to factoring trinomials using the technique known as trial and error Describes the method of factoring a trinomial by systematically checking factors to see if their product is the original trinomial. (or guess and check Used when referring to the trial and error method for factoring trinomials. ). The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Factor: x 2 + 7 x + 12 . Solution: Note that the polynomial to be factored has three terms; it is a trinomial with a leading coefficient of 1. Use trial and error to factor as follows: Step 1: Write two sets of blank parentheses. If a trinomial of this form factors, then it will factor into two linear binomial factors. Step 2: Write the factors of the first term in the first space of each set of parentheses. In this case, factor x 2 = x ⋅ x . Step 3: Determine the factors of the last term whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term. To do this, list all of the factorizations of 12 and search for factors whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, 7. Choose 12 = 3 ⋅ 4 because 3 + 4 = 7. Step 4: Write in the last term of each binomial using the factors determined in the previous step. Step 5: Check by multiplying the two binomials. Answer: ( x + 3 ) ( x + 4 )   Since multiplication is commutative, the order of the factors does not matter. If the last term of the trinomial is positive, then either both of the constant factors must be negative or both must be positive. Therefore, when looking at the list of factorizations of the last term, we are searching for sums that are equal to the coefficient of the middle term.   Example 2: Factor: x 2 − 9 x + 20 . Solution: First, factor x 2 = x ⋅ x . Next, determine which factors of 20 add up to −9: In this case, choose −4 and −5 because ( − 4 ) ( − 5 ) = + 20 and − 4 + ( − 5 ) = − 9 . Check. Answer: ( x − 4 ) ( x − 5 )   If the last term of the trinomial is negative, then one of its factors must be negative. In this case, search the list of factorizations of the last term for differences that equal the coefficient of the middle term.   Example 3: Factor: x 2 − 4 x − 12 . Solution: Begin by factoring the first term x 2 = x ⋅ x . The factors of 12 are listed below. In this example, we are looking for factors whose difference is −4. Here choose the factors 2 and −6 because the coefficient of the middle term, −4, is obtained if we add 2 + ( − 6 ) . Multiply to check. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x − 6 )   Often our first guess will not produce a correct factorization. This process may require repeated trials. For this reason, the check is very important and is not optional.   Example 4: Factor: x 2 + 5 x − 6 . Solution: The first term of this trinomial x 2 factors as x ⋅ x . Consider the factors of 6: Suppose we choose the factors 2 and 3 because 2 + 3 = 5, the coefficient of the middle term. Then we have the following incorrect factorization: When we multiply to check, we find the error. In this case, the middle term is correct but the last term is not. Since the last term in the original expression is negative, we need to choose factors that are opposite in sign. Therefore, we must try again. This time we choose the factors −1 and 6 because − 1 + 6 = 5 . Now the check shows that this factorization is correct. Answer: ( x − 1 ) ( x + 6 )   If we choose the factors wisely, then we can reduce much of the guesswork in this process. However, if a guess is not correct, do not get discouraged; just try a different set of factors.   Example 5: Factor: x 2 + 3 x + 20 . Solution: Here there are no factors of 20 whose sum is 3. Therefore, the original trinomial cannot be factored as a product of two binomials. This trinomial is prime. Answer: Prime   Try this! Factor: x 2 − 13 x − 30 . Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x − 15 ) Video Solution The techniques described can also be used to factor trinomials with more than one variable.   Example 6: Factor: x 2 − 14 x y − 72 y 2 . Solution: The first term x 2 factors as x ⋅ x . Next, look for factors of the coefficient of the last term, 72, whose sum is −14. Therefore, the coefficient of the last term can be factored − 72 = 4 ( − 18 ) , where 4 + ( − 18 ) = − 14 . Because the last term has a variable factor of y 2 , factor 72 y 2 as 4 y ( − 18 y ) and try the following factorization: Multiply to check. Visually, we have the following: Answer: ( x + 4 y ) ( x − 18 y )   Try this! Factor: x 2 y 2 + 9 x y − 10 . Answer: ( x y − 1 ) ( x y + 10 ) Video Solution Factoring Trinomials of the Form x^2 + bx + c Some trinomials of the form x 2 + b x + c can be factored as a product of binomials. For example, We can verify this factorization by multiplying: Factoring trinomials requires that we work the distributive process in reverse. Notice that the product of the first terms of each binomial is equal to the first term of the trinomial. The middle term of the trinomial, 7x, is the sum of the products of the outer and inner terms of the binomials: And the product of the last terms of each binomial is equal to the last term of the trinomial. This can be visually interpreted as follows: If a trinomial of this type factors, then these relationships will be true: This gives us In short, if the leading coefficient of a factorable trinomial is one, then the factors of the last term must add up to the coefficient of the middle term. This observation is the key to factoring trinomials using the technique known as trial and error Describes the method of factoring a trinomial by systematically checking factors to see if their product is the original trinomial. (or guess and check Used when referring to the trial and error method for factoring trinomials. ). The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Factor: x 2 + 7 x + 12 . Solution: Note that the polynomial to be factored has three terms; it is a trinomial with a leading coefficient of 1. Use trial and error to factor as follows: Step 1: Write two sets of blank parentheses. If a trinomial of this form factors, then it will factor into two linear binomial factors. Step 2: Write the factors of the first term in the first space of each set of parentheses. In this case, factor x 2 = x ⋅ x . Step 3: Determine the factors of the last term whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term. To do this, list all of the factorizations of 12 and search for factors whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, 7. Choose 12 = 3 ⋅ 4 because 3 + 4 = 7. Step 4: Write in the last term of each binomial using the factors determined in the previous step. Step 5: Check by multiplying the two binomials. Answer: ( x + 3 ) ( x + 4 )   Since multiplication is commutative, the order of the factors does not matter. If the last term of the trinomial is positive, then either both of the constant factors must be negative or both must be positive. Therefore, when looking at the list of factorizations of the last term, we are searching for sums that are equal to the coefficient of the middle term.   Example 2: Factor: x 2 − 9 x + 20 . Solution: First, factor x 2 = x ⋅ x . Next, determine which factors of 20 add up to −9: In this case, choose −4 and −5 because ( − 4 ) ( − 5 ) = + 20 and − 4 + ( − 5 ) = − 9 . Check. Answer: ( x − 4 ) ( x − 5 )   If the last term of the trinomial is negative, then one of its factors must be negative. In this case, search the list of factorizations of the last term for differences that equal the coefficient of the middle term.   Example 3: Factor: x 2 − 4 x − 12 . Solution: Begin by factoring the first term x 2 = x ⋅ x . The factors of 12 are listed below. In this example, we are looking for factors whose difference is −4. Here choose the factors 2 and −6 because the coefficient of the middle term, −4, is obtained if we add 2 + ( − 6 ) . Multiply to check. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x − 6 )   Often our first guess will not produce a correct factorization. This process may require repeated trials. For this reason, the check is very important and is not optional.   Example 4: Factor: x 2 + 5 x − 6 . Solution: The first term of this trinomial x 2 factors as x ⋅ x . Consider the factors of 6: Suppose we choose the factors 2 and 3 because 2 + 3 = 5, the coefficient of the middle term. Then we have the following incorrect factorization: When we multiply to check, we find the error. In this case, the middle term is correct but the last term is not. Since the last term in the original expression is negative, we need to choose factors that are opposite in sign. Therefore, we must try again. This time we choose the factors −1 and 6 because − 1 + 6 = 5 . Now the check shows that this factorization is correct. Answer: ( x − 1 ) ( x + 6 )   If we choose the factors wisely, then we can reduce much of the guesswork in this process. However, if a guess is not correct, do not get discouraged; just try a different set of factors.   Example 5: Factor: x 2 + 3 x + 20 . Solution: Here there are no factors of 20 whose sum is 3. Therefore, the original trinomial cannot be factored as a product of two binomials. This trinomial is prime. Answer: Prime   Try this! Factor: x 2 − 13 x − 30 . Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x − 15 ) Video Solution The techniques described can also be used to factor trinomials with more than one variable.   Example 6: Factor: x 2 − 14 x y − 72 y 2 . Solution: The first term x 2 factors as x ⋅ x . Next, look for factors of the coefficient of the last term, 72, whose sum is −14. Therefore, the coefficient of the last term can be factored − 72 = 4 ( − 18 ) , where 4 + ( − 18 ) = − 14 . Because the last term has a variable factor of y 2 , factor 72 y 2 as 4 y ( − 18 y ) and try the following factorization: Multiply to check. Visually, we have the following: Answer: ( x + 4 y ) ( x − 18 y )   Try this! Factor: x 2 y 2 + 9 x y − 10 . Answer: ( x y − 1 ) ( x y + 10 ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_2_2	Factoring Using the AC Method An alternate technique for factoring trinomials, called the AC method Method for factoring trinomials by replacing the middle term with two terms that allow us to factor the resulting four-term polynomial by grouping. , makes use of the grouping method for factoring four-term polynomials. If a trinomial in the form a x 2 + b x + c can be factored, then the middle term, bx, can be replaced with two terms with coefficients whose sum is b and product ac. This substitution results in an equivalent expression with four terms that can be factored by grouping. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 7: Factor using the AC method: x 2 − x − 30 . Solution: In this example a = 1, b = −1, and c = −30. Step 1: Determine the product ac. Step 2: Find factors of ac whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, b. We can see that the sum of the factors 5 and −6 is equal to the coefficient of the middle term, −1. Step 3: Use the factors as coefficients for the terms that replace the middle term. Here − x = − 6 x + 5 x . Write Step 4: Factor the equivalent expression by grouping. Answer: ( x − 6 ) ( x + 5 )   Notice that the AC method is consistent with the trial and error method. Both methods require that b = m + n , where c = m n . In the example above, − 30 = ( − 6 ) ( 5 ) and − 1 = ( − 6 ) + 5 . The only difference between the methods, when the leading coefficient is 1, is in the process used to obtain the final factorization.   Example 8: Factor: y 2 − 14 x + 48 . Solution: Here ac = 48 and we search for factors whose sum is −14. Therefore, − 14 x = − 6 x − 8 x . Substitute the new terms and factor by grouping. Answer: ( x − 6 ) ( x − 8 ) . The check is left to the reader.   At this point, it is recommended that the reader stop and factor as many trinomials of the form x 2 + b x + c as time allows before moving on to the next section. Factoring trinomials is one of the more important skills that we learn in this course and should be mastered. Factoring Using the AC Method An alternate technique for factoring trinomials, called the AC method Method for factoring trinomials by replacing the middle term with two terms that allow us to factor the resulting four-term polynomial by grouping. , makes use of the grouping method for factoring four-term polynomials. If a trinomial in the form a x 2 + b x + c can be factored, then the middle term, bx, can be replaced with two terms with coefficients whose sum is b and product ac. This substitution results in an equivalent expression with four terms that can be factored by grouping. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 7: Factor using the AC method: x 2 − x − 30 . Solution: In this example a = 1, b = −1, and c = −30. Step 1: Determine the product ac. Step 2: Find factors of ac whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, b. We can see that the sum of the factors 5 and −6 is equal to the coefficient of the middle term, −1. Step 3: Use the factors as coefficients for the terms that replace the middle term. Here − x = − 6 x + 5 x . Write Step 4: Factor the equivalent expression by grouping. Answer: ( x − 6 ) ( x + 5 )   Notice that the AC method is consistent with the trial and error method. Both methods require that b = m + n , where c = m n . In the example above, − 30 = ( − 6 ) ( 5 ) and − 1 = ( − 6 ) + 5 . The only difference between the methods, when the leading coefficient is 1, is in the process used to obtain the final factorization.   Example 8: Factor: y 2 − 14 x + 48 . Solution: Here ac = 48 and we search for factors whose sum is −14. Therefore, − 14 x = − 6 x − 8 x . Substitute the new terms and factor by grouping. Answer: ( x − 6 ) ( x − 8 ) . The check is left to the reader.   At this point, it is recommended that the reader stop and factor as many trinomials of the form x 2 + b x + c as time allows before moving on to the next section. Factoring trinomials is one of the more important skills that we learn in this course and should be mastered.  || 
book2_chapter6_3	 || Factoring Trinomials of the Form ax^2 + bx + c Factoring trinomials of the form a x 2 + b x + c can be challenging because the middle term is affected by the factors of both a and c. To illustrate this, consider the following factored trinomial: We can multiply to verify that this is the correct factorization. As we have seen before, the product of the first terms of each binomial is equal to the first term of the trinomial. The middle term of the trinomial is the sum of the products of the outer and inner terms of the binomials. The product of the last terms of each binomial is equal to the last term of the trinomial. Visually, we have the following: In general, This gives us, In short, when the leading coefficient of a trinomial is something other than 1, there will be more to consider when determining the factors using the trial and error method. The key lies in the understanding of how the middle term is obtained. Multiply ( 2 x + 5 ) ( 3 x + 7 ) and carefully follow the formation of the middle term. If we think of the FOIL method for multiplying binomials, then the middle term results from the sum of the inner product and the outer product. In this case, 14 x + 15 x = 29 x , as illustrated below: For this reason, we need to look for products of the factors of the first and last terms whose sum is equal to the coefficient of the middle term. For example, to factor 6 x 2 + 29 x + 35 , look at the factors of 6 and 35. The combination that produces the coefficient of the middle term is 2 ⋅ 7 + 3 ⋅ 5 = 14 + 15 = 29 . Make sure that the outer terms have coefficients 2 and 7, and that the inner terms have coefficients 5 and 3. Use this information to factor the trinomial:   Example 1: Factor: 3 x 2 + 7 x + 2 . Solution: Since the leading coefficient and the last term are both prime, there is only one way to factor each. Begin by writing the factors of the first term, 3 x 2 , as follows: The middle and last term are both positive; therefore, the factors of 2 are chosen as positive numbers. In this case, the only choice is in which grouping to place these factors. Determine which grouping is correct by multiplying each expression. Notice that these products differ only in their middle terms. Also, notice that the middle term is the sum of the inner and outer product, as illustrated below: Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( 3 x + 1 )   Example 2: Factor: 12 x 2 + 38 x + 20 . Solution: First, consider the factors of the first and last terms. We search for products of factors whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, 38. For brevity, the thought process is illustrated starting with the factors 2 and 6. Factoring begins at this point with the first term. We search for factors of 20 that along with the factors of 12 produce a middle term of 38x. Here the last combination produces a middle term of 38x. Answer: ( 2 x + 5 ) ( 6 x + 4 )   Example 3: Factor: 10 x 2 − 23 x + 6 . Solution: First, consider the factors of the first and last terms. We are searching for products of factors whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, −23. Factoring begins at this point with two sets of blank parentheses: Since the last term is positive and the middle term is negative, we know that both factors of the last term must be negative. Here we list all possible combinations with the factors of 10 x 2 = 2 x ⋅ 5 x . There is no combination that produces a middle term of − 23 x . We then move on to the factors of 10 x 2 = 10 x ⋅ x and list all possible combinations: And we can write Answer: ( 10 x − 3 ) ( x − 2 ) . The complete check is left to the reader.   We can reduce much of the guesswork involved in factoring trinomials if we consider all of the factors of the first and last terms and their products.   Example 4: Factor: 5 x 2 + 38 x − 16 . Solution: We begin with the factors of 5 and 16. Since the leading coefficient is prime, we can begin with the following: We look for products of the factors of 5 and 16 that could possibly add to 38. Since the last term is negative, we must look for factors with opposite signs. Here we can see that the products 2 and 40 add up to 38 if they have opposite signs: Therefore, use −2 and 8 as the factors of 16, making sure that the inner and outer products are − 2 x and 40 x : Answer: ( x + 8   ) ( 5 x − 2 ) . The complete check is left to the reader.   After lots of practice, the process described in the previous example can be performed mentally.   Try this! Factor: 12 x 2 − 31 x − 30 . Answer: ( 3 x − 10 ) ( 4 x + 3 ) Video Solution When given trinomials with multiple variables, the process is similar.   Example 5: Factor: 9 x 2 + 30 x y + 25 y 2 . Solution: Search for factors of the first and last terms such that the sum of the inner and outer products equals the middle term. Add the following products to obtain the middle term: 3 x ⋅ 5 y + 3 x ⋅ 5 y = 30 x y . In this example, we have a perfect square trinomial. Check. Answer: ( 3 x + 5 y ) 2   Try this! Factor: 16 x 2 − 24 x y + 9 y 2 . Answer: ( 4 x − 3 y ) 2 Video Solution  || Factoring Trinomials with Common Factors It is a good practice to first factor out the GCF, if there is one. Doing this produces a trinomial factor with smaller coefficients. As we have seen, trinomials with smaller coefficients require much less effort to factor. This commonly overlooked step is worth identifying early.   Example 6: Factor: 12 x 2 − 27 x + 6 . Solution: Begin by factoring out the GCF. After factoring out 3, the coefficients of the resulting trinomial are smaller and have fewer factors. After some thought, we can see that the combination that gives the coefficient of the middle term is 4 ( − 2 ) + 1 ( − 1 ) = − 8 − 1 = − 9 . Check. The factor 3 is part of the factored form of the original expression; be sure to include it in the answer. Answer: 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) ( x − 2 )   It is a good practice to consistently work with trinomials where the leading coefficient is positive.   Example 7: Factor: − x 2 + 2 x + 15 . Solution: In this example, the leading coefficient is −1. Before beginning the factoring process, factor out the −1: At this point, factor the remaining trinomial as usual, remembering to write the −1 as a factor in your final answer. Because 3 + (−5) = −2, use 3 and 5 as the factors of 15. Answer: − 1 ( x + 3 ) ( x − 5 ) . The check is left to the reader.   Example 8: Factor: − 60 a 2 − 5 a + 30 . Solution: The GCF of all the terms is 5. However, in this case factor out −5 because this produces a trinomial factor where the leading coefficient is positive. Focus on the factors of 12 and 6 that combine to give the middle coefficient, 1. After much thought, we find that 3 ⋅ 3 − 4 ⋅ 2 = 9 − 8 = 1 . Factor the remaining trinomial. Answer: − 5 ( 4 a + 3 ) ( 3 a − 2 ) . The check is left to the reader.   Try this! Factor: 24 + 2 x − x 2 . Answer: − 1 ( x − 6 ) ( x + 4 ) Video Solution  || Factoring Using the AC Method In this section, we factor trinomials of the form a x 2 + b x + c using the AC method described previously.   Example 9: Factor using the AC method: 18 x 2 − 21 x + 5 . Solution: Here a = 18, b = −21, and c = 5. Factor 90 and search for factors whose sum is −21. In this case, the sum of the factors −6 and −15 equals the middle coefficient, −21. Therefore, − 21 x = − 6 x − 15 x , and we can write Factor the equivalent expression by grouping. Answer: ( 3 x − 1 ) ( 6 x − 5 )   Example 10: Factor using the AC method: 9 x 2 − 61 x − 14 . Solution: Here a = 9, b = −61, and c = −14. We factor −126 as follows: The sum of factors 2 and −63 equals the middle coefficient, −61. Replace − 61 x with 2 x − 63 x : Answer: ( x − 7 ) ( 9 x + 2 ) . The check is left to the reader.  || 
book2_chapter6_3_1	Factoring Trinomials of the Form ax^2 + bx + c Factoring trinomials of the form a x 2 + b x + c can be challenging because the middle term is affected by the factors of both a and c. To illustrate this, consider the following factored trinomial: We can multiply to verify that this is the correct factorization. As we have seen before, the product of the first terms of each binomial is equal to the first term of the trinomial. The middle term of the trinomial is the sum of the products of the outer and inner terms of the binomials. The product of the last terms of each binomial is equal to the last term of the trinomial. Visually, we have the following: In general, This gives us, In short, when the leading coefficient of a trinomial is something other than 1, there will be more to consider when determining the factors using the trial and error method. The key lies in the understanding of how the middle term is obtained. Multiply ( 2 x + 5 ) ( 3 x + 7 ) and carefully follow the formation of the middle term. If we think of the FOIL method for multiplying binomials, then the middle term results from the sum of the inner product and the outer product. In this case, 14 x + 15 x = 29 x , as illustrated below: For this reason, we need to look for products of the factors of the first and last terms whose sum is equal to the coefficient of the middle term. For example, to factor 6 x 2 + 29 x + 35 , look at the factors of 6 and 35. The combination that produces the coefficient of the middle term is 2 ⋅ 7 + 3 ⋅ 5 = 14 + 15 = 29 . Make sure that the outer terms have coefficients 2 and 7, and that the inner terms have coefficients 5 and 3. Use this information to factor the trinomial:   Example 1: Factor: 3 x 2 + 7 x + 2 . Solution: Since the leading coefficient and the last term are both prime, there is only one way to factor each. Begin by writing the factors of the first term, 3 x 2 , as follows: The middle and last term are both positive; therefore, the factors of 2 are chosen as positive numbers. In this case, the only choice is in which grouping to place these factors. Determine which grouping is correct by multiplying each expression. Notice that these products differ only in their middle terms. Also, notice that the middle term is the sum of the inner and outer product, as illustrated below: Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( 3 x + 1 )   Example 2: Factor: 12 x 2 + 38 x + 20 . Solution: First, consider the factors of the first and last terms. We search for products of factors whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, 38. For brevity, the thought process is illustrated starting with the factors 2 and 6. Factoring begins at this point with the first term. We search for factors of 20 that along with the factors of 12 produce a middle term of 38x. Here the last combination produces a middle term of 38x. Answer: ( 2 x + 5 ) ( 6 x + 4 )   Example 3: Factor: 10 x 2 − 23 x + 6 . Solution: First, consider the factors of the first and last terms. We are searching for products of factors whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, −23. Factoring begins at this point with two sets of blank parentheses: Since the last term is positive and the middle term is negative, we know that both factors of the last term must be negative. Here we list all possible combinations with the factors of 10 x 2 = 2 x ⋅ 5 x . There is no combination that produces a middle term of − 23 x . We then move on to the factors of 10 x 2 = 10 x ⋅ x and list all possible combinations: And we can write Answer: ( 10 x − 3 ) ( x − 2 ) . The complete check is left to the reader.   We can reduce much of the guesswork involved in factoring trinomials if we consider all of the factors of the first and last terms and their products.   Example 4: Factor: 5 x 2 + 38 x − 16 . Solution: We begin with the factors of 5 and 16. Since the leading coefficient is prime, we can begin with the following: We look for products of the factors of 5 and 16 that could possibly add to 38. Since the last term is negative, we must look for factors with opposite signs. Here we can see that the products 2 and 40 add up to 38 if they have opposite signs: Therefore, use −2 and 8 as the factors of 16, making sure that the inner and outer products are − 2 x and 40 x : Answer: ( x + 8   ) ( 5 x − 2 ) . The complete check is left to the reader.   After lots of practice, the process described in the previous example can be performed mentally.   Try this! Factor: 12 x 2 − 31 x − 30 . Answer: ( 3 x − 10 ) ( 4 x + 3 ) Video Solution When given trinomials with multiple variables, the process is similar.   Example 5: Factor: 9 x 2 + 30 x y + 25 y 2 . Solution: Search for factors of the first and last terms such that the sum of the inner and outer products equals the middle term. Add the following products to obtain the middle term: 3 x ⋅ 5 y + 3 x ⋅ 5 y = 30 x y . In this example, we have a perfect square trinomial. Check. Answer: ( 3 x + 5 y ) 2   Try this! Factor: 16 x 2 − 24 x y + 9 y 2 . Answer: ( 4 x − 3 y ) 2 Video Solution Factoring Trinomials of the Form ax^2 + bx + c Factoring trinomials of the form a x 2 + b x + c can be challenging because the middle term is affected by the factors of both a and c. To illustrate this, consider the following factored trinomial: We can multiply to verify that this is the correct factorization. As we have seen before, the product of the first terms of each binomial is equal to the first term of the trinomial. The middle term of the trinomial is the sum of the products of the outer and inner terms of the binomials. The product of the last terms of each binomial is equal to the last term of the trinomial. Visually, we have the following: In general, This gives us, In short, when the leading coefficient of a trinomial is something other than 1, there will be more to consider when determining the factors using the trial and error method. The key lies in the understanding of how the middle term is obtained. Multiply ( 2 x + 5 ) ( 3 x + 7 ) and carefully follow the formation of the middle term. If we think of the FOIL method for multiplying binomials, then the middle term results from the sum of the inner product and the outer product. In this case, 14 x + 15 x = 29 x , as illustrated below: For this reason, we need to look for products of the factors of the first and last terms whose sum is equal to the coefficient of the middle term. For example, to factor 6 x 2 + 29 x + 35 , look at the factors of 6 and 35. The combination that produces the coefficient of the middle term is 2 ⋅ 7 + 3 ⋅ 5 = 14 + 15 = 29 . Make sure that the outer terms have coefficients 2 and 7, and that the inner terms have coefficients 5 and 3. Use this information to factor the trinomial:   Example 1: Factor: 3 x 2 + 7 x + 2 . Solution: Since the leading coefficient and the last term are both prime, there is only one way to factor each. Begin by writing the factors of the first term, 3 x 2 , as follows: The middle and last term are both positive; therefore, the factors of 2 are chosen as positive numbers. In this case, the only choice is in which grouping to place these factors. Determine which grouping is correct by multiplying each expression. Notice that these products differ only in their middle terms. Also, notice that the middle term is the sum of the inner and outer product, as illustrated below: Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( 3 x + 1 )   Example 2: Factor: 12 x 2 + 38 x + 20 . Solution: First, consider the factors of the first and last terms. We search for products of factors whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, 38. For brevity, the thought process is illustrated starting with the factors 2 and 6. Factoring begins at this point with the first term. We search for factors of 20 that along with the factors of 12 produce a middle term of 38x. Here the last combination produces a middle term of 38x. Answer: ( 2 x + 5 ) ( 6 x + 4 )   Example 3: Factor: 10 x 2 − 23 x + 6 . Solution: First, consider the factors of the first and last terms. We are searching for products of factors whose sum equals the coefficient of the middle term, −23. Factoring begins at this point with two sets of blank parentheses: Since the last term is positive and the middle term is negative, we know that both factors of the last term must be negative. Here we list all possible combinations with the factors of 10 x 2 = 2 x ⋅ 5 x . There is no combination that produces a middle term of − 23 x . We then move on to the factors of 10 x 2 = 10 x ⋅ x and list all possible combinations: And we can write Answer: ( 10 x − 3 ) ( x − 2 ) . The complete check is left to the reader.   We can reduce much of the guesswork involved in factoring trinomials if we consider all of the factors of the first and last terms and their products.   Example 4: Factor: 5 x 2 + 38 x − 16 . Solution: We begin with the factors of 5 and 16. Since the leading coefficient is prime, we can begin with the following: We look for products of the factors of 5 and 16 that could possibly add to 38. Since the last term is negative, we must look for factors with opposite signs. Here we can see that the products 2 and 40 add up to 38 if they have opposite signs: Therefore, use −2 and 8 as the factors of 16, making sure that the inner and outer products are − 2 x and 40 x : Answer: ( x + 8   ) ( 5 x − 2 ) . The complete check is left to the reader.   After lots of practice, the process described in the previous example can be performed mentally.   Try this! Factor: 12 x 2 − 31 x − 30 . Answer: ( 3 x − 10 ) ( 4 x + 3 ) Video Solution When given trinomials with multiple variables, the process is similar.   Example 5: Factor: 9 x 2 + 30 x y + 25 y 2 . Solution: Search for factors of the first and last terms such that the sum of the inner and outer products equals the middle term. Add the following products to obtain the middle term: 3 x ⋅ 5 y + 3 x ⋅ 5 y = 30 x y . In this example, we have a perfect square trinomial. Check. Answer: ( 3 x + 5 y ) 2   Try this! Factor: 16 x 2 − 24 x y + 9 y 2 . Answer: ( 4 x − 3 y ) 2 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_3_2	Factoring Trinomials with Common Factors It is a good practice to first factor out the GCF, if there is one. Doing this produces a trinomial factor with smaller coefficients. As we have seen, trinomials with smaller coefficients require much less effort to factor. This commonly overlooked step is worth identifying early.   Example 6: Factor: 12 x 2 − 27 x + 6 . Solution: Begin by factoring out the GCF. After factoring out 3, the coefficients of the resulting trinomial are smaller and have fewer factors. After some thought, we can see that the combination that gives the coefficient of the middle term is 4 ( − 2 ) + 1 ( − 1 ) = − 8 − 1 = − 9 . Check. The factor 3 is part of the factored form of the original expression; be sure to include it in the answer. Answer: 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) ( x − 2 )   It is a good practice to consistently work with trinomials where the leading coefficient is positive.   Example 7: Factor: − x 2 + 2 x + 15 . Solution: In this example, the leading coefficient is −1. Before beginning the factoring process, factor out the −1: At this point, factor the remaining trinomial as usual, remembering to write the −1 as a factor in your final answer. Because 3 + (−5) = −2, use 3 and 5 as the factors of 15. Answer: − 1 ( x + 3 ) ( x − 5 ) . The check is left to the reader.   Example 8: Factor: − 60 a 2 − 5 a + 30 . Solution: The GCF of all the terms is 5. However, in this case factor out −5 because this produces a trinomial factor where the leading coefficient is positive. Focus on the factors of 12 and 6 that combine to give the middle coefficient, 1. After much thought, we find that 3 ⋅ 3 − 4 ⋅ 2 = 9 − 8 = 1 . Factor the remaining trinomial. Answer: − 5 ( 4 a + 3 ) ( 3 a − 2 ) . The check is left to the reader.   Try this! Factor: 24 + 2 x − x 2 . Answer: − 1 ( x − 6 ) ( x + 4 ) Video Solution Factoring Trinomials with Common Factors It is a good practice to first factor out the GCF, if there is one. Doing this produces a trinomial factor with smaller coefficients. As we have seen, trinomials with smaller coefficients require much less effort to factor. This commonly overlooked step is worth identifying early.   Example 6: Factor: 12 x 2 − 27 x + 6 . Solution: Begin by factoring out the GCF. After factoring out 3, the coefficients of the resulting trinomial are smaller and have fewer factors. After some thought, we can see that the combination that gives the coefficient of the middle term is 4 ( − 2 ) + 1 ( − 1 ) = − 8 − 1 = − 9 . Check. The factor 3 is part of the factored form of the original expression; be sure to include it in the answer. Answer: 3 ( 4 x − 1 ) ( x − 2 )   It is a good practice to consistently work with trinomials where the leading coefficient is positive.   Example 7: Factor: − x 2 + 2 x + 15 . Solution: In this example, the leading coefficient is −1. Before beginning the factoring process, factor out the −1: At this point, factor the remaining trinomial as usual, remembering to write the −1 as a factor in your final answer. Because 3 + (−5) = −2, use 3 and 5 as the factors of 15. Answer: − 1 ( x + 3 ) ( x − 5 ) . The check is left to the reader.   Example 8: Factor: − 60 a 2 − 5 a + 30 . Solution: The GCF of all the terms is 5. However, in this case factor out −5 because this produces a trinomial factor where the leading coefficient is positive. Focus on the factors of 12 and 6 that combine to give the middle coefficient, 1. After much thought, we find that 3 ⋅ 3 − 4 ⋅ 2 = 9 − 8 = 1 . Factor the remaining trinomial. Answer: − 5 ( 4 a + 3 ) ( 3 a − 2 ) . The check is left to the reader.   Try this! Factor: 24 + 2 x − x 2 . Answer: − 1 ( x − 6 ) ( x + 4 ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_3_3	Factoring Using the AC Method In this section, we factor trinomials of the form a x 2 + b x + c using the AC method described previously.   Example 9: Factor using the AC method: 18 x 2 − 21 x + 5 . Solution: Here a = 18, b = −21, and c = 5. Factor 90 and search for factors whose sum is −21. In this case, the sum of the factors −6 and −15 equals the middle coefficient, −21. Therefore, − 21 x = − 6 x − 15 x , and we can write Factor the equivalent expression by grouping. Answer: ( 3 x − 1 ) ( 6 x − 5 )   Example 10: Factor using the AC method: 9 x 2 − 61 x − 14 . Solution: Here a = 9, b = −61, and c = −14. We factor −126 as follows: The sum of factors 2 and −63 equals the middle coefficient, −61. Replace − 61 x with 2 x − 63 x : Answer: ( x − 7 ) ( 9 x + 2 ) . The check is left to the reader. Factoring Using the AC Method In this section, we factor trinomials of the form a x 2 + b x + c using the AC method described previously.   Example 9: Factor using the AC method: 18 x 2 − 21 x + 5 . Solution: Here a = 18, b = −21, and c = 5. Factor 90 and search for factors whose sum is −21. In this case, the sum of the factors −6 and −15 equals the middle coefficient, −21. Therefore, − 21 x = − 6 x − 15 x , and we can write Factor the equivalent expression by grouping. Answer: ( 3 x − 1 ) ( 6 x − 5 )   Example 10: Factor using the AC method: 9 x 2 − 61 x − 14 . Solution: Here a = 9, b = −61, and c = −14. We factor −126 as follows: The sum of factors 2 and −63 equals the middle coefficient, −61. Replace − 61 x with 2 x − 63 x : Answer: ( x − 7 ) ( 9 x + 2 ) . The check is left to the reader.  || 
book2_chapter6_4	 || Difference of Squares A binomial is a polynomial with two terms. We begin with our first special binomial called difference of squares a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) , where a and b represent algebraic expressions. : To verify the above formula, multiply: We use this formula to factor certain special binomials.   Example 1: Factor: x 2 − 16 . Solution: Step 1: Identify the binomial as difference of squares and determine the square factors of each term. Here we can write The terms are squares of x and 4. Hence a = x and b = 4 . Step 2: Substitute into the difference of squares formula. Step 3: Multiply to check. This step is optional. Answer: ( x + 4 ) ( x − 4 )   It is worth taking some extra time at this point to review all of the squares of integers from 1 to 12. Recognizing these perfect square integers helps speed the factoring process.   Example 2: Factor: 9 x 2 − 121 . Solution: The subtraction indicates that this is a difference. Furthermore, we recognize that the terms are squares. In this case, a = 3 x and b = 11 . Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. Answer: ( 3 x + 11 ) ( 3 x − 11 )   It may be the case that the terms of the binomial have a common factor. If so, it will be difficult to identify the perfect squares until we first factor out the GCF.   Example 3: Factor: 12 y 2 − 75 . Solution: The terms are not perfect squares. However, notice that they do have a common factor. First, factor out the GCF, 3. The resulting binomial factor is a difference of squares with a = 2 y and b = 5 . Answer: 3 ( 2 y + 5 ) ( 2 y − 5 )   Example 4: Factor: 49 x 2 − 100 y 2 . Solution: Here we have a binomial with two variables and recognize that it is a difference of squares. Therefore, a = 7 x and b = 10 y . Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. Answer: ( 7 x + 10 y ) ( 7 x − 10 y )   Try this! Factor: 36 x 2 − 1 . Answer: ( 6 x + 1 ) ( 6 x − 1 ) Video Solution Given any real number b, a polynomial of the form x 2 + b 2 is prime. Furthermore, the sum of squares a 2 + b 2 does not have a general factored equivalent. a 2 + b 2 does not have a general factored equivalent. Care should be taken not to confuse this with a perfect square trinomial: Therefore, When the degree of the special binomial is greater than two, we may need to apply the difference of squares formula multiple times. A polynomial is completely factored when none of the factors can be factored any further.   Example 5: Factor completely: x 4 − 16 . Solution: First, identify what is being squared: To do this, recall the power rule for exponents, ( x m ) n = x m n . When exponents are raised to a power, multiply them. With this in mind, determine that ( x 2 ) 2 = x 4 and write Therefore, a = x 2 and b = 4 . Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. At this point, notice that the factor ( x 2 − 4 ) is itself a difference of two squares and thus can be further factored using a = x and b = 2 . The factor ( x 2 + 4 ) is a sum of squares, which cannot be factored using real numbers. Answer: ( x 2 + 4 ) ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 )   Try this! Factor completely: 81 x 4 − 1 . Answer: ( 9 x 2 + 1 ) ( 3 x + 1 ) ( 3 x − 1 ) Video Solution  || Sum and Difference of Cubes Two other special binomials of interest are the sum a 3 + b 3 = ( a + b ) ( a 2 − a b + b 2 ) , where a and b represent algebraic expressions. and difference of cubes a 3 − b 3 = ( a − b ) ( a 2 + a b + b 2 ) , where a and b represent algebraic expressions. : We can verify these formulas by multiplying: The process for factoring the sum and difference of cubes is very similar to that for the difference of squares. We first identify a and b and then substitute into the appropriate formula. The separate formulas for sum and difference of cubes allow us to always choose a and b to be positive.   Example 6: Factor: x 3 + 8 . Solution: The plus sign and the fact that the terms are cubes indicate to us that this is a sum of cubes. Next, identify what is being cubed. In this case, a = x and b = 2 . Substitute into the sum of cubes formula. The resulting trinomial is prime and the factoring is complete. We can check this factorization by multiplying. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x 2 − 2 x + 4 )   It is helpful to review the perfect cubes of integers from 1 to 12. This will aid you in identifying sums and differences of cubes.   Example 7: Factor: y 3 − 125 . Solution: In this case, we have a difference of cubes. We can write Substitute a = y and b = 5 into the formula for difference of cubes. Answer: ( y − 5 ) ( y 2 + 5 y + 25 )   Always look for common factors when factoring. If the terms of the binomial have a GCF other than 1, then factor that out first.   Example 8: Factor: 54 x 4 + 128 x . Solution: Begin by factoring out the GCF 2 x . The resulting binomial factor is a sum of cubes, where a = 3 x and b = 4 . Answer: 2 x ( 3 x + 4 ) ( 9 x 2 − 12 x + 16 )   Example 9: Factor: x 3 y 3 − 1 . Solution: This binomial is a difference of cubes with two variables. Identify what is being cubed. Here a = x y and b = 1 . Substitute into the appropriate formula and simplify. Answer: ( x y − 1 ) ( x 2 y 2 + x y + 1 )   Try this! Factor: 8 x 3 + 343 . Answer: ( 2 x + 7 ) ( 4 x 2 − 14 x + 49 ) Video Solution When factoring, always look for resulting factors to factor further.   Example 10: Factor completely: x 6 − 64 . Solution: When confronted with a binomial that is both a difference of squares and cubes, as this is, make it a rule to factor using difference of squares first. Therefore, a = x 3 and b = 8 . Substitute into the difference of squares formula. The resulting two binomial factors are a sum and a difference of cubes. Each can be factored further. Therefore, we have The trinomial factors are prime and the expression is completely factored. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x 2 − 2 x + 4 ) ( x − 2 ) ( x 2 + 2 x + 4 )   As an exercise, factor the previous example as a difference of cubes first and then compare the results. Why do you think we make it a rule to factor using difference of squares first?   Try this! Factor: x 6 − y 6 . Answer: ( x + y ) ( x 2 − x y + y 2 ) ( x − y ) ( x 2 + x y + y 2 ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_4_1	Difference of Squares A binomial is a polynomial with two terms. We begin with our first special binomial called difference of squares a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) , where a and b represent algebraic expressions. : To verify the above formula, multiply: We use this formula to factor certain special binomials.   Example 1: Factor: x 2 − 16 . Solution: Step 1: Identify the binomial as difference of squares and determine the square factors of each term. Here we can write The terms are squares of x and 4. Hence a = x and b = 4 . Step 2: Substitute into the difference of squares formula. Step 3: Multiply to check. This step is optional. Answer: ( x + 4 ) ( x − 4 )   It is worth taking some extra time at this point to review all of the squares of integers from 1 to 12. Recognizing these perfect square integers helps speed the factoring process.   Example 2: Factor: 9 x 2 − 121 . Solution: The subtraction indicates that this is a difference. Furthermore, we recognize that the terms are squares. In this case, a = 3 x and b = 11 . Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. Answer: ( 3 x + 11 ) ( 3 x − 11 )   It may be the case that the terms of the binomial have a common factor. If so, it will be difficult to identify the perfect squares until we first factor out the GCF.   Example 3: Factor: 12 y 2 − 75 . Solution: The terms are not perfect squares. However, notice that they do have a common factor. First, factor out the GCF, 3. The resulting binomial factor is a difference of squares with a = 2 y and b = 5 . Answer: 3 ( 2 y + 5 ) ( 2 y − 5 )   Example 4: Factor: 49 x 2 − 100 y 2 . Solution: Here we have a binomial with two variables and recognize that it is a difference of squares. Therefore, a = 7 x and b = 10 y . Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. Answer: ( 7 x + 10 y ) ( 7 x − 10 y )   Try this! Factor: 36 x 2 − 1 . Answer: ( 6 x + 1 ) ( 6 x − 1 ) Video Solution Given any real number b, a polynomial of the form x 2 + b 2 is prime. Furthermore, the sum of squares a 2 + b 2 does not have a general factored equivalent. a 2 + b 2 does not have a general factored equivalent. Care should be taken not to confuse this with a perfect square trinomial: Therefore, When the degree of the special binomial is greater than two, we may need to apply the difference of squares formula multiple times. A polynomial is completely factored when none of the factors can be factored any further.   Example 5: Factor completely: x 4 − 16 . Solution: First, identify what is being squared: To do this, recall the power rule for exponents, ( x m ) n = x m n . When exponents are raised to a power, multiply them. With this in mind, determine that ( x 2 ) 2 = x 4 and write Therefore, a = x 2 and b = 4 . Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. At this point, notice that the factor ( x 2 − 4 ) is itself a difference of two squares and thus can be further factored using a = x and b = 2 . The factor ( x 2 + 4 ) is a sum of squares, which cannot be factored using real numbers. Answer: ( x 2 + 4 ) ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 )   Try this! Factor completely: 81 x 4 − 1 . Answer: ( 9 x 2 + 1 ) ( 3 x + 1 ) ( 3 x − 1 ) Video Solution Difference of Squares A binomial is a polynomial with two terms. We begin with our first special binomial called difference of squares a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) , where a and b represent algebraic expressions. : To verify the above formula, multiply: We use this formula to factor certain special binomials.   Example 1: Factor: x 2 − 16 . Solution: Step 1: Identify the binomial as difference of squares and determine the square factors of each term. Here we can write The terms are squares of x and 4. Hence a = x and b = 4 . Step 2: Substitute into the difference of squares formula. Step 3: Multiply to check. This step is optional. Answer: ( x + 4 ) ( x − 4 )   It is worth taking some extra time at this point to review all of the squares of integers from 1 to 12. Recognizing these perfect square integers helps speed the factoring process.   Example 2: Factor: 9 x 2 − 121 . Solution: The subtraction indicates that this is a difference. Furthermore, we recognize that the terms are squares. In this case, a = 3 x and b = 11 . Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. Answer: ( 3 x + 11 ) ( 3 x − 11 )   It may be the case that the terms of the binomial have a common factor. If so, it will be difficult to identify the perfect squares until we first factor out the GCF.   Example 3: Factor: 12 y 2 − 75 . Solution: The terms are not perfect squares. However, notice that they do have a common factor. First, factor out the GCF, 3. The resulting binomial factor is a difference of squares with a = 2 y and b = 5 . Answer: 3 ( 2 y + 5 ) ( 2 y − 5 )   Example 4: Factor: 49 x 2 − 100 y 2 . Solution: Here we have a binomial with two variables and recognize that it is a difference of squares. Therefore, a = 7 x and b = 10 y . Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. Answer: ( 7 x + 10 y ) ( 7 x − 10 y )   Try this! Factor: 36 x 2 − 1 . Answer: ( 6 x + 1 ) ( 6 x − 1 ) Video Solution Given any real number b, a polynomial of the form x 2 + b 2 is prime. Furthermore, the sum of squares a 2 + b 2 does not have a general factored equivalent. a 2 + b 2 does not have a general factored equivalent. Care should be taken not to confuse this with a perfect square trinomial: Therefore, When the degree of the special binomial is greater than two, we may need to apply the difference of squares formula multiple times. A polynomial is completely factored when none of the factors can be factored any further.   Example 5: Factor completely: x 4 − 16 . Solution: First, identify what is being squared: To do this, recall the power rule for exponents, ( x m ) n = x m n . When exponents are raised to a power, multiply them. With this in mind, determine that ( x 2 ) 2 = x 4 and write Therefore, a = x 2 and b = 4 . Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. At this point, notice that the factor ( x 2 − 4 ) is itself a difference of two squares and thus can be further factored using a = x and b = 2 . The factor ( x 2 + 4 ) is a sum of squares, which cannot be factored using real numbers. Answer: ( x 2 + 4 ) ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 )   Try this! Factor completely: 81 x 4 − 1 . Answer: ( 9 x 2 + 1 ) ( 3 x + 1 ) ( 3 x − 1 ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_4_2	Sum and Difference of Cubes Two other special binomials of interest are the sum a 3 + b 3 = ( a + b ) ( a 2 − a b + b 2 ) , where a and b represent algebraic expressions. and difference of cubes a 3 − b 3 = ( a − b ) ( a 2 + a b + b 2 ) , where a and b represent algebraic expressions. : We can verify these formulas by multiplying: The process for factoring the sum and difference of cubes is very similar to that for the difference of squares. We first identify a and b and then substitute into the appropriate formula. The separate formulas for sum and difference of cubes allow us to always choose a and b to be positive.   Example 6: Factor: x 3 + 8 . Solution: The plus sign and the fact that the terms are cubes indicate to us that this is a sum of cubes. Next, identify what is being cubed. In this case, a = x and b = 2 . Substitute into the sum of cubes formula. The resulting trinomial is prime and the factoring is complete. We can check this factorization by multiplying. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x 2 − 2 x + 4 )   It is helpful to review the perfect cubes of integers from 1 to 12. This will aid you in identifying sums and differences of cubes.   Example 7: Factor: y 3 − 125 . Solution: In this case, we have a difference of cubes. We can write Substitute a = y and b = 5 into the formula for difference of cubes. Answer: ( y − 5 ) ( y 2 + 5 y + 25 )   Always look for common factors when factoring. If the terms of the binomial have a GCF other than 1, then factor that out first.   Example 8: Factor: 54 x 4 + 128 x . Solution: Begin by factoring out the GCF 2 x . The resulting binomial factor is a sum of cubes, where a = 3 x and b = 4 . Answer: 2 x ( 3 x + 4 ) ( 9 x 2 − 12 x + 16 )   Example 9: Factor: x 3 y 3 − 1 . Solution: This binomial is a difference of cubes with two variables. Identify what is being cubed. Here a = x y and b = 1 . Substitute into the appropriate formula and simplify. Answer: ( x y − 1 ) ( x 2 y 2 + x y + 1 )   Try this! Factor: 8 x 3 + 343 . Answer: ( 2 x + 7 ) ( 4 x 2 − 14 x + 49 ) Video Solution When factoring, always look for resulting factors to factor further.   Example 10: Factor completely: x 6 − 64 . Solution: When confronted with a binomial that is both a difference of squares and cubes, as this is, make it a rule to factor using difference of squares first. Therefore, a = x 3 and b = 8 . Substitute into the difference of squares formula. The resulting two binomial factors are a sum and a difference of cubes. Each can be factored further. Therefore, we have The trinomial factors are prime and the expression is completely factored. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x 2 − 2 x + 4 ) ( x − 2 ) ( x 2 + 2 x + 4 )   As an exercise, factor the previous example as a difference of cubes first and then compare the results. Why do you think we make it a rule to factor using difference of squares first?   Try this! Factor: x 6 − y 6 . Answer: ( x + y ) ( x 2 − x y + y 2 ) ( x − y ) ( x 2 + x y + y 2 ) Video Solution Sum and Difference of Cubes Two other special binomials of interest are the sum a 3 + b 3 = ( a + b ) ( a 2 − a b + b 2 ) , where a and b represent algebraic expressions. and difference of cubes a 3 − b 3 = ( a − b ) ( a 2 + a b + b 2 ) , where a and b represent algebraic expressions. : We can verify these formulas by multiplying: The process for factoring the sum and difference of cubes is very similar to that for the difference of squares. We first identify a and b and then substitute into the appropriate formula. The separate formulas for sum and difference of cubes allow us to always choose a and b to be positive.   Example 6: Factor: x 3 + 8 . Solution: The plus sign and the fact that the terms are cubes indicate to us that this is a sum of cubes. Next, identify what is being cubed. In this case, a = x and b = 2 . Substitute into the sum of cubes formula. The resulting trinomial is prime and the factoring is complete. We can check this factorization by multiplying. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x 2 − 2 x + 4 )   It is helpful to review the perfect cubes of integers from 1 to 12. This will aid you in identifying sums and differences of cubes.   Example 7: Factor: y 3 − 125 . Solution: In this case, we have a difference of cubes. We can write Substitute a = y and b = 5 into the formula for difference of cubes. Answer: ( y − 5 ) ( y 2 + 5 y + 25 )   Always look for common factors when factoring. If the terms of the binomial have a GCF other than 1, then factor that out first.   Example 8: Factor: 54 x 4 + 128 x . Solution: Begin by factoring out the GCF 2 x . The resulting binomial factor is a sum of cubes, where a = 3 x and b = 4 . Answer: 2 x ( 3 x + 4 ) ( 9 x 2 − 12 x + 16 )   Example 9: Factor: x 3 y 3 − 1 . Solution: This binomial is a difference of cubes with two variables. Identify what is being cubed. Here a = x y and b = 1 . Substitute into the appropriate formula and simplify. Answer: ( x y − 1 ) ( x 2 y 2 + x y + 1 )   Try this! Factor: 8 x 3 + 343 . Answer: ( 2 x + 7 ) ( 4 x 2 − 14 x + 49 ) Video Solution When factoring, always look for resulting factors to factor further.   Example 10: Factor completely: x 6 − 64 . Solution: When confronted with a binomial that is both a difference of squares and cubes, as this is, make it a rule to factor using difference of squares first. Therefore, a = x 3 and b = 8 . Substitute into the difference of squares formula. The resulting two binomial factors are a sum and a difference of cubes. Each can be factored further. Therefore, we have The trinomial factors are prime and the expression is completely factored. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x 2 − 2 x + 4 ) ( x − 2 ) ( x 2 + 2 x + 4 )   As an exercise, factor the previous example as a difference of cubes first and then compare the results. Why do you think we make it a rule to factor using difference of squares first?   Try this! Factor: x 6 − y 6 . Answer: ( x + y ) ( x 2 − x y + y 2 ) ( x − y ) ( x 2 + x y + y 2 ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_5	 || General Factoring Strategy We have learned various techniques for factoring polynomials with up to four terms. The challenge is to identify the type of polynomial and then decide which method to apply. The following outlines a general guideline for factoring polynomials: Check for common factors. If the terms have common factors, then factor out the greatest common factor (GCF) and look at the resulting polynomial factors to factor further. Determine the number of terms in the polynomial. a. Factor four-term polynomials by grouping. b. Factor trinomials (three terms) using “trial and error” or the AC method. c. Factor binomials (two terms) using the following special products: Difference of squares: a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) Sum of squares: a 2 + b 2       no general formula Difference of cubes: a 3 − b 3 = ( a − b ) ( a 2 + a b + b 2 ) Sum of cubes: a 3 + b 3 = ( a + b ) ( a 2 − a b + b 2 ) Look for factors that can be factored further. Check by multiplying. Note If a binomial is both a difference of squares and a difference of cubes, then first factor it as difference of squares and then as a sum and difference of cubes to obtain a more complete factorization. Not all polynomials with integer coefficients factor. When this is the case, we say that the polynomial is prime. If an expression has a GCF, then factor this out first. Doing so is often overlooked and typically results in factors that are easier to work with. Also, look for the resulting factors to factor further; many factoring problems require more than one step. A polynomial is completely factored when none of the factors can be factored further.   Example 1: Factor: 6 x 4 − 3 x 3 − 24 x 2 + 12 x . Solution: This four-term polynomial has a GCF of 3 x . Factor this out first. Now factor the resulting four-term polynomial by grouping. The factor ( x 2 − 4 ) is a difference of squares and can be factored further. Answer: 3 x ( 2 x − 1 ) ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 )   Example 2: Factor: 18 x 3 y − 60 x 2 y + 50 x y . Solution: This trinomial has a GCF of 2 x y . Factor this out first. The trinomial factor can be factored further using the trial and error method. Use the factors 9 = 3 ⋅ 3 and 25 = ( − 5 ) ⋅ ( − 5 ) . These combine to generate the correct coefficient for the middle term: 3 ( − 5 ) + 3 ( − 5 ) = − 15 − 15 = − 30 . Check. Answer: 2 x y ( 3 x − 5 ) 2   Example 3: Factor: 5 a 3 b 4 + 10 a 2 b 3 − 75 a b 2 . Solution: This trinomial has a GCF of 5 a b 2 . Factor this out first. The resulting trinomial factor can be factored as follows: Answer: 5 a b 2 ( a b + 5 ) ( a b − 3 )   Try this! Factor: 3 x 3 y − 12 x 2 y 2 + 12 x y 3 . Answer: 3 x y ( x − 2 y ) 2 Video Solution   Example 4: Factor: 16 y 4 − 1 . Solution: This binomial does not have a GCF. Therefore, begin factoring by identifying it as a difference of squares. Here a = 4 y 2 and b = 1. Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. The factor ( 4 y 2 + 1 ) is a sum of squares and is prime. However, ( 4 y 2 − 1 ) is a difference of squares and can be factored further. Answer: ( 4 y 2 + 1 ) ( 2 y + 1 ) ( 2 y − 1 )   Example 5: Factor: x 6 − 64 y 6 . Solution: This binomial is a difference of squares and a difference of cubes. When this is the case, first factor it as a difference of squares. We can write Each factor can be further factored either as a sum or difference of cubes, respectively. Therefore, Answer: ( x + 2 y ) ( x 2 − 2 x y + 4 y 2 ) ( x − 2 y ) ( x 2 + 2 x y + 4 y 2 )   Example 6: Factor: x 2 − ( 2 x − 1 ) 2 . Solution: First, identify this expression as a difference of squares. Here use a = x and b = 2 x − 1 in the formula for a difference of squares. Answer: ( 3 x − 1 ) ( − x + 1 )   Try this! Factor: x 4 + 2 x 3 + 27 x + 54 . Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x + 3 ) ( x 2 − 3 x + 9 ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_5_1	General Factoring Strategy We have learned various techniques for factoring polynomials with up to four terms. The challenge is to identify the type of polynomial and then decide which method to apply. The following outlines a general guideline for factoring polynomials: Check for common factors. If the terms have common factors, then factor out the greatest common factor (GCF) and look at the resulting polynomial factors to factor further. Determine the number of terms in the polynomial. a. Factor four-term polynomials by grouping. b. Factor trinomials (three terms) using “trial and error” or the AC method. c. Factor binomials (two terms) using the following special products: Difference of squares: a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) Sum of squares: a 2 + b 2       no general formula Difference of cubes: a 3 − b 3 = ( a − b ) ( a 2 + a b + b 2 ) Sum of cubes: a 3 + b 3 = ( a + b ) ( a 2 − a b + b 2 ) Look for factors that can be factored further. Check by multiplying. Note If a binomial is both a difference of squares and a difference of cubes, then first factor it as difference of squares and then as a sum and difference of cubes to obtain a more complete factorization. Not all polynomials with integer coefficients factor. When this is the case, we say that the polynomial is prime. If an expression has a GCF, then factor this out first. Doing so is often overlooked and typically results in factors that are easier to work with. Also, look for the resulting factors to factor further; many factoring problems require more than one step. A polynomial is completely factored when none of the factors can be factored further.   Example 1: Factor: 6 x 4 − 3 x 3 − 24 x 2 + 12 x . Solution: This four-term polynomial has a GCF of 3 x . Factor this out first. Now factor the resulting four-term polynomial by grouping. The factor ( x 2 − 4 ) is a difference of squares and can be factored further. Answer: 3 x ( 2 x − 1 ) ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 )   Example 2: Factor: 18 x 3 y − 60 x 2 y + 50 x y . Solution: This trinomial has a GCF of 2 x y . Factor this out first. The trinomial factor can be factored further using the trial and error method. Use the factors 9 = 3 ⋅ 3 and 25 = ( − 5 ) ⋅ ( − 5 ) . These combine to generate the correct coefficient for the middle term: 3 ( − 5 ) + 3 ( − 5 ) = − 15 − 15 = − 30 . Check. Answer: 2 x y ( 3 x − 5 ) 2   Example 3: Factor: 5 a 3 b 4 + 10 a 2 b 3 − 75 a b 2 . Solution: This trinomial has a GCF of 5 a b 2 . Factor this out first. The resulting trinomial factor can be factored as follows: Answer: 5 a b 2 ( a b + 5 ) ( a b − 3 )   Try this! Factor: 3 x 3 y − 12 x 2 y 2 + 12 x y 3 . Answer: 3 x y ( x − 2 y ) 2 Video Solution   Example 4: Factor: 16 y 4 − 1 . Solution: This binomial does not have a GCF. Therefore, begin factoring by identifying it as a difference of squares. Here a = 4 y 2 and b = 1. Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. The factor ( 4 y 2 + 1 ) is a sum of squares and is prime. However, ( 4 y 2 − 1 ) is a difference of squares and can be factored further. Answer: ( 4 y 2 + 1 ) ( 2 y + 1 ) ( 2 y − 1 )   Example 5: Factor: x 6 − 64 y 6 . Solution: This binomial is a difference of squares and a difference of cubes. When this is the case, first factor it as a difference of squares. We can write Each factor can be further factored either as a sum or difference of cubes, respectively. Therefore, Answer: ( x + 2 y ) ( x 2 − 2 x y + 4 y 2 ) ( x − 2 y ) ( x 2 + 2 x y + 4 y 2 )   Example 6: Factor: x 2 − ( 2 x − 1 ) 2 . Solution: First, identify this expression as a difference of squares. Here use a = x and b = 2 x − 1 in the formula for a difference of squares. Answer: ( 3 x − 1 ) ( − x + 1 )   Try this! Factor: x 4 + 2 x 3 + 27 x + 54 . Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x + 3 ) ( x 2 − 3 x + 9 ) Video Solution General Factoring Strategy We have learned various techniques for factoring polynomials with up to four terms. The challenge is to identify the type of polynomial and then decide which method to apply. The following outlines a general guideline for factoring polynomials: Check for common factors. If the terms have common factors, then factor out the greatest common factor (GCF) and look at the resulting polynomial factors to factor further. Determine the number of terms in the polynomial. a. Factor four-term polynomials by grouping. b. Factor trinomials (three terms) using “trial and error” or the AC method. c. Factor binomials (two terms) using the following special products: Difference of squares: a 2 − b 2 = ( a + b ) ( a − b ) Sum of squares: a 2 + b 2       no general formula Difference of cubes: a 3 − b 3 = ( a − b ) ( a 2 + a b + b 2 ) Sum of cubes: a 3 + b 3 = ( a + b ) ( a 2 − a b + b 2 ) Look for factors that can be factored further. Check by multiplying. Note If a binomial is both a difference of squares and a difference of cubes, then first factor it as difference of squares and then as a sum and difference of cubes to obtain a more complete factorization. Not all polynomials with integer coefficients factor. When this is the case, we say that the polynomial is prime. If an expression has a GCF, then factor this out first. Doing so is often overlooked and typically results in factors that are easier to work with. Also, look for the resulting factors to factor further; many factoring problems require more than one step. A polynomial is completely factored when none of the factors can be factored further.   Example 1: Factor: 6 x 4 − 3 x 3 − 24 x 2 + 12 x . Solution: This four-term polynomial has a GCF of 3 x . Factor this out first. Now factor the resulting four-term polynomial by grouping. The factor ( x 2 − 4 ) is a difference of squares and can be factored further. Answer: 3 x ( 2 x − 1 ) ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 )   Example 2: Factor: 18 x 3 y − 60 x 2 y + 50 x y . Solution: This trinomial has a GCF of 2 x y . Factor this out first. The trinomial factor can be factored further using the trial and error method. Use the factors 9 = 3 ⋅ 3 and 25 = ( − 5 ) ⋅ ( − 5 ) . These combine to generate the correct coefficient for the middle term: 3 ( − 5 ) + 3 ( − 5 ) = − 15 − 15 = − 30 . Check. Answer: 2 x y ( 3 x − 5 ) 2   Example 3: Factor: 5 a 3 b 4 + 10 a 2 b 3 − 75 a b 2 . Solution: This trinomial has a GCF of 5 a b 2 . Factor this out first. The resulting trinomial factor can be factored as follows: Answer: 5 a b 2 ( a b + 5 ) ( a b − 3 )   Try this! Factor: 3 x 3 y − 12 x 2 y 2 + 12 x y 3 . Answer: 3 x y ( x − 2 y ) 2 Video Solution   Example 4: Factor: 16 y 4 − 1 . Solution: This binomial does not have a GCF. Therefore, begin factoring by identifying it as a difference of squares. Here a = 4 y 2 and b = 1. Substitute into the formula for difference of squares. The factor ( 4 y 2 + 1 ) is a sum of squares and is prime. However, ( 4 y 2 − 1 ) is a difference of squares and can be factored further. Answer: ( 4 y 2 + 1 ) ( 2 y + 1 ) ( 2 y − 1 )   Example 5: Factor: x 6 − 64 y 6 . Solution: This binomial is a difference of squares and a difference of cubes. When this is the case, first factor it as a difference of squares. We can write Each factor can be further factored either as a sum or difference of cubes, respectively. Therefore, Answer: ( x + 2 y ) ( x 2 − 2 x y + 4 y 2 ) ( x − 2 y ) ( x 2 + 2 x y + 4 y 2 )   Example 6: Factor: x 2 − ( 2 x − 1 ) 2 . Solution: First, identify this expression as a difference of squares. Here use a = x and b = 2 x − 1 in the formula for a difference of squares. Answer: ( 3 x − 1 ) ( − x + 1 )   Try this! Factor: x 4 + 2 x 3 + 27 x + 54 . Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x + 3 ) ( x 2 − 3 x + 9 ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_6	 || Solving Quadratic Equations by Factoring Learning how to solve equations is one of our main goals in algebra. Up to this point, we have solved linear equations, which are of degree 1. In this section, we will learn a technique that can be used to solve certain equations of degree 2. A quadratic equation A polynomial equation with one variable of degree 2. is any equation that can be written in the standard form A quadratic equation written in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0. where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . The following are some examples of quadratic equations, all of which will be solved in this section: A solution of a quadratic equation in standard form is called a root A solution to a quadratic equation in standard form. . Quadratic equations can have two real solutions, one real solution, or no real solution. The quadratic equation x 2 + x − 6 = 0 has two solutions, namely, x = − 3 and x = 2 .   Example 1: Verify that x = − 3 and x = 2 are solutions to x 2 + x − 6 = 0 . Solution: To verify solutions, substitute the values for x and then simplify to see if a true statement results. Answer: Both values produce true statements. Therefore, they are both solutions to the equation.   Our goal is to develop algebraic techniques for finding solutions to quadratic equations. The first technique requires the zero-product property Any product is equal to zero if and only if at least one of the factors is zero. : In other words, if any product is equal to zero, then one or both of the variable factors must be equal to zero.   Example 2: Solve: ( x − 8 ) ( x + 7 ) = 0 . Solution: This equation consists of a product of two quantities equal to zero; therefore, the zero-product property applies. One or both of the quantities must be zero. To verify that these are solutions, substitute them for the variable x. Notice that each solution produces a factor that is equal to zero. Answer: The solutions are 8 and −7.   The quadratic equation may not be given in its factored form.   Example 3: Solve: x 2 + 3 x − 10 = 0 . Solution: The goal is to produce a product that is equal to zero. We can do that by factoring the trinomial on the left side of the equation. Next, apply the zero-product property and set each factor equal to zero. This leaves us with two linear equations, each of which can be solved for x . Check the solutions by substituting into the original equation to verify that we obtain true statements. Answer: The solutions are −5 and 2.   Using the zero-product property after factoring a quadratic equation in standard form is the key to this technique. However, the quadratic equation may not be given in standard form, and so there may be some preliminary steps before factoring. The steps required to solve by factoring The process of solving an equation that is equal to zero by factoring it and then setting each variable factor equal to zero. are outlined in the following example.   Example 4: Solve: 2 x 2 + 10 x + 20 = − 3 x + 5 . Solution: Step 1: Express the quadratic equation in standard form. For the zero-product property to apply, the quadratic expression must be equal to zero. Use the addition and subtraction properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms and obtain zero on one side of the equation. In this example, add 3 x to and subtract 5 from both sides. Step 2: Factor the quadratic expression. Step 3: Apply the zero-product property and set each variable factor equal to zero. Step 4: Solve the resulting linear equations. Answer: The solutions are −5 and −3/2. The check is optional.   Example 5: Solve: 9 x 2 + 1 = 6 x . Solution: Write this in standard form by subtracting 6 x from both sides. Once the equation is in standard form, equal to zero, factor. This is a perfect square trinomial. Hence setting each factor equal to zero results in a repeated solution. A repeated solution is called a double root A root that is repeated twice. and does not have to be written twice. Answer: The solution is 1/3.   Try this! Solve: x 2 − 3 x = 28 . Answer: x = − 4 or x = 7 Video Solution Not all quadratic equations in standard form are trinomials. We often encounter binomials.   Example 6: Solve: x 2 − 9 = 0 . Solution: This quadratic equation is given in standard form, where the binomial on the left side is a difference of squares. Factor as follows: Next, set each factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are 3 and −3, which can also be written as ± 3 .   Example 7: Solve: 5 x 2 = 15 x . Solution: By inspection, we see that x = 0 is a solution to this quadratic equation. Since dividing by zero is undefined, we want to avoid dividing both sides of this equation by x. In general, we wish to avoid dividing both sides of any equation by a variable or an expression containing a variable. We will discuss this in more detail later. The first step is to rewrite this equation in standard form with zero on one side. Next, factor the expression. Notice that the binomial on the left has a GCF of 5 x . Set each factor to equal to zero. Answer: The solutions are 0 and 3.   Example 8: Solve: ( 2 x + 1 ) ( x + 5 ) = 11 . Solution: This quadratic equation appears to be factored; hence it might be tempting to set each factor equal to 11. However, this would lead to incorrect results. We must rewrite the equation in standard form, equal to zero, so that we can apply the zero-product property. Once it is in standard form, we can factor and then set each factor equal to zero. Answer: The solutions are 1/2 and −6.   Example 9: Solve: 15 x 2 − 25 x + 10 = 0 . Solution: We begin by factoring out the GCF of 5. Then factor the resulting trinomial. Next, we set each variable factor equal to zero and solve for x. Notice that the factor 5 is not a variable factor and thus did not contribute to the solution set. Answer: The solutions are 2/3 and 1.   Example 10: Factor: 5 2 x 2 + 7 6 x − 1 3 = 0 . Solution: Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD, which is equal to 6. At this point, we have an equivalent equation with integer coefficients and can factor as usual. Begin with the factors of 15 and 2. The coefficient of the middle term is 7 = 3 ( − 1 ) + 5 ( 2 ) . Factor as follows: Set each factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are −2/3 and 1/5.   Try this! Solve: 4 x 2 − 9 = 0 . Answer: −3/2 and 3/2 Video Solution  || Finding Equations with Given Solutions The zero-product property states, And, in fact, the converse is true as well: When this is the case, we can write the following: We use this property to find equations, given the solutions. To do this, the steps for solving by factoring are performed in reverse.   Example 11: Find a quadratic equation with solutions −7 and 2. Solution: Given the solutions, we can determine two linear factors. The product of these linear factors is equal to zero when x = − 7 or x = 2 : Multiply the binomials and present the equation in standard form. Answer: x 2 + 5 x − 14 = 0 . We may check our equation by substituting the given answers to see if we obtain a true statement. Also, the equation found above is not unique and so the check becomes essential when our equation looks different from someone else’s. This is left as an exercise.   Example 12: Find a quadratic equation with integer coefficients, given solutions 1/2 and −3/4. Solution: To avoid fractional coefficients, we first clear the fractions by multiplying both sides by the denominator. Apply the zero-product property and multiply. Answer: 8 x 2 + 2 x − 3 = 0   Try this! Find a quadratic equation with integer coefficients, given solutions −1 and 2/3. Answer: 3 x 2 + x − 2 = 0 Video Solution  || Solving Polynomial Equations by Factoring The zero-product property is true for any number of factors that make up an equation. If an expression is equal to zero and can be factored into linear factors, then we will be able to set each factor equal to zero and solve for each equation.   Example 13: Solve: 3 x ( x − 5 ) ( 3 x − 2 ) = 0 . Solution: Set each variable factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are 0, 5, and 2/3.   Of course, we cannot expect the equation to be given in factored form.   Example 14: Solve: x 3 + 2 x 2 − 9 x − 18 = 0 . Solution: Begin by factoring the left side completely. Set each factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are −2, −3, and 3.   Notice that the degree of the polynomial is 3 and we obtained three solutions. In general, for any polynomial equation with one variable of degree n, the fundamental theorem of algebra Guarantees that there will be as many (or fewer) real solutions to a polynomial with one variable as its degree. guarantees n real solutions or fewer. We have seen that many polynomials do not factor. This does not imply that equations involving these unfactorable polynomials do not have real solutions. In fact, many polynomial equations that do not factor do have real solutions. We will learn how to solve these types of equations as we continue in our study of algebra.   Try this! Solve: − 10 x 3 − 18 x 2 + 4 x = 0 . Answer: −2, 0, 1/5 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_6_1	Solving Quadratic Equations by Factoring Learning how to solve equations is one of our main goals in algebra. Up to this point, we have solved linear equations, which are of degree 1. In this section, we will learn a technique that can be used to solve certain equations of degree 2. A quadratic equation A polynomial equation with one variable of degree 2. is any equation that can be written in the standard form A quadratic equation written in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0. where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . The following are some examples of quadratic equations, all of which will be solved in this section: A solution of a quadratic equation in standard form is called a root A solution to a quadratic equation in standard form. . Quadratic equations can have two real solutions, one real solution, or no real solution. The quadratic equation x 2 + x − 6 = 0 has two solutions, namely, x = − 3 and x = 2 .   Example 1: Verify that x = − 3 and x = 2 are solutions to x 2 + x − 6 = 0 . Solution: To verify solutions, substitute the values for x and then simplify to see if a true statement results. Answer: Both values produce true statements. Therefore, they are both solutions to the equation.   Our goal is to develop algebraic techniques for finding solutions to quadratic equations. The first technique requires the zero-product property Any product is equal to zero if and only if at least one of the factors is zero. : In other words, if any product is equal to zero, then one or both of the variable factors must be equal to zero.   Example 2: Solve: ( x − 8 ) ( x + 7 ) = 0 . Solution: This equation consists of a product of two quantities equal to zero; therefore, the zero-product property applies. One or both of the quantities must be zero. To verify that these are solutions, substitute them for the variable x. Notice that each solution produces a factor that is equal to zero. Answer: The solutions are 8 and −7.   The quadratic equation may not be given in its factored form.   Example 3: Solve: x 2 + 3 x − 10 = 0 . Solution: The goal is to produce a product that is equal to zero. We can do that by factoring the trinomial on the left side of the equation. Next, apply the zero-product property and set each factor equal to zero. This leaves us with two linear equations, each of which can be solved for x . Check the solutions by substituting into the original equation to verify that we obtain true statements. Answer: The solutions are −5 and 2.   Using the zero-product property after factoring a quadratic equation in standard form is the key to this technique. However, the quadratic equation may not be given in standard form, and so there may be some preliminary steps before factoring. The steps required to solve by factoring The process of solving an equation that is equal to zero by factoring it and then setting each variable factor equal to zero. are outlined in the following example.   Example 4: Solve: 2 x 2 + 10 x + 20 = − 3 x + 5 . Solution: Step 1: Express the quadratic equation in standard form. For the zero-product property to apply, the quadratic expression must be equal to zero. Use the addition and subtraction properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms and obtain zero on one side of the equation. In this example, add 3 x to and subtract 5 from both sides. Step 2: Factor the quadratic expression. Step 3: Apply the zero-product property and set each variable factor equal to zero. Step 4: Solve the resulting linear equations. Answer: The solutions are −5 and −3/2. The check is optional.   Example 5: Solve: 9 x 2 + 1 = 6 x . Solution: Write this in standard form by subtracting 6 x from both sides. Once the equation is in standard form, equal to zero, factor. This is a perfect square trinomial. Hence setting each factor equal to zero results in a repeated solution. A repeated solution is called a double root A root that is repeated twice. and does not have to be written twice. Answer: The solution is 1/3.   Try this! Solve: x 2 − 3 x = 28 . Answer: x = − 4 or x = 7 Video Solution Not all quadratic equations in standard form are trinomials. We often encounter binomials.   Example 6: Solve: x 2 − 9 = 0 . Solution: This quadratic equation is given in standard form, where the binomial on the left side is a difference of squares. Factor as follows: Next, set each factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are 3 and −3, which can also be written as ± 3 .   Example 7: Solve: 5 x 2 = 15 x . Solution: By inspection, we see that x = 0 is a solution to this quadratic equation. Since dividing by zero is undefined, we want to avoid dividing both sides of this equation by x. In general, we wish to avoid dividing both sides of any equation by a variable or an expression containing a variable. We will discuss this in more detail later. The first step is to rewrite this equation in standard form with zero on one side. Next, factor the expression. Notice that the binomial on the left has a GCF of 5 x . Set each factor to equal to zero. Answer: The solutions are 0 and 3.   Example 8: Solve: ( 2 x + 1 ) ( x + 5 ) = 11 . Solution: This quadratic equation appears to be factored; hence it might be tempting to set each factor equal to 11. However, this would lead to incorrect results. We must rewrite the equation in standard form, equal to zero, so that we can apply the zero-product property. Once it is in standard form, we can factor and then set each factor equal to zero. Answer: The solutions are 1/2 and −6.   Example 9: Solve: 15 x 2 − 25 x + 10 = 0 . Solution: We begin by factoring out the GCF of 5. Then factor the resulting trinomial. Next, we set each variable factor equal to zero and solve for x. Notice that the factor 5 is not a variable factor and thus did not contribute to the solution set. Answer: The solutions are 2/3 and 1.   Example 10: Factor: 5 2 x 2 + 7 6 x − 1 3 = 0 . Solution: Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD, which is equal to 6. At this point, we have an equivalent equation with integer coefficients and can factor as usual. Begin with the factors of 15 and 2. The coefficient of the middle term is 7 = 3 ( − 1 ) + 5 ( 2 ) . Factor as follows: Set each factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are −2/3 and 1/5.   Try this! Solve: 4 x 2 − 9 = 0 . Answer: −3/2 and 3/2 Video Solution Solving Quadratic Equations by Factoring Learning how to solve equations is one of our main goals in algebra. Up to this point, we have solved linear equations, which are of degree 1. In this section, we will learn a technique that can be used to solve certain equations of degree 2. A quadratic equation A polynomial equation with one variable of degree 2. is any equation that can be written in the standard form A quadratic equation written in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0. where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . The following are some examples of quadratic equations, all of which will be solved in this section: A solution of a quadratic equation in standard form is called a root A solution to a quadratic equation in standard form. . Quadratic equations can have two real solutions, one real solution, or no real solution. The quadratic equation x 2 + x − 6 = 0 has two solutions, namely, x = − 3 and x = 2 .   Example 1: Verify that x = − 3 and x = 2 are solutions to x 2 + x − 6 = 0 . Solution: To verify solutions, substitute the values for x and then simplify to see if a true statement results. Answer: Both values produce true statements. Therefore, they are both solutions to the equation.   Our goal is to develop algebraic techniques for finding solutions to quadratic equations. The first technique requires the zero-product property Any product is equal to zero if and only if at least one of the factors is zero. : In other words, if any product is equal to zero, then one or both of the variable factors must be equal to zero.   Example 2: Solve: ( x − 8 ) ( x + 7 ) = 0 . Solution: This equation consists of a product of two quantities equal to zero; therefore, the zero-product property applies. One or both of the quantities must be zero. To verify that these are solutions, substitute them for the variable x. Notice that each solution produces a factor that is equal to zero. Answer: The solutions are 8 and −7.   The quadratic equation may not be given in its factored form.   Example 3: Solve: x 2 + 3 x − 10 = 0 . Solution: The goal is to produce a product that is equal to zero. We can do that by factoring the trinomial on the left side of the equation. Next, apply the zero-product property and set each factor equal to zero. This leaves us with two linear equations, each of which can be solved for x . Check the solutions by substituting into the original equation to verify that we obtain true statements. Answer: The solutions are −5 and 2.   Using the zero-product property after factoring a quadratic equation in standard form is the key to this technique. However, the quadratic equation may not be given in standard form, and so there may be some preliminary steps before factoring. The steps required to solve by factoring The process of solving an equation that is equal to zero by factoring it and then setting each variable factor equal to zero. are outlined in the following example.   Example 4: Solve: 2 x 2 + 10 x + 20 = − 3 x + 5 . Solution: Step 1: Express the quadratic equation in standard form. For the zero-product property to apply, the quadratic expression must be equal to zero. Use the addition and subtraction properties of equality to combine opposite-side like terms and obtain zero on one side of the equation. In this example, add 3 x to and subtract 5 from both sides. Step 2: Factor the quadratic expression. Step 3: Apply the zero-product property and set each variable factor equal to zero. Step 4: Solve the resulting linear equations. Answer: The solutions are −5 and −3/2. The check is optional.   Example 5: Solve: 9 x 2 + 1 = 6 x . Solution: Write this in standard form by subtracting 6 x from both sides. Once the equation is in standard form, equal to zero, factor. This is a perfect square trinomial. Hence setting each factor equal to zero results in a repeated solution. A repeated solution is called a double root A root that is repeated twice. and does not have to be written twice. Answer: The solution is 1/3.   Try this! Solve: x 2 − 3 x = 28 . Answer: x = − 4 or x = 7 Video Solution Not all quadratic equations in standard form are trinomials. We often encounter binomials.   Example 6: Solve: x 2 − 9 = 0 . Solution: This quadratic equation is given in standard form, where the binomial on the left side is a difference of squares. Factor as follows: Next, set each factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are 3 and −3, which can also be written as ± 3 .   Example 7: Solve: 5 x 2 = 15 x . Solution: By inspection, we see that x = 0 is a solution to this quadratic equation. Since dividing by zero is undefined, we want to avoid dividing both sides of this equation by x. In general, we wish to avoid dividing both sides of any equation by a variable or an expression containing a variable. We will discuss this in more detail later. The first step is to rewrite this equation in standard form with zero on one side. Next, factor the expression. Notice that the binomial on the left has a GCF of 5 x . Set each factor to equal to zero. Answer: The solutions are 0 and 3.   Example 8: Solve: ( 2 x + 1 ) ( x + 5 ) = 11 . Solution: This quadratic equation appears to be factored; hence it might be tempting to set each factor equal to 11. However, this would lead to incorrect results. We must rewrite the equation in standard form, equal to zero, so that we can apply the zero-product property. Once it is in standard form, we can factor and then set each factor equal to zero. Answer: The solutions are 1/2 and −6.   Example 9: Solve: 15 x 2 − 25 x + 10 = 0 . Solution: We begin by factoring out the GCF of 5. Then factor the resulting trinomial. Next, we set each variable factor equal to zero and solve for x. Notice that the factor 5 is not a variable factor and thus did not contribute to the solution set. Answer: The solutions are 2/3 and 1.   Example 10: Factor: 5 2 x 2 + 7 6 x − 1 3 = 0 . Solution: Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD, which is equal to 6. At this point, we have an equivalent equation with integer coefficients and can factor as usual. Begin with the factors of 15 and 2. The coefficient of the middle term is 7 = 3 ( − 1 ) + 5 ( 2 ) . Factor as follows: Set each factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are −2/3 and 1/5.   Try this! Solve: 4 x 2 − 9 = 0 . Answer: −3/2 and 3/2 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_6_2	Finding Equations with Given Solutions The zero-product property states, And, in fact, the converse is true as well: When this is the case, we can write the following: We use this property to find equations, given the solutions. To do this, the steps for solving by factoring are performed in reverse.   Example 11: Find a quadratic equation with solutions −7 and 2. Solution: Given the solutions, we can determine two linear factors. The product of these linear factors is equal to zero when x = − 7 or x = 2 : Multiply the binomials and present the equation in standard form. Answer: x 2 + 5 x − 14 = 0 . We may check our equation by substituting the given answers to see if we obtain a true statement. Also, the equation found above is not unique and so the check becomes essential when our equation looks different from someone else’s. This is left as an exercise.   Example 12: Find a quadratic equation with integer coefficients, given solutions 1/2 and −3/4. Solution: To avoid fractional coefficients, we first clear the fractions by multiplying both sides by the denominator. Apply the zero-product property and multiply. Answer: 8 x 2 + 2 x − 3 = 0   Try this! Find a quadratic equation with integer coefficients, given solutions −1 and 2/3. Answer: 3 x 2 + x − 2 = 0 Video Solution Finding Equations with Given Solutions The zero-product property states, And, in fact, the converse is true as well: When this is the case, we can write the following: We use this property to find equations, given the solutions. To do this, the steps for solving by factoring are performed in reverse.   Example 11: Find a quadratic equation with solutions −7 and 2. Solution: Given the solutions, we can determine two linear factors. The product of these linear factors is equal to zero when x = − 7 or x = 2 : Multiply the binomials and present the equation in standard form. Answer: x 2 + 5 x − 14 = 0 . We may check our equation by substituting the given answers to see if we obtain a true statement. Also, the equation found above is not unique and so the check becomes essential when our equation looks different from someone else’s. This is left as an exercise.   Example 12: Find a quadratic equation with integer coefficients, given solutions 1/2 and −3/4. Solution: To avoid fractional coefficients, we first clear the fractions by multiplying both sides by the denominator. Apply the zero-product property and multiply. Answer: 8 x 2 + 2 x − 3 = 0   Try this! Find a quadratic equation with integer coefficients, given solutions −1 and 2/3. Answer: 3 x 2 + x − 2 = 0 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_6_3	Solving Polynomial Equations by Factoring The zero-product property is true for any number of factors that make up an equation. If an expression is equal to zero and can be factored into linear factors, then we will be able to set each factor equal to zero and solve for each equation.   Example 13: Solve: 3 x ( x − 5 ) ( 3 x − 2 ) = 0 . Solution: Set each variable factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are 0, 5, and 2/3.   Of course, we cannot expect the equation to be given in factored form.   Example 14: Solve: x 3 + 2 x 2 − 9 x − 18 = 0 . Solution: Begin by factoring the left side completely. Set each factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are −2, −3, and 3.   Notice that the degree of the polynomial is 3 and we obtained three solutions. In general, for any polynomial equation with one variable of degree n, the fundamental theorem of algebra Guarantees that there will be as many (or fewer) real solutions to a polynomial with one variable as its degree. guarantees n real solutions or fewer. We have seen that many polynomials do not factor. This does not imply that equations involving these unfactorable polynomials do not have real solutions. In fact, many polynomial equations that do not factor do have real solutions. We will learn how to solve these types of equations as we continue in our study of algebra.   Try this! Solve: − 10 x 3 − 18 x 2 + 4 x = 0 . Answer: −2, 0, 1/5 Video Solution Solving Polynomial Equations by Factoring The zero-product property is true for any number of factors that make up an equation. If an expression is equal to zero and can be factored into linear factors, then we will be able to set each factor equal to zero and solve for each equation.   Example 13: Solve: 3 x ( x − 5 ) ( 3 x − 2 ) = 0 . Solution: Set each variable factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are 0, 5, and 2/3.   Of course, we cannot expect the equation to be given in factored form.   Example 14: Solve: x 3 + 2 x 2 − 9 x − 18 = 0 . Solution: Begin by factoring the left side completely. Set each factor equal to zero and solve. Answer: The solutions are −2, −3, and 3.   Notice that the degree of the polynomial is 3 and we obtained three solutions. In general, for any polynomial equation with one variable of degree n, the fundamental theorem of algebra Guarantees that there will be as many (or fewer) real solutions to a polynomial with one variable as its degree. guarantees n real solutions or fewer. We have seen that many polynomials do not factor. This does not imply that equations involving these unfactorable polynomials do not have real solutions. In fact, many polynomial equations that do not factor do have real solutions. We will learn how to solve these types of equations as we continue in our study of algebra.   Try this! Solve: − 10 x 3 − 18 x 2 + 4 x = 0 . Answer: −2, 0, 1/5 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_7	 || Number Problems The algebraic setups of the word problems that we have previously encountered led to linear equations. When we translate the applications to algebraic setups in this section, the setups lead to quadratic equations. Just as before, we want to avoid relying on the “guess and check” method for solving applications. Using algebra to solve problems simplifies the process and is more reliable.   Example 1: One integer is 4 less than twice another integer, and their product is 96. Set up an algebraic equation and solve it to find the two integers. Solution: First, identify the variables. Avoid two variables by using the relationship between the two unknowns. The key phrase, “their product is 96,” indicates that we should multiply and set the product equal to 96. Once we have the problem translated to a mathematical equation, we then solve. In this case, we can solve by factoring. The first step is to write the equation in standard form: Next, factor completely and set each variable factor equal to zero. The problem calls for two integers whose product is +96. The product of two positive numbers is positive and the product of two negative numbers is positive. Hence we can have two sets of solutions. Use 2 n − 4 to determine the other integers. Answer: Two sets of integers solve this problem: {8, 12} and {−6, −16}. Notice that (8)(12) = 96 and (−6)(−16) = 96; our solutions check out.   With quadratic equations, we often obtain two solutions for the identified unknown. Although it may be the case that both are solutions to the equation, they may not be solutions to the problem. If a solution does not solve the original application, then we disregard it. Recall that consecutive odd and even integers both are separated by two units.   Example 2: The product of two consecutive positive odd integers is 99. Find the integers. Solution: The key phase, “product…is 99,” indicates that we should multiply and set the product equal to 99. Rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form and solve by factoring. Because the problem asks for positive integers, n = 9 is the only solution. Back substitute to determine the next odd integer. Answer: The consecutive positive odd integers are 9 and 11.   Example 3: Given two consecutive positive odd integers, the product of the larger and twice the smaller is equal to 70. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase “twice the smaller” can be translated to 2 n . The phrase “product…is 70” indicates that we should multiply this by the larger odd integer and set the product equal to 70. Solve by factoring. Because the problem asks for positive integers, n = 5 is the only solution. Back substitute into n + 2 to determine the next odd integer. Answer: The positive odd integers are 5 and 7.   Try this! The product of two consecutive positive even integers is 168. Find the integers. Answer: The positive even integers are 12 and 14. Video Solution  || Geometry Problems When working with geometry problems, it is helpful to draw a picture. Below are some area formulas that you are expected to know. (Recall that π ≈ 3.14 .) Area of a rectangle A = l w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. : A = l ⋅ w Area of a square A = s 2 , where s represents the length of each side. : A = s 2 Area of a triangle A = 1 2 b h , where b represents the length of the base and h represents the height. : A = 1 2 b h Area of a circle A = π r 2 , where r represents the radius and the constant π ≈ 3.14 . : A = π r 2   Example 4: The floor of a rectangular room has a length that is 4 feet more than twice its width. If the total area of the floor is 240 square feet, then find the dimensions of the floor. Solution: Use the formula A = l ⋅ w and the fact that the area is 240 square feet to set up an algebraic equation. Solve by factoring. At this point we have two possibilities for the width of the rectangle. However, since a negative width is not defined, choose the positive solution, w = 10 . Back substitute to find the length. Answer: The width is 10 feet and the length is 24 feet.   It is important to include the correct units in the final presentation of the answer. In the previous example, it would not make much sense to say the width is 10. Make sure to indicate that the width is 10 feet.   Example 5: The height of a triangle is 3 inches less than twice the length of its base. If the total area of the triangle is 7 square inches, then find the lengths of the base and height. Solution: Use the formula A = 1 2 b h and the fact that the area is 7 square inches to set up an algebraic equation. To avoid fractional coefficients, multiply both sides by 2 and then rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form. Factor and then set each factor equal to zero. In this case, disregard the negative answer; the length of the base is 7/2 inches long. Use 2 b − 3 to determine the height of the triangle. Answer: The base measures 7/2 = 3½ inches and the height is 4 inches.   Try this! The base of a triangle is 5 units less than twice the height. If the area is 75 square units, then what is the length of the base and height? Answer: The height is 10 units and the base is 15 units. Video Solution Recall that a right triangle is a triangle where one of the angles measures 90°. The side opposite of the right angle is the longest side of the triangle and is called the hypotenuse. The Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . gives us a relationship between the legs and hypotenuse of any right triangle, where a and b are the lengths of the legs and c is the length of the hypotenuse: Given certain relationships, we use this theorem when determining the lengths of sides of right triangles.   Example 6: The hypotenuse of a right triangle is 10 inches. If the short leg is 2 inches less than the long leg, then find the lengths of the legs. Solution: Given that the hypotenuse measures 10 inches, substitute its value into the Pythagorean theorem and obtain a quadratic equation in terms of x. Multiply and rewrite the equation in standard form. Once it is in standard form, factor and set each variable factor equal to zero. Because lengths cannot be negative, disregard the negative answer. In this case, the long leg measures 8 inches. Use x − 2 to determine the length of the short leg. Answer: The short leg measures 6 inches and the long leg measures 8 inches.   Example 7: One leg of a right triangle measures 3 centimeters. The hypotenuse of the right triangle measures 3 centimeters less than twice the length of the unknown leg. Find the measure of all the sides of the triangle. Solution: To set up an algebraic equation, we use the Pythagorean theorem. Solve by factoring. Disregard 0. The length of the unknown leg is 4 centimeters. Use 2 x − 3 to determine the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: The sides of the triangle measure 3 centimeters, 4 centimeters, and 5 centimeters.   Try this! The hypotenuse of a right triangle measures 13 units. If one leg is 2 units more than twice that of the other, then find the length of each leg. Answer: The two legs measure 5 units and 12 units. Video Solution  || Projectile Problems The height of an object launched upward, ignoring the effects of air resistance, can be modeled with the following formula: Using function notation, which is more appropriate, we have With this formula, the height can be calculated at any given time t after the object is launched. The coefficients represent the following: − 1 2 g The letter g represents the acceleration due to gravity. v 0 “v-naught” represents the initial velocity of the object. s 0 “s-naught” represents the initial height from which the object is launched. We consider only problems where the acceleration due to gravity can be expressed as g = 32  ft / sec 2 . Therefore, in this section time will be measured in seconds and the height in feet. Certainly though, the formula is valid using units other than these.   Example 8: The height of a projectile launched upward at a speed of 32 feet/second from a height of 128 feet is given by the function h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 32 t + 128 . How long does it take to hit the ground? Solution: An inefficient method for finding the time to hit the ground is to simply start guessing at times and evaluating. To do this, construct a chart. Use the table to sketch the height of the projectile over time. We see that at 4 seconds, the projectile hits the ground. Note that when this occurs, the height is equal to 0. Now we need to solve this problem algebraically. To find the solution algebraically, use the fact that the height is 0 when the object hits the ground. We need to find the time, t, when h ( t ) = 0 . Solve the equation by factoring. Now set each variable factor to zero. As expected, the projectile hits the ground at t = 4 seconds. Disregard −2 as a solution because negative time is not defined. Answer: The projectile hits the ground 4 seconds after it is launched.   Example 9: The height of a certain book dropped from the top of a 144-foot building is given by h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 144 . How long does it take to hit the ground? Solution: Find the time t when the height h ( t ) = 0 . Answer: The book takes 3 seconds to hit the ground when dropped from the top of a 144-foot building.   Try this! The height of a projectile, shot straight up into the air from the ground, is given by h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 80 t . How long does it take to come back down to the ground? Answer: It will take 5 seconds to come back down to the ground. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_7_1	Number Problems The algebraic setups of the word problems that we have previously encountered led to linear equations. When we translate the applications to algebraic setups in this section, the setups lead to quadratic equations. Just as before, we want to avoid relying on the “guess and check” method for solving applications. Using algebra to solve problems simplifies the process and is more reliable.   Example 1: One integer is 4 less than twice another integer, and their product is 96. Set up an algebraic equation and solve it to find the two integers. Solution: First, identify the variables. Avoid two variables by using the relationship between the two unknowns. The key phrase, “their product is 96,” indicates that we should multiply and set the product equal to 96. Once we have the problem translated to a mathematical equation, we then solve. In this case, we can solve by factoring. The first step is to write the equation in standard form: Next, factor completely and set each variable factor equal to zero. The problem calls for two integers whose product is +96. The product of two positive numbers is positive and the product of two negative numbers is positive. Hence we can have two sets of solutions. Use 2 n − 4 to determine the other integers. Answer: Two sets of integers solve this problem: {8, 12} and {−6, −16}. Notice that (8)(12) = 96 and (−6)(−16) = 96; our solutions check out.   With quadratic equations, we often obtain two solutions for the identified unknown. Although it may be the case that both are solutions to the equation, they may not be solutions to the problem. If a solution does not solve the original application, then we disregard it. Recall that consecutive odd and even integers both are separated by two units.   Example 2: The product of two consecutive positive odd integers is 99. Find the integers. Solution: The key phase, “product…is 99,” indicates that we should multiply and set the product equal to 99. Rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form and solve by factoring. Because the problem asks for positive integers, n = 9 is the only solution. Back substitute to determine the next odd integer. Answer: The consecutive positive odd integers are 9 and 11.   Example 3: Given two consecutive positive odd integers, the product of the larger and twice the smaller is equal to 70. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase “twice the smaller” can be translated to 2 n . The phrase “product…is 70” indicates that we should multiply this by the larger odd integer and set the product equal to 70. Solve by factoring. Because the problem asks for positive integers, n = 5 is the only solution. Back substitute into n + 2 to determine the next odd integer. Answer: The positive odd integers are 5 and 7.   Try this! The product of two consecutive positive even integers is 168. Find the integers. Answer: The positive even integers are 12 and 14. Video Solution Number Problems The algebraic setups of the word problems that we have previously encountered led to linear equations. When we translate the applications to algebraic setups in this section, the setups lead to quadratic equations. Just as before, we want to avoid relying on the “guess and check” method for solving applications. Using algebra to solve problems simplifies the process and is more reliable.   Example 1: One integer is 4 less than twice another integer, and their product is 96. Set up an algebraic equation and solve it to find the two integers. Solution: First, identify the variables. Avoid two variables by using the relationship between the two unknowns. The key phrase, “their product is 96,” indicates that we should multiply and set the product equal to 96. Once we have the problem translated to a mathematical equation, we then solve. In this case, we can solve by factoring. The first step is to write the equation in standard form: Next, factor completely and set each variable factor equal to zero. The problem calls for two integers whose product is +96. The product of two positive numbers is positive and the product of two negative numbers is positive. Hence we can have two sets of solutions. Use 2 n − 4 to determine the other integers. Answer: Two sets of integers solve this problem: {8, 12} and {−6, −16}. Notice that (8)(12) = 96 and (−6)(−16) = 96; our solutions check out.   With quadratic equations, we often obtain two solutions for the identified unknown. Although it may be the case that both are solutions to the equation, they may not be solutions to the problem. If a solution does not solve the original application, then we disregard it. Recall that consecutive odd and even integers both are separated by two units.   Example 2: The product of two consecutive positive odd integers is 99. Find the integers. Solution: The key phase, “product…is 99,” indicates that we should multiply and set the product equal to 99. Rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form and solve by factoring. Because the problem asks for positive integers, n = 9 is the only solution. Back substitute to determine the next odd integer. Answer: The consecutive positive odd integers are 9 and 11.   Example 3: Given two consecutive positive odd integers, the product of the larger and twice the smaller is equal to 70. Find the integers. Solution: The key phrase “twice the smaller” can be translated to 2 n . The phrase “product…is 70” indicates that we should multiply this by the larger odd integer and set the product equal to 70. Solve by factoring. Because the problem asks for positive integers, n = 5 is the only solution. Back substitute into n + 2 to determine the next odd integer. Answer: The positive odd integers are 5 and 7.   Try this! The product of two consecutive positive even integers is 168. Find the integers. Answer: The positive even integers are 12 and 14. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_7_2	Geometry Problems When working with geometry problems, it is helpful to draw a picture. Below are some area formulas that you are expected to know. (Recall that π ≈ 3.14 .) Area of a rectangle A = l w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. : A = l ⋅ w Area of a square A = s 2 , where s represents the length of each side. : A = s 2 Area of a triangle A = 1 2 b h , where b represents the length of the base and h represents the height. : A = 1 2 b h Area of a circle A = π r 2 , where r represents the radius and the constant π ≈ 3.14 . : A = π r 2   Example 4: The floor of a rectangular room has a length that is 4 feet more than twice its width. If the total area of the floor is 240 square feet, then find the dimensions of the floor. Solution: Use the formula A = l ⋅ w and the fact that the area is 240 square feet to set up an algebraic equation. Solve by factoring. At this point we have two possibilities for the width of the rectangle. However, since a negative width is not defined, choose the positive solution, w = 10 . Back substitute to find the length. Answer: The width is 10 feet and the length is 24 feet.   It is important to include the correct units in the final presentation of the answer. In the previous example, it would not make much sense to say the width is 10. Make sure to indicate that the width is 10 feet.   Example 5: The height of a triangle is 3 inches less than twice the length of its base. If the total area of the triangle is 7 square inches, then find the lengths of the base and height. Solution: Use the formula A = 1 2 b h and the fact that the area is 7 square inches to set up an algebraic equation. To avoid fractional coefficients, multiply both sides by 2 and then rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form. Factor and then set each factor equal to zero. In this case, disregard the negative answer; the length of the base is 7/2 inches long. Use 2 b − 3 to determine the height of the triangle. Answer: The base measures 7/2 = 3½ inches and the height is 4 inches.   Try this! The base of a triangle is 5 units less than twice the height. If the area is 75 square units, then what is the length of the base and height? Answer: The height is 10 units and the base is 15 units. Video Solution Recall that a right triangle is a triangle where one of the angles measures 90°. The side opposite of the right angle is the longest side of the triangle and is called the hypotenuse. The Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . gives us a relationship between the legs and hypotenuse of any right triangle, where a and b are the lengths of the legs and c is the length of the hypotenuse: Given certain relationships, we use this theorem when determining the lengths of sides of right triangles.   Example 6: The hypotenuse of a right triangle is 10 inches. If the short leg is 2 inches less than the long leg, then find the lengths of the legs. Solution: Given that the hypotenuse measures 10 inches, substitute its value into the Pythagorean theorem and obtain a quadratic equation in terms of x. Multiply and rewrite the equation in standard form. Once it is in standard form, factor and set each variable factor equal to zero. Because lengths cannot be negative, disregard the negative answer. In this case, the long leg measures 8 inches. Use x − 2 to determine the length of the short leg. Answer: The short leg measures 6 inches and the long leg measures 8 inches.   Example 7: One leg of a right triangle measures 3 centimeters. The hypotenuse of the right triangle measures 3 centimeters less than twice the length of the unknown leg. Find the measure of all the sides of the triangle. Solution: To set up an algebraic equation, we use the Pythagorean theorem. Solve by factoring. Disregard 0. The length of the unknown leg is 4 centimeters. Use 2 x − 3 to determine the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: The sides of the triangle measure 3 centimeters, 4 centimeters, and 5 centimeters.   Try this! The hypotenuse of a right triangle measures 13 units. If one leg is 2 units more than twice that of the other, then find the length of each leg. Answer: The two legs measure 5 units and 12 units. Video Solution Geometry Problems When working with geometry problems, it is helpful to draw a picture. Below are some area formulas that you are expected to know. (Recall that π ≈ 3.14 .) Area of a rectangle A = l w , where l represents the length and w represents the width. : A = l ⋅ w Area of a square A = s 2 , where s represents the length of each side. : A = s 2 Area of a triangle A = 1 2 b h , where b represents the length of the base and h represents the height. : A = 1 2 b h Area of a circle A = π r 2 , where r represents the radius and the constant π ≈ 3.14 . : A = π r 2   Example 4: The floor of a rectangular room has a length that is 4 feet more than twice its width. If the total area of the floor is 240 square feet, then find the dimensions of the floor. Solution: Use the formula A = l ⋅ w and the fact that the area is 240 square feet to set up an algebraic equation. Solve by factoring. At this point we have two possibilities for the width of the rectangle. However, since a negative width is not defined, choose the positive solution, w = 10 . Back substitute to find the length. Answer: The width is 10 feet and the length is 24 feet.   It is important to include the correct units in the final presentation of the answer. In the previous example, it would not make much sense to say the width is 10. Make sure to indicate that the width is 10 feet.   Example 5: The height of a triangle is 3 inches less than twice the length of its base. If the total area of the triangle is 7 square inches, then find the lengths of the base and height. Solution: Use the formula A = 1 2 b h and the fact that the area is 7 square inches to set up an algebraic equation. To avoid fractional coefficients, multiply both sides by 2 and then rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form. Factor and then set each factor equal to zero. In this case, disregard the negative answer; the length of the base is 7/2 inches long. Use 2 b − 3 to determine the height of the triangle. Answer: The base measures 7/2 = 3½ inches and the height is 4 inches.   Try this! The base of a triangle is 5 units less than twice the height. If the area is 75 square units, then what is the length of the base and height? Answer: The height is 10 units and the base is 15 units. Video Solution Recall that a right triangle is a triangle where one of the angles measures 90°. The side opposite of the right angle is the longest side of the triangle and is called the hypotenuse. The Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . gives us a relationship between the legs and hypotenuse of any right triangle, where a and b are the lengths of the legs and c is the length of the hypotenuse: Given certain relationships, we use this theorem when determining the lengths of sides of right triangles.   Example 6: The hypotenuse of a right triangle is 10 inches. If the short leg is 2 inches less than the long leg, then find the lengths of the legs. Solution: Given that the hypotenuse measures 10 inches, substitute its value into the Pythagorean theorem and obtain a quadratic equation in terms of x. Multiply and rewrite the equation in standard form. Once it is in standard form, factor and set each variable factor equal to zero. Because lengths cannot be negative, disregard the negative answer. In this case, the long leg measures 8 inches. Use x − 2 to determine the length of the short leg. Answer: The short leg measures 6 inches and the long leg measures 8 inches.   Example 7: One leg of a right triangle measures 3 centimeters. The hypotenuse of the right triangle measures 3 centimeters less than twice the length of the unknown leg. Find the measure of all the sides of the triangle. Solution: To set up an algebraic equation, we use the Pythagorean theorem. Solve by factoring. Disregard 0. The length of the unknown leg is 4 centimeters. Use 2 x − 3 to determine the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: The sides of the triangle measure 3 centimeters, 4 centimeters, and 5 centimeters.   Try this! The hypotenuse of a right triangle measures 13 units. If one leg is 2 units more than twice that of the other, then find the length of each leg. Answer: The two legs measure 5 units and 12 units. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter6_7_3	Projectile Problems The height of an object launched upward, ignoring the effects of air resistance, can be modeled with the following formula: Using function notation, which is more appropriate, we have With this formula, the height can be calculated at any given time t after the object is launched. The coefficients represent the following: − 1 2 g The letter g represents the acceleration due to gravity. v 0 “v-naught” represents the initial velocity of the object. s 0 “s-naught” represents the initial height from which the object is launched. We consider only problems where the acceleration due to gravity can be expressed as g = 32  ft / sec 2 . Therefore, in this section time will be measured in seconds and the height in feet. Certainly though, the formula is valid using units other than these.   Example 8: The height of a projectile launched upward at a speed of 32 feet/second from a height of 128 feet is given by the function h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 32 t + 128 . How long does it take to hit the ground? Solution: An inefficient method for finding the time to hit the ground is to simply start guessing at times and evaluating. To do this, construct a chart. Use the table to sketch the height of the projectile over time. We see that at 4 seconds, the projectile hits the ground. Note that when this occurs, the height is equal to 0. Now we need to solve this problem algebraically. To find the solution algebraically, use the fact that the height is 0 when the object hits the ground. We need to find the time, t, when h ( t ) = 0 . Solve the equation by factoring. Now set each variable factor to zero. As expected, the projectile hits the ground at t = 4 seconds. Disregard −2 as a solution because negative time is not defined. Answer: The projectile hits the ground 4 seconds after it is launched.   Example 9: The height of a certain book dropped from the top of a 144-foot building is given by h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 144 . How long does it take to hit the ground? Solution: Find the time t when the height h ( t ) = 0 . Answer: The book takes 3 seconds to hit the ground when dropped from the top of a 144-foot building.   Try this! The height of a projectile, shot straight up into the air from the ground, is given by h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 80 t . How long does it take to come back down to the ground? Answer: It will take 5 seconds to come back down to the ground. Video Solution Projectile Problems The height of an object launched upward, ignoring the effects of air resistance, can be modeled with the following formula: Using function notation, which is more appropriate, we have With this formula, the height can be calculated at any given time t after the object is launched. The coefficients represent the following: − 1 2 g The letter g represents the acceleration due to gravity. v 0 “v-naught” represents the initial velocity of the object. s 0 “s-naught” represents the initial height from which the object is launched. We consider only problems where the acceleration due to gravity can be expressed as g = 32  ft / sec 2 . Therefore, in this section time will be measured in seconds and the height in feet. Certainly though, the formula is valid using units other than these.   Example 8: The height of a projectile launched upward at a speed of 32 feet/second from a height of 128 feet is given by the function h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 32 t + 128 . How long does it take to hit the ground? Solution: An inefficient method for finding the time to hit the ground is to simply start guessing at times and evaluating. To do this, construct a chart. Use the table to sketch the height of the projectile over time. We see that at 4 seconds, the projectile hits the ground. Note that when this occurs, the height is equal to 0. Now we need to solve this problem algebraically. To find the solution algebraically, use the fact that the height is 0 when the object hits the ground. We need to find the time, t, when h ( t ) = 0 . Solve the equation by factoring. Now set each variable factor to zero. As expected, the projectile hits the ground at t = 4 seconds. Disregard −2 as a solution because negative time is not defined. Answer: The projectile hits the ground 4 seconds after it is launched.   Example 9: The height of a certain book dropped from the top of a 144-foot building is given by h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 144 . How long does it take to hit the ground? Solution: Find the time t when the height h ( t ) = 0 . Answer: The book takes 3 seconds to hit the ground when dropped from the top of a 144-foot building.   Try this! The height of a projectile, shot straight up into the air from the ground, is given by h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 80 t . How long does it take to come back down to the ground? Answer: It will take 5 seconds to come back down to the ground. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3	 ||  || Rectangular Coordinate System The rectangular coordinate system A system with two number lines at right angles uniquely specifying points in a plane using ordered pairs (x, y). consists of two real number lines that intersect at a right angle. The horizontal number line is called the x-axis The horizontal number line used as reference in the rectangular coordinate system. , and the vertical number line is called the y-axis The vertical number line used as reference in the rectangular coordinate system. . These two number lines define a flat surface called a plane The flat surface defined by the x- and y-axes. , and each point on this plane is associated with an ordered pair A pair (x, y) that identifies position relative to the origin on a rectangular coordinate plane. of real numbers (x, y). The first number is called the x-coordinate, and the second number is called the y-coordinate. The intersection of the two axes is known as the origin The point where the x- and y-axes cross, denoted by (0, 0). , which corresponds to the point (0, 0). An ordered pair (x, y) represents the position of a point relative to the origin. The x-coordinate represents a position to the right of the origin if it is positive and to the left of the origin if it is negative. The y-coordinate represents a position above the origin if it is positive and below the origin if it is negative. Using this system, every position (point) in the plane is uniquely identified. For example, the pair (2, 3) denotes the position relative to the origin as shown: Portrait of René Descartes (1596–1650) after Frans Hals, from http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Frans_Hals_-_Portret_van_Ren%C3%A9_Descartes.jpg. This system is often called the Cartesian coordinate system Used in honor of René Descartes when referring to the rectangular coordinate system. , named after the French mathematician René Descartes (1596–1650). The x- and y-axes break the plane into four regions called quadrants The four regions of a rectangular coordinate plane partly bounded by the x- and y-axes and numbered using the roman numerals I, II, III, and IV. , named using roman numerals I, II, III, and IV, as pictured. In quadrant I, both coordinates are positive. In quadrant II, the x-coordinate is negative and the y-coordinate is positive. In quadrant III, both coordinates are negative. In quadrant IV, the x-coordinate is positive and the y-coordinate is negative.   Example 1: Plot the ordered pair (−3, 5) and determine the quadrant in which it lies. Solution: The coordinates x = − 3 and y = 5 indicate a point 3 units to the left of and 5 units above the origin. Answer: The point is plotted in quadrant II (QII) because the x-coordinate is negative and the y-coordinate is positive.   Ordered pairs with 0 as one of the coordinates do not lie in a quadrant; these points are on one axis or the other (or the point is the origin if both coordinates are 0). Also, the scale indicated on the x-axis may be different from the scale indicated on the y-axis. Choose a scale that is convenient for the given situation.   Example 2: Plot this set of ordered pairs: {(4, 0), (−6, 0), (0, 3), (−2, 6), (−4, −6)}. Solution: Each tick mark on the x-axis represents 2 units and each tick mark on the y-axis represents 3 units.   Example 3: Plot this set of ordered pairs: {(−6, −5), (−3, −3), (0, −1), (3, 1), (6, 3)}. Solution: In this example, the points appear to be collinear Describes points that lie on the same line. , or to lie on the same line. The entire chapter focuses on finding and expressing points with this property.   Try this! Plot the set of points {(5, 3), (−3, 2), (−2, −4), (4, −3)} and indicate in which quadrant they lie. ([Link: Click here for printable graph paper in PDF.]) Answer: Video Solution Graphs are used in everyday life to display data visually. A line graph A set of related data values graphed on a coordinate plane and connected by line segments. consists of a set of related data values graphed on a coordinate plane and connected by line segments. Typically, the independent quantity, such as time, is displayed on the x-axis and the dependent quantity, such as distance traveled, on the y-axis.   Example 4: The following line graph shows the number of mathematics and statistics bachelor’s degrees awarded in the United States each year since 1970. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. a. How many mathematics and statistics bachelor’s degrees were awarded in 1975? b. In which years were the number of mathematics and statistics degrees awarded at the low of 11,000? Solution: a. The scale on the x-axis represents time since 1970, so to determine the number of degrees awarded in 1975, read the y-value of the graph at x = 5. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. The y-value corresponding to x = 5 is 18. The graph indicates that this is in thousands; there were 18,000 mathematics and statistics degrees awarded in 1975. b. To find the year a particular number of degrees was awarded, first look at the y-axis. In this case, 11,000 degrees is represented by 11 on the y-axis; look to the right to see in which years this occurred. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. The y-value of 11 occurs at two data points, one where x = 10 and the other where x = 30. These values correspond to the years 1980 and 2000, respectively. Answers: a. In the year 1975, 18,000 mathematics and statistics degrees were awarded. b. In the years 1980 and 2000, the lows of 11,000 mathematics and statistics degrees were awarded.  || Distance Formula Frequently you need to calculate the distance between two points in a plane. To do this, form a right triangle using the two points as vertices of the triangle and then apply the Pythagorean theorem. Recall that the Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . states that if given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units, then the square of the measure of the hypotenuse c is equal to the sum of the squares of the legs: a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . In other words, the hypotenuse of any right triangle is equal to the square root of the sum of the squares of its legs.   Example 5: Find the distance between (−1, 2) and (3, 5). Solution: Form a right triangle by drawing horizontal and vertical lines through the two points. This creates a right triangle as shown below: The length of leg b is calculated by finding the distance between the x-values of the given points, and the length of leg a is calculated by finding the distance between the given y-values. Next, use the Pythagorean theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: The distance between the two points is 5 units.   Generalize this process to produce a formula that can be used to algebraically calculate the distance between any two given points. Given two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 )   and ( x 2 ,   y 2 )   , then the distance, d, between them is given by the distance formula Given two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , calculate the distance d between them using the formula d = ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − √ . : d = ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − √   Example 6: Calculate the distance between (−3, −1) and (−2, 4). Solution: Use the distance formula. It is a good practice to include the formula in its general form as a part of the written solution before substituting values for the variables. This improves readability and reduces the chance for errors. Answer: 26 − − √ units   Try this! Calculate the distance between (−7, 5) and (−1, 13). Answer: 10 units Video Solution   Example 7: Do the three points (1, −1), (3, −3), and (3, 1) form a right triangle? Solution: The Pythagorean theorem states that having side lengths that satisfy the property a 2 + b 2 = c 2 is a necessary and sufficient condition of right triangles. In other words, if you can show that the sum of the squares of the leg lengths of the triangle is equal to the square of the length of the hypotenuse, then the figure must be a right triangle. First, calculate the length of each side using the distance formula. Now we check to see if a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . Answer: Yes, the three points form a right triangle. In fact, since two of the legs are equal in length, the points form an isosceles right triangle.  || Midpoint Formula The point that bisects the line segment formed by two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , is called the midpoint Given two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , the midpoint is an ordered pair given by ( x 1 + x 2 2 ,   y 1 + y 2 2 ) . and is given by the following formula: The midpoint is an ordered pair formed by finding the average of the x-values and the average of the y-values of the given points.   Example 8: Calculate the midpoint between (−1, −2) and (7, 4). Solution: First, calculate the average of the x- and y-values of the given points. Next, form the midpoint as an ordered pair using the averaged coordinates. Answer: (3, 1)   To verify that this is indeed the midpoint, calculate the distance between the two given points and verify that the result is equal to the sum of the two equal distances from the endpoints to this midpoint. This verification is left to the reader as an exercise.   Try this! Find the midpoint between (−6, 5) and (6, −11). Answer: (0, −3) Video Solution  ||  || Solutions to Equations with Two Variables A linear equation with two variables An equation with two variables that can be written in the standard form a x + b y = c , where the real numbers a and b are not both zero. has standard form a x + b y = c , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a and b are not both 0. Solutions to equations of this form are ordered pairs (x, y), where the coordinates, when substituted into the equation, produce a true statement.   Example 1: Determine whether (1, −2) and (−4, 1) are solutions to 6 x − 3 y = 12 . Solution: Substitute the x- and y-values into the equation to determine whether the ordered pair produces a true statement. Answer: (1, −2) is a solution, and (−4, 1) is not.   It is often the case that a linear equation is given in a form where one of the variables, usually y, is isolated. If this is the case, then we can check that an ordered pair is a solution by substituting in a value for one of the coordinates and simplifying to see if we obtain the other.   Example 2: Are (   1 2 ,   − 3 ) and ( − 5 ,   14 ) solutions to y = 2 x − 4 ? Solution: Substitute the x-values and simplify to see if the corresponding y-values are obtained. Answer: (   1 2 ,   − 3 ) is a solution, and ( − 5 ,   14 ) is not.   Try this! Is (6, −1) a solution to y = − 2 3 x + 3 ? Answer: Yes Video Solution When given linear equations with two variables, we can solve for one of the variables, usually y, and obtain an equivalent equation as follows: Written in this form, we can see that y depends on x. Here x is the independent variable The variable that determines the values of other variables. Usually we think of the x-value as the independent variable. and y is the dependent variable The variable whose value is determined by the value of the independent variable. Usually we think of the y-value as the dependent variable. . The linear equation y = 2 x − 4 can be used to find ordered pair solutions. If we substitute any real number for x, then we can simplify to find the corresponding y-value. For example, if x = 3 , then y = 2 ( 3 ) − 4 = 6 − 4 = 2 , and we can form an ordered pair solution, (3, 2). Since there are infinitely many real numbers to choose for x, the linear equation has infinitely many ordered pair solutions (x, y).   Example 3: Find ordered pair solutions to the equation 5 x − y = 14 with the given x-values {−2, −1, 0, 4, 6}. Solution: First, solve for y. Next, substitute the x-values in the equation y = 5 x − 14 to find the corresponding y-values. Answer: {(−2, −24), (−1, −19), (0, −14), (4, 6), (6, 16)}   In the previous example, certain x-values are given, but that is not always going to be the case. When treating x as the independent variable, we can choose any values for x and then substitute them into the equation to find the corresponding y-values. This method produces as many ordered pair solutions as we wish.   Example 4: Find five ordered pair solutions to 6 x + 2 y = 10 . Solution: First, solve for y. Next, choose any set of x-values. Usually we choose some negative values and some positive values. In this case, we will find the corresponding y-values when x is {−2, −1, 0, 1, 2}. Make the substitutions required to fill in the following table (often referred to as a t-chart): Answer: {(−2, 11), (−1, 8), (0, 5), (1, 2), (2, −1)}. Since there are infinitely many ordered pair solutions, answers may vary depending on the choice of values for the independent variable.   Try this! Find five ordered pair solutions to 10 x − 2 y = 2 . Answer: {(−2, −11), (−1, −6), (0, −1), (1, 4), (2, 9)} (answers may vary) Video Solution  || Graph by Plotting Points Since the solutions to linear equations are ordered pairs, they can be graphed using the rectangular coordinate system. The set of all solutions to a linear equation can be represented on a rectangular coordinate plane using a straight line connecting at least two points; this line is called its graph A point on the number line associated with a coordinate. . To illustrate this, plot five ordered pair solutions, {(−2, 11), (−1, 8), (0, 5), (1, 2), (2, −1)}, to the linear equation 6 x + 2 y = 10 . Notice that the points are collinear; this will be the case for any linear equation. Draw a line through the points with a straightedge, and add arrows on either end to indicate that the graph extends indefinitely. The resulting line represents all solutions to , of which there are infinitely many. The steps for graphing lines by plotting points are outlined in the following example.   Example 5: Find five ordered pair solutions and graph: . Solution: Step 1: Solve for y. Step2: Choose at least two x-values and find the corresponding y-values. In this section, we will choose five real numbers to use as x-values. It is a good practice to choose 0 and some negative numbers, as well as some positive numbers. Five ordered pair solutions are {(−2, −6), (−1, −4), (0, −2), (1, 0), (2, 2)} Step 3: Choose an appropriate scale, plot the points, and draw a line through them using a straightedge. In this case, choose a scale where each tick mark on the y-axis represents 2 units because all the y-values are multiples of 2. Answer: It will not always be the case that y can be solved in terms of x with integer coefficients. In fact, the coefficients often turn out to be fractions.   Example 6: Find five ordered pair solutions and graph: . Solution: Remember that you can choose any real number for the independent variable x, so choose wisely here. Since the denominator of the coefficient of the variable x is 2, you can avoid fractions by choosing multiples of 2 for the x-values. In this case, choose the set of x-values {−6, −4, −2, 0, 2} and find the corresponding y-values. Five solutions are {(−6, −10), (−4, −5), (−2, 0), (0, 5), (2, 10)}. Here we choose to scale the x-axis with multiples of 2 and the y-axis with multiples of 5. Answer:   Try this! Find five ordered pair solutions and graph: . Answer: {(−2, 4), (0, 3), (2, 2), (4, 1), (6, 0)} Video Solution  || Horizontal and Vertical Lines We need to recognize by inspection linear equations that represent a vertical or horizontal line.   Example 7: Graph by plotting five points: . Solution: Since the given equation does not have a variable x, we can rewrite it with a 0 coefficient for x. Choose any five values for x and see that the corresponding y-value is always −2. We now have five ordered pair solutions to plot {(−2, −2), (−1, −2), (0, −2), (1, −2), (2, −2)}. Answer: When the coefficient for the variable x is 0, the graph is a horizontal line. In general, the equation for a horizontal line Any line whose equation can be written in the form y = k, where k is a real number. can be written in the form , where k represents any real number.   Example 8: Graph by plotting five points: x = 3. Solution: Since the given equation does not have a variable y, rewrite it with a 0 coefficient for y. Choose any five values for y and see that the corresponding x-value is always 3. We now have five ordered pair solutions to plot: {(3, −2), (3, −1), (3, 0), (3, 1), (3, 2)}. Answer: When the coefficient for the variable y is 0, the graph is a vertical line. In general, the equation for a vertical line Any line whose equation can be written in the form x = k, where k is a real number. can be written as , where k represents any real number. To summarize, if k is a real number,   Try this! Graph and on the same set of axes and determine where they intersect. Answer: (−2, 5) Video Solution  ||  || Definition of x- and y-Intercepts The x-intercept The point (or points) where a graph intersects the x-axis, expressed as an ordered pair (x, 0). is the point where the graph of a line intersects the x-axis. The y-intercept The point (or points) where a graph intersects the y-axis, expressed as an ordered pair (0, y). is the point where the graph of a line intersects the y-axis. These points have the form (x, 0) and (0, y), respectively. To find the x- and y-intercepts algebraically, use the fact that all x-intercepts have a y-value of zero and all y-intercepts have an x-value of zero. To find the y-intercept, set x = 0 and determine the corresponding y-value. Similarly, to find the x-intercept, set y = 0 and determine the corresponding x-value.   Example 1: Find the x- and y-intercepts: − 3 x + 2 y = 12 . Solution: To find the x-intercept, set y = 0. Therefore, the x-intercept is (−4, 0). To find the y-intercept, set x = 0. Hence the y-intercept is (0, 6). Note that this linear equation is graphed above. Answer: x-intercept: (−4, 0); y-intercept: (0, 6)   Example 2: Find the x- and y-intercepts: y = − 3 x + 9 . Solution: Begin by finding the x-intercept. The x-intercept is (3, 0). Next, determine the y-intercept. The y-intercept is (0, 9). Answer: x-intercept: (3, 0); y-intercept: (0, 9)   Keep in mind that the intercepts are ordered pairs and not numbers. In other words, the x-intercept is not x = 2 but rather (2, 0). In addition, not all graphs necessarily have both intercepts: for example, The horizontal line graphed above has a y-intercept of (0, −2) and no x-intercept. The vertical line graphed above has an x-intercept (3, 0) and no y-intercept.   Try this! Find the x- and y-intercepts: 4 x − y = 2 . Answer: x-intercept: (1/2, 0); y-intercept: (0, −2) Video Solution  || Graphing Lines Using Intercepts Since two points determine a line, we can use the x- and y-intercepts to graph linear equations. We have just outlined an easy method for finding intercepts; now we outline the steps for graphing lines using the intercepts.   Example 3: Graph using intercepts: 2 x − 3 y = 12 . Solution: Step 1: Find the x- and y-intercepts. Step 2: Plot the intercepts and draw the line through them. Use a straightedge to create a nice straight line. Add an arrow on either end to indicate that the line continues indefinitely in either direction. Answer:   Example 4: Graph using intercepts: y = − 1 5 x + 3 . Solution: Begin by determining the x- and y-intercepts. Next, graph the two points and draw a line through them with a straightedge. Answer:   Example 5: Graph using intercepts: y = − 2 x . Solution: Here the x- and y-intercepts are actually the same point, the origin. We will need at least one more point so that we can graph the line. Choose any value for x and determine the corresponding value for y. Use the ordered pair solutions (0, 0), (−1, 2), and (1, −2) to graph the line. Answer: To summarize, any linear equation can be graphed by finding two points and connecting them with a line drawn with a straightedge. Two important and useful points are the x- and y-intercepts; find these points by substituting y = 0 and x = 0, respectively. This method for finding intercepts will be used throughout our study of algebra.   Try this! Graph using intercepts: 3 x − 5 y = 15 . Answer: x-intercept: (5, 0); y-intercept: (0, −3) Video Solution  || Finding Intercepts Given the Graph The x- and y-intercepts are important points on any graph. This chapter will focus on the graphs of linear equations. However, at this point, we can use these ideas to determine intercepts of nonlinear graphs. Remember that intercepts are ordered pairs that indicate where the graph intersects the axes.   Example 6: Find the x- and y-intercepts given the following graph: Solution: We see that the graph intersects the x-axis in two places. This graph has two x-intercepts, namely, (−4, 0) and (2, 0). Furthermore, the graph intersects the y-axis in one place. The only y-intercept is (0, −3). Answer: x-intercepts: (−4, 0), (2, 0); y-intercept: (0, −3)   In our study of algebra, we will see that some graphs have many intercepts. Also, we will see that some graphs do not have any.   Example 7: Given the following graph, find the x- and y-intercepts: Solution: This is a graph of a circle; we can see that it does not intersect either axis. Therefore, this graph does not have any intercepts. Answer: None  ||  || Slope The steepness of any incline can be measured as the ratio of the vertical change to the horizontal change. For example, a 5% incline can be written as 5/100, which means that for every 100 feet forward, the height increases 5 feet. In mathematics, we call the incline of a line the slope The incline of a line measured as the ratio of the vertical change to the horizontal change, often referred to as rise over run. and use the letter m to denote it. The vertical change is called the rise The vertical change between any two points on a line. and the horizontal change is called the run The horizontal change between any two points on a line. . The rise and the run can be positive or negative. A positive rise corresponds to a vertical change up and a negative rise corresponds to a vertical change down. A positive run denotes a horizontal change to the right and a negative run corresponds to a horizontal change to the left. Given the graph, we can calculate the slope by determining the vertical and horizontal changes between any two points.   Example 1: Find the slope of the given line: Solution: From the given points on the graph, count 3 units down and 4 units right. Answer: m = − 3 4   Here we have a negative slope, which means that for every 4 units of movement to the right, the vertical change is 3 units downward. There are four geometric cases for the value of the slope. Reading the graph from left to right, we see that lines with an upward incline have positive slopes and lines with a downward incline have negative slopes. If the line is horizontal, then the rise is 0: The slope of a horizontal line is 0. If the line is vertical, then the run is 0: The slope of a vertical line is undefined.   Try this! Find the slope of the given line: Answer: m = 2 3 Video Solution Calculating the slope can be difficult if the graph does not have points with integer coordinates. Therefore, we next develop a formula that allows us to calculate the slope algebraically. Given any two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , we can obtain the rise and run by subtracting the corresponding coordinates. This leads us to the slope formula Given two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , then the slope of the line is given by the formula m = r i s e r u n = y 2 − y 1 x 2 − x 1 . . Given any two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , the slope is given by   Example 2: Find the slope of the line passing through (−3, −5) and (2, 1). Solution: Given (−3, −5) and (2, 1), calculate the difference of the y-values divided by the difference of the x-values. Since subtraction is not commutative, take care to be consistent when subtracting the coordinates. Answer: m = 6 5   We can graph the line described in the previous example and verify that the slope is 6/5. Certainly the graph is optional; the beauty of the slope formula is that we can obtain the slope, given two points, using only algebra.   Example 3: Find the slope of the line passing through (−4, 3) and (−1, −7). Solution: Answer: m = − 10 3   When using the slope formula, take care to be consistent since order does matter. You must subtract the coordinates of the first point from the coordinates of the second point for both the numerator and the denominator in the same order.   Example 4: Find the slope of the line passing through (7, −2) and (−5, −2). Solution: Answer: m = 0 . As an exercise, plot the given two points and verify that they lie on a horizontal line.   Example 5: Find the slope of the line passing through (−4, −3) and (−4, 5). Solution: Answer: The slope m is undefined. As an exercise, plot the given two points and verify that they lie on a vertical line.   Try this! Calculate the slope of the line passing through (−2, 3) and (5, −5). Answer: m = − 8 7 Video Solution When considering the slope as a rate of change it is important to include the correct units.   Example 6: A Corvette Coupe was purchased new in 1970 for about $5,200 and depreciated in value over time until it was sold in 1985 for $1,300. At this point, the car was beginning to be considered a classic and started to increase in value. In the year 2000, when the car was 30 years old, it sold at auction for $10,450. The following line graph depicts the value of the car over time. a. Determine the rate at which the car depreciated in value from 1970 to 1985. b. Determine the rate at which the car appreciated in value from 1985 to 2000. Solution: Notice that the value depends on the age of the car and that the slope measures the rate in dollars per year. a. The slope of the line segment depicting the value for the first 15 years is Answer: The value of the car depreciated $260 per year from 1970 to 1985. b. The slope of the line segment depicting the value for the next 15 years is Answer: The value of the car appreciated $610 per year from 1985 to 2000.  || Slope-Intercept Form of a Line To this point, we have learned how to graph lines by plotting points and by using the x- and y-intercepts. In addition, we have seen that we need only two points to graph a line. In this section, we outline a process to easily determine two points using the y-intercept and the slope. The equation of any nonvertical line can be written in slope-intercept form Any nonvertical line can be written in the form y = m x + b , where m is the slope and (0, b) is the y-intercept. y = m x + b . In this form, we can identify the slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0, b).   Example 7: Determine the slope and y-intercept: y = − 4 5 x + 7 . Solution: In this form, the coefficient of x is the slope, and the constant is the y-value of the y-intercept. Therefore, by inspection, we have Answer: The y-intercept is (0, 7), and the slope is m = − 4 5 .   It is not always the case that the linear equation is given in slope-intercept form. When it is given in standard form, you have to first solve for y to obtain slope-intercept form.   Example 8: Express 3 x + 5 y = 30 in slope-intercept form and then identify the slope and y-intercept. Solution: Begin by solving for y. To do this, apply the properties of equality to first isolate 5y and then divide both sides by 5. Answer: Slope-intercept form: y = − 3 5 x + 6 ; y-intercept: (0, 6); slope: m = − 3 5   Once the equation is in slope-intercept form, we immediately have one point to plot, the y-intercept. From the intercept, you can mark off the slope to plot another point on the line. From the previous example we have Starting from the point (0, 6), use the slope to mark another point 3 units down and 5 units to the right. It is not necessary to check that the second point, (5, 3), solves the original linear equation. However, we do it here for the sake of completeness. Marking off the slope in this fashion produces as many ordered pair solutions as we desire. Notice that if we mark off the slope again, from the point (5, 3), then we obtain the x-intercept, (10, 0).   Example 9: Graph: − x + 2 y = 4 . Solution: In this example, we outline the general steps for graphing a line using slope-intercept form. Step 1: Solve for y to obtain slope-intercept form. Step 2: Identify the y-intercept and slope. Step 3: Plot the y-intercept and use the slope to find another ordered pair solution. Starting from the y-intercept, mark off the slope and identify a second point. In this case, mark a point after a rise of 1 unit and a run of 2 units. Step 4: Draw the line through the two points with a straightedge. Answer: In this example, we notice that we could get the x-intercept by marking off the slope in a different but equivalent manner. Consider the slope as the ratio of two negative numbers as follows: We could obtain another point on the line by marking off the equivalent slope down 1 unit and left 2 units. We do this twice to obtain the x-intercept, (−4, 0). Marking off the slope multiple times is not necessarily always going to give us the x-intercept, but when it does, we obtain a valuable point with little effort. In fact, it is a good practice to mark off the slope multiple times; doing so allows you to obtain more points on the line and produce a more accurate graph.   Example 10: Graph and find the x-intercept: y = 3 4 x − 2 . Solution: The equation is given in slope-intercept form. Therefore, by inspection, we have the y-intercept and slope. We can see that the x-value of the x-intercept is a mixed number between 2 and 3. To algebraically find x-intercepts, recall that we must set y = 0 and solve for x. Answer: The x-intercept is ( 2 2 3 ,   0 ) .   Example 11: Graph: x − y = 0 . Solution: Begin by solving for y. The equation y = x can be written y = 1 x + 0 , and we have Answer:   Try this! Graph − 2 x + 5 y = 20 and label the x-intercept. Answer: Video Solution  ||  || Finding Equations Using Slope-Intercept Form Given the algebraic equation of a line, we are able to graph it in a number of ways. In this section, we will be given a geometric description of a line and be asked to find the algebraic equation. Finding the equation of a line can be accomplished in a number of ways, the first of which makes use of slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . If we know the slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0, b), we can construct the equation.   Example 1: Find the equation of a line with slope m = − 5 8 and y-intercept (0, 1). Solution: The given y-intercept implies that b = 1 . Substitute the slope m and the y-value of the y-intercept b into the equation y = m x + b . Answer: y = − 5 8 x + 1   Finding a linear equation is very straightforward if the slope and y-intercept are given. This is certainly not always the case; however, the example demonstrates that the algebraic equation of a line depends on these two pieces of information. If the graph is given, then we can often read it to determine the y-intercept and slope.   Example 2: Find the equation of the line given the graph: Solution: By reading the graph, we can see that the y-intercept is (0, 4), and thus Furthermore, from the points (0, 4) to (4, 2), we can see that the rise is −2 units and the run is 4 units. Now substitute m and b into slope-intercept form: Answer: y = − 1 2 x + 4   Often the y-intercept and slope will not be given or are not easily discernible from the graph. For this reason, we will develop some algebraic techniques that allow us to calculate these quantities.   Example 3: Find the equation of the line with slope m = − 2 3 passing through (−6, 3). Solution: Begin by substituting the given slope into slope-intercept form. For the ordered pair (−6, 3) to be a solution, it must solve the equation. Therefore, we can use it to find b. Substitute the appropriate x- and y-values as follows: After substituting the appropriate values, solve for the only remaining variable, b. Once we have b, we can then complete the equation: As a check, verify that (−6, 3) solves this linear equation as follows: Answer: y = − 2 3 x − 1   Example 4: Find the equation of the line given the graph: Solution: Use the graph to determine the slope. From the points (−5, 2) to (−1, 0), we can see that the rise between the points is −2 units and the run is 4 units. Therefore, we calculate the slope as follows: Substitute the slope into slope-intercept form. Now substitute the coordinates of one of the given points to find b. It does not matter which one you choose. Here choose (−1, 0): Next, put it all together. Answer: y = − 1 2 x − 1 2   As an exercise, substitute the coordinates of the point (−5, 2) to see that b will turn out to be the same value. In fact, you can substitute any ordered pair solution of the line to find b. We next outline an algebraic technique for finding the equation of a nonvertical line passing through two given points.   Example 5: Find the equation of the line passing through (−4, −2) and (1, 3). Solution: When finding a linear equation using slope-intercept form y = m x + b , the goal is to find m and then b. Step 1: Find the slope m. In this case, given two points, use the slope formula. Substitute m = 1 into slope-intercept form. Step 2: Find b. To do this, substitute the coordinates of any given ordered pair solution. Use (1, 3): Step 3: Finish building the equation by substituting in the value for b. In this case, we use b = 2 . Answer: y = x + 2   These three steps outline the process for finding the equation of any nonvertical line in slope-intercept form. This is a completely algebraic method, but always keep in mind the geometry behind the technique. Note that the line has a y-intercept at (0, 2), with slope m = 1 .   Example 6: Find the equation of the line passing through (−1, 3) and (5, 1). Solution: First, find m, the slope. Given two points, use the slope formula as follows: Substitute m = − 1 3 into slope-intercept form. Next, find b. Substitute the coordinates of the point (−1, 3). Finally, substitute b = 8 3 into the equation. Answer: y = − 1 3 x + 8 3   Try this! Find the equation of the line passing through (−3, 4) and (6, −2). Answer: y = − 2 3 x + 2 Video Solution  || Finding Equations Using a Point and the Slope Given any point on a line and its slope, we can find the equation of that line. Begin by applying the slope formula with a given point ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and a variable point ( x ,   y ) . The equation y − y 1 =   m ( x − x 1 ) is called the point-slope form of a line Any nonvertical line can be written in the form y − y 1 =   m ( x − x 1 ) , where m is the slope and ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) is any point on the line. . Any nonvertical linear equation can be written in this form. It is useful for finding the equation of a line given the slope and any ordered pair solution.   Example 7: Find the equation of the line with slope m = 1 2 passing through (4, −1). Solution: Use point-slope form, where m = 1 2 and ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) = ( 4 , − 1 ) . At this point, we must choose to present the equation of our line in either standard form or slope-intercept form. In this textbook, we will present our lines in slope-intercept form. This facilitates future graphing. Answer: y = 1 2 x − 3   Example 8: Find the equation of the line passing through (−5, 3) with slope m = − 2 5 . Solution: Substitute (−5, 3) and m = − 2 5 into point-slope form. Answer: y = − 2 5 x + 1   It is always important to understand what is occurring geometrically. Compare the answer for the last example to the corresponding graph below. The geometric understanding is important because you will often be given graphs from which you will need to determine a point on the line and the slope.   Example 9: Find an equation of the given graph: Solution: Between the points (1, 1) to (3, 0), we can see that the rise is −1 unit and the run is 2 units. The slope of the line is m = r i s e r u n = − 1 2 = − 1 2 . Use this and the point (3, 0) to find the equation as follows: Answer: y = − 1 2 x + 3 2   Example 10: Find the equation of the line passing through (−1, 1) and (7, −1). Solution: Begin by calculating the slope using the slope formula. Next, substitute into point-slope form using one of the given points; it does not matter which point is used. Use m = − 1 4 and the point (−1, 1). Answer: y = − 1 4 x + 3 4   Try this! Find the equation of the line passing through (4, −5) and (−4, 1). Answer: y = − 3 4 x − 2 Video Solution  ||  || Definition of Parallel and Perpendicular Parallel lines Lines in the same plane that do not intersect; their slopes are the same. are lines in the same plane that never intersect. Two nonvertical lines in the same plane, with slopes m 1 and m 2 , are parallel if their slopes are the same, m 1 = m 2 . Consider the following two lines: Consider their corresponding graphs: Both lines have a slope m = 3 4 and thus are parallel. Perpendicular lines Lines in the same plane that intersect at right angles; their slopes are opposite reciprocals. are lines in the same plane that intersect at right angles (90 degrees). Two nonvertical lines in the same plane, with slopes m 1 and m 2 , are perpendicular if the product of their slopes is −1: m 1 ⋅ m 2 = − 1 . We can solve for m 1 and obtain m 1 = − 1 m 2 . In this form, we see that perpendicular lines have slopes that are negative reciprocals, or opposite reciprocals Two real numbers whose product is −1. Given a real number a b , the opposite reciprocal is − b a . . For example, if given a slope then the slope of a perpendicular line is the opposite reciprocal: The mathematical notation m ⊥ reads “m perpendicular.” We can verify that two slopes produce perpendicular lines if their product is −1. Geometrically, we note that if a line has a positive slope, then any perpendicular line will have a negative slope. Furthermore, the rise and run between two perpendicular lines are interchanged. Perpendicular lines have slopes that are opposite reciprocals, so remember to find the reciprocal and change the sign. In other words, Determining the slope of a perpendicular line can be performed mentally. Some examples follow. Given slope Slope of perpendicular line m = 1 2 m ⊥ = − 2 m = − 3 4 m ⊥ = 4 3 m = 3 m ⊥ = − 1 3 m = − 4 m ⊥ = 1 4   Example 1: Determine the slope of a line parallel to y = − 5 x + 3 . Solution: Since the given line is in slope-intercept form, we can see that its slope is m = − 5 . Thus the slope of any line parallel to the given line must be the same, m ∥ = − 5 . The mathematical notation m ∥ reads “m parallel.” Answer: m ∥ = − 5   Example 2: Determine the slope of a line perpendicular to 3 x − 7 y = 21 . Solution: First, solve for y and express the line in slope-intercept form. In this form, we can see that the slope of the given line is m = 3 7 , and thus m ⊥ = − 7 3 . Answer: m ⊥ = − 7 3   Try this! Find the slope of the line perpendicular to 15 x + 5 y = 20 . Answer: m ⊥ = 1 3 Video Solution  || Finding Equations of Parallel and Perpendicular Lines We have seen that the graph of a line is completely determined by two points or one point and its slope. Often you will be asked to find the equation of a line given some geometric relationship—for instance, whether the line is parallel or perpendicular to another line.   Example 3: Find the equation of the line passing through (6, −1) and parallel to y = 1 2 x + 2 . Solution: Here the given line has slope m = 1 2 , and the slope of a line parallel is m ∥ = 1 2 . Since you are given a point and the slope, use the point-slope form of a line to determine the equation. Answer: y = 1 2 x − 4   It is important to have a geometric understanding of this question. We were asked to find the equation of a line parallel to another line passing through a certain point. Through the point (6, −1) we found a parallel line, y = 1 2 x − 4 , shown dashed. Notice that the slope is the same as the given line, but the y-intercept is different. If we keep in mind the geometric interpretation, then it will be easier to remember the process needed to solve the problem.   Example 4: Find the equation of the line passing through (−1, −5) and perpendicular to y = − 1 4 x + 2 . Solution: The given line has slope m = − 1 4 , and thus m ⊥ = + 4 1 = 4 . Substitute this slope and the given point into point-slope form. Answer: y = 4 x − 1   Geometrically, we see that the line y = 4 x − 1 , shown dashed below, passes through (−1, −5) and is perpendicular to the given line. It is not always the case that the given line is in slope-intercept form. Often you have to perform additional steps to determine the slope. The general steps for finding the equation of a line are outlined in the following example.   Example 5: Find the equation of the line passing through (8, −2) and perpendicular to 6 x + 3 y = 1 . Solution: Step 1: Find the slope m. First, find the slope of the given line. To do this, solve for y to change standard form to slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . In this form, you can see that the slope is m = − 2 = − 2 1 , and thus m ⊥ = − 1 − 2 = + 1 2 . Step 2: Substitute the slope you found and the given point into the point-slope form of an equation for a line. In this case, the slope is m ⊥ = 1 2 and the given point is (8, −2). Step 3: Solve for y. Answer: y = 1 2 x − 6   Example 6: Find the equation of the line passing through ( 7 2 ,   1 ) and parallel to 2 x + 14 y = 7 . Solution: Find the slope m by solving for y. The given line has the slope m = − 1 7 , and so m ∥ = − 1 7 . We use this and the point ( 7 2 ,   1 ) in point-slope form. Answer: y = − 1 7 x + 3 2   Try this! Find the equation of the line perpendicular to x − 3 y = 9 and passing through ( − 1 2 ,   2 ) . Answer: y = − 3 x + 1 2 Video Solution When finding an equation of a line perpendicular to a horizontal or vertical line, it is best to consider the geometric interpretation.   Example 7: Find the equation of the line passing through (−3, −2) and perpendicular to y = 4 . Solution: We recognize that y = 4 is a horizontal line and we want to find a perpendicular line passing through (−3, −2). If we draw the line perpendicular to the given horizontal line, the result is a vertical line. Equations of vertical lines look like x = k . Since it must pass through (−3, −2), we conclude that x = − 3 is the equation. All ordered pair solutions of a vertical line must share the same x-coordinate. Answer: x = − 3   We can rewrite the equation of any horizontal line, y = k , in slope-intercept form as follows: Written in this form, we see that the slope is m = 0 = 0 1 . If we try to find the slope of a perpendicular line by finding the opposite reciprocal, we run into a problem: m ⊥ = − 1 0 , which is undefined. This is why we took care to restrict the definition to two nonvertical lines. Remember that horizontal lines are perpendicular to vertical lines.  ||  || Relations, Functions, Domain, and Range Relationships between sets occur often in everyday life. For example, for each month in Cape Canaveral, we can associate an average amount of rainfall. In this case, the amount of precipitation depends on the month of the year, and the data can be written in tabular form or as a set of ordered pairs. Month Precipitation Ordered pairs January 2.4 in (January, 2.4) February 3.3 in (February, 3.3) March 3.1 in (March, 3.1) April 2.0 in (April, 2.0) May 3.8 in (May, 3.8) June 6.8 in (June, 6.8) July 8.1 in (July, 8.1) August 7.6 in (August, 7.6) September 7.3 in (September, 7.3) October 4.1 in (October, 4.1) November 3.3 in (November, 3.3) December 2.4 in (December, 2.4) We define a relation Any set of ordered pairs. as any set of ordered pairs. Usually we write the independent component of the relation in the first column and the dependent component in the second column. In the opening example, notice that it makes sense to relate the average amount of precipitation as dependent on the month of year. The set of all elements in the first column of a relation is called the domain The set of first components of a relation. The x-values define the domain in relations consisting of points (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. . The set of all elements that compose the second column is called the range The set of second components of a relation. The y-values define the range in relations consisting of points (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. . In this example, the domain consists of the set of all months of the year, and the range consists of the values that represent the average rainfall for each month. In the context of algebra, the relations of interest are sets of ordered pairs (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. In this case, the x-values define the domain and the y-values define the range. Of special interest are relations where every x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value; these relations are called functions Relations where every x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value. With the definition comes new notation: f ( x ) = y , which is read “f of x is equal to y.” .   Example 1: Determine the domain and range of the following relation and state whether or not it is a function: {(−1, 4), (0, 7), (2, 3), (3, 3), (4, −2)}. Solution: Here we separate the domain and range and depict the correspondence between the values with arrows. Answer: The domain is {−1, 0, 2, 3, 4}, and the range is {−2, 3, 4, 7}. The relation is a function because each x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value.   Example 2: Determine the domain and range of the following relation and state whether or not it is a function: {(−4, −3), (−2, 6), (0, 3), (3, 5), (3, 7)}. Solution: Answer: The domain is {−4, −2, 0, 3}, and the range is {−3, 3, 5, 6, 7}. This relation is not a function because the x-value 3 has two corresponding y-values.   In the previous example, the relation is not a function because it contains ordered pairs with the same x-value, (3, 5) and (3, 7). We can recognize functions as relations where no x-values are repeated. In algebra, equations such as y = 3 4 x − 2 define relations. This linear equation can be graphed as follows: The graph is a relation since it represents the infinite set of ordered pair solutions to y = 3 4 x − 2 . The domain is the set of all x-values, and in this case consists of all real numbers. The range is the set of all possible y-values, and in this case also consists of all real numbers. Furthermore, the graph is a function because for each x-value there is only one corresponding y-value. In fact, any nonvertical or nonhorizontal line is a function with domain and range consisting of all real numbers. Any graph is a set of ordered pairs and thus defines a relation. Consider the following graph of a circle: Here the graph represents a relation where many x-values in the domain correspond to two y-values. If we draw a vertical line, as illustrated, we can see that (3, 2) and (3, −2) are two ordered pairs with the same x-value. Therefore, the x-value 3 corresponds to two y-values; hence the graph does not represent a function. The illustration suggests that if any vertical line intersects a graph more than once, then the graph does not represent a function. This is called the vertical line test If a vertical line intersects a graph more than once, then the graph does not represent a function. .   Example 3: Given the following graph, determine the domain and range and state whether or not it is a function. Solution: The given shape is called a parabola and extends indefinitely to the left and right as indicated by the arrows. This suggests that if we choose any x-value, then we will be able to find a corresponding point on the graph; therefore, the domain consists of all real numbers. Furthermore, the graph shows that −1 is the minimum y-value, and any y-value greater than that is represented in the relation. Hence the range consists of all y-values greater than or equal to −1, or in interval notation, [ − 1 ,   ∞ ) . Lastly, any vertical line will intersect the graph only once; therefore, it is a function. Answer: The domain is all real numbers R = (−∞, ∞), and the range is [ − 1 ,   ∞ ) . The graph represents a function because it passes the vertical line test.   Try this! Given the graph, determine the domain and range and state whether or not it is a function: Answer: Domain: [ − 4 ,   ∞ ) ; range: ( − ∞ ,   ∞ ) ; function: no Video Solution  || Function Notation and Linear Functions With the definition of a function comes special notation. If we consider each x-value to be the input that produces exactly one output, then we can use the notation The notation f ( x ) reads “f of x” and should not be confused with multiplication. Most of our study of algebra involves functions, so the notation becomes very useful when performing common tasks. Functions can be named with different letters; some common names for functions are g(x), h(x), C(x), and R(x). First, consider nonvertical lines that we know can be expressed using slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . For any real numbers m and b, the equation defines a function, and we can replace y with the new notation f ( x ) as follows: Therefore, a linear function Any function that can be written in the form f(x) = mx + b. is any function that can be written in the form f ( x ) = m x + b . In particular, we can write the following: The notation also shows values to evaluate in the equation. If the value for x is given as 8, then we know that we can find the corresponding y-value by substituting 8 in for x and simplifying. Using function notation, this is denoted f ( 8 ) and can be interpreted as follows: Finally, simplify: We have f ( 8 ) = 4 . This notation tells us that when x = 8 (the input), the function results in 4 (the output).   Example 4: Given the linear function f ( x ) = − 5 x + 7 , find f ( − 2 ) . Solution: In this case, f ( − 2 ) indicates that we should evaluate when x = − 2 . Answer: f ( − 2 ) = 17   Example 5: Given the linear function f ( x ) = − 5 x + 7 , find x when f ( x ) = 10 . Solution: In this case, f ( x ) = 10 indicates that the function should be set equal to 10. Answer: Here x = − 3 5 , and we can write f ( − 3 5 ) = 10 .   Example 6: Given the graph of a linear function g ( x ) , a. Find g ( 2 ) . b. Find x when g ( x ) = 3 . Solution: a. The notation g ( 2 ) implies that x = 2. Use the graph to determine the corresponding y-value. Answer: g ( 2 ) = 1 b. The notation g ( x ) = 3 implies that the y-value is given as 3. Use the graph to determine the corresponding x-value. Answer: x = 4   Example 7: Graph the linear function f ( x ) = − 5 3 x + 6 and state the domain and range. Solution: From the function, we see that b = 6 and thus the y-intercept is (0, 6). Also, we can see that the slope is m = − 5 3 = − 5 3 = r i s e r u n . Starting from the y-intercept, mark a second point down 5 units and right 3 units. Given any coordinate on the x-axis, we can find a corresponding point on the graph; the domain consists of all real numbers. Also, for any coordinate on the y-axis, we can find a point on the graph; the range consists of all real numbers. Answer: Both the domain and range consist of all real numbers R.   Try this! Given the linear function g ( x ) = − x + 5 , a. Find g ( − 1 2 ) . b. Find x when g ( x ) = 18 . Answers: a. g ( − 1 2 ) = 11 2 b. x = − 13 Video Solution  ||  || Solutions to Linear Inequalities We know that a linear equation with two variables has infinitely many ordered pair solutions that form a line when graphed. A linear inequality with two variables An inequality relating linear expressions with two variables. The solution set is a region defining half of the plane. , on the other hand, has a solution set consisting of a region that defines half of the plane. For the inequality, the line defines one boundary of the region that is shaded. This indicates that any ordered pair that is in the shaded region, including the boundary line, will satisfy the inequality. To see that this is the case, choose a few test points A point not on the boundary of the linear inequality used as a means to determine in which half-plane the solutions lie. and substitute them into the inequality. Also, we can see that ordered pairs outside the shaded region do not solve the linear inequality. The graph of the solution set to a linear inequality is always a region. However, the boundary may not always be included in that set. In the previous example, the line was part of the solution set because of the “or equal to” part of the inclusive inequality ≤ . If we have a strict inequality < , we would then use a dashed line to indicate that those points are not included in the solution set. Consider the point (0, 3) on the boundary; this ordered pair satisfies the linear equation. It is the “or equal to” part of the inclusive inequality that makes it part of the solution set. So far, we have seen examples of inequalities that were “less than.” Now consider the following graphs with the same boundary: Given the graphs above, what might we expect if we use the origin (0, 0) as a test point?   Try this! Which of the ordered pairs (−2, −1), (0, 0), (−2, 8), (2, 1), and (4, 2) solve the inequality y > − 1 2 x + 2 ? Answer: (−2, 8) and (4, 2) Video Solution  || Graphing Solutions to Linear Inequalities Solutions to linear inequalities are a shaded half-plane, bounded by a solid line or a dashed line. This boundary is either included in the solution or not, depending on the given inequality. If we are given a strict inequality, we use a dashed line to indicate that the boundary is not included. If we are given an inclusive inequality, we use a solid line to indicate that it is included. The steps for graphing the solution set for an inequality with two variables are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Graph the solution set: y > − 3 x + 1 . Solution: Step 1: Graph the boundary line. In this case, graph a dashed line y = − 3 x + 1 because of the strict inequality. By inspection, we see that the slope is m = − 3 = − 3 1 = r i s e r u n and the y-intercept is (0, 1). Step 2: Test a point not on the boundary. A common test point is the origin (0, 0). The test point helps us determine which half of the plane to shade. Step 3: Shade the region containing the solutions. Since the test point (0, 0) was not a solution, it does not lie in the region containing all the ordered pair solutions. Therefore, shade the half of the plane that does not contain this test point. In this case, shade above the boundary line. Answer: Consider the problem of shading above or below the boundary line when the inequality is in slope-intercept form. If y > m x + b , then shade above the line. If y < m x + b , then shade below the line. Use this with caution; sometimes the boundary is given in standard form, in which case these rules do not apply.   Example 2: Graph the solution set: 2 x − 5 y ≥ − 10 . Solution: Here the boundary is defined by the line 2 x − 5 y = − 10 . Since the inequality is inclusive, we graph the boundary using a solid line. In this case, graph the boundary line using intercepts. Next, test a point; this helps decide which region to shade. Since the test point is in the solution set, shade the half of the plane that contains it. Answer: In this example, notice that the solution set consists of all the ordered pairs below the boundary line. This may be counterintuitive because of the original ≥ in the inequality. This illustrates that it is a best practice to actually test a point. Solve for y and you see that the shading is correct. In slope-intercept form, you can see that the region below the boundary line should be shaded. An alternate approach is to first express the boundary in slope-intercept form, graph it, and then shade the appropriate region.   Example 3: Graph the solution set: y < 2 . Solution: First, graph the boundary line y = 2 with a dashed line because of the strict inequality. Next, test a point. In this case, shade the region that contains the test point. Answer:   Try this! Graph the solution set: 5 x − y ≤ 10 . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_1	 || Rectangular Coordinate System The rectangular coordinate system A system with two number lines at right angles uniquely specifying points in a plane using ordered pairs (x, y). consists of two real number lines that intersect at a right angle. The horizontal number line is called the x-axis The horizontal number line used as reference in the rectangular coordinate system. , and the vertical number line is called the y-axis The vertical number line used as reference in the rectangular coordinate system. . These two number lines define a flat surface called a plane The flat surface defined by the x- and y-axes. , and each point on this plane is associated with an ordered pair A pair (x, y) that identifies position relative to the origin on a rectangular coordinate plane. of real numbers (x, y). The first number is called the x-coordinate, and the second number is called the y-coordinate. The intersection of the two axes is known as the origin The point where the x- and y-axes cross, denoted by (0, 0). , which corresponds to the point (0, 0). An ordered pair (x, y) represents the position of a point relative to the origin. The x-coordinate represents a position to the right of the origin if it is positive and to the left of the origin if it is negative. The y-coordinate represents a position above the origin if it is positive and below the origin if it is negative. Using this system, every position (point) in the plane is uniquely identified. For example, the pair (2, 3) denotes the position relative to the origin as shown: Portrait of René Descartes (1596–1650) after Frans Hals, from http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Frans_Hals_-_Portret_van_Ren%C3%A9_Descartes.jpg. This system is often called the Cartesian coordinate system Used in honor of René Descartes when referring to the rectangular coordinate system. , named after the French mathematician René Descartes (1596–1650). The x- and y-axes break the plane into four regions called quadrants The four regions of a rectangular coordinate plane partly bounded by the x- and y-axes and numbered using the roman numerals I, II, III, and IV. , named using roman numerals I, II, III, and IV, as pictured. In quadrant I, both coordinates are positive. In quadrant II, the x-coordinate is negative and the y-coordinate is positive. In quadrant III, both coordinates are negative. In quadrant IV, the x-coordinate is positive and the y-coordinate is negative.   Example 1: Plot the ordered pair (−3, 5) and determine the quadrant in which it lies. Solution: The coordinates x = − 3 and y = 5 indicate a point 3 units to the left of and 5 units above the origin. Answer: The point is plotted in quadrant II (QII) because the x-coordinate is negative and the y-coordinate is positive.   Ordered pairs with 0 as one of the coordinates do not lie in a quadrant; these points are on one axis or the other (or the point is the origin if both coordinates are 0). Also, the scale indicated on the x-axis may be different from the scale indicated on the y-axis. Choose a scale that is convenient for the given situation.   Example 2: Plot this set of ordered pairs: {(4, 0), (−6, 0), (0, 3), (−2, 6), (−4, −6)}. Solution: Each tick mark on the x-axis represents 2 units and each tick mark on the y-axis represents 3 units.   Example 3: Plot this set of ordered pairs: {(−6, −5), (−3, −3), (0, −1), (3, 1), (6, 3)}. Solution: In this example, the points appear to be collinear Describes points that lie on the same line. , or to lie on the same line. The entire chapter focuses on finding and expressing points with this property.   Try this! Plot the set of points {(5, 3), (−3, 2), (−2, −4), (4, −3)} and indicate in which quadrant they lie. ([Link: Click here for printable graph paper in PDF.]) Answer: Video Solution Graphs are used in everyday life to display data visually. A line graph A set of related data values graphed on a coordinate plane and connected by line segments. consists of a set of related data values graphed on a coordinate plane and connected by line segments. Typically, the independent quantity, such as time, is displayed on the x-axis and the dependent quantity, such as distance traveled, on the y-axis.   Example 4: The following line graph shows the number of mathematics and statistics bachelor’s degrees awarded in the United States each year since 1970. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. a. How many mathematics and statistics bachelor’s degrees were awarded in 1975? b. In which years were the number of mathematics and statistics degrees awarded at the low of 11,000? Solution: a. The scale on the x-axis represents time since 1970, so to determine the number of degrees awarded in 1975, read the y-value of the graph at x = 5. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. The y-value corresponding to x = 5 is 18. The graph indicates that this is in thousands; there were 18,000 mathematics and statistics degrees awarded in 1975. b. To find the year a particular number of degrees was awarded, first look at the y-axis. In this case, 11,000 degrees is represented by 11 on the y-axis; look to the right to see in which years this occurred. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. The y-value of 11 occurs at two data points, one where x = 10 and the other where x = 30. These values correspond to the years 1980 and 2000, respectively. Answers: a. In the year 1975, 18,000 mathematics and statistics degrees were awarded. b. In the years 1980 and 2000, the lows of 11,000 mathematics and statistics degrees were awarded.  || Distance Formula Frequently you need to calculate the distance between two points in a plane. To do this, form a right triangle using the two points as vertices of the triangle and then apply the Pythagorean theorem. Recall that the Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . states that if given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units, then the square of the measure of the hypotenuse c is equal to the sum of the squares of the legs: a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . In other words, the hypotenuse of any right triangle is equal to the square root of the sum of the squares of its legs.   Example 5: Find the distance between (−1, 2) and (3, 5). Solution: Form a right triangle by drawing horizontal and vertical lines through the two points. This creates a right triangle as shown below: The length of leg b is calculated by finding the distance between the x-values of the given points, and the length of leg a is calculated by finding the distance between the given y-values. Next, use the Pythagorean theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: The distance between the two points is 5 units.   Generalize this process to produce a formula that can be used to algebraically calculate the distance between any two given points. Given two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 )   and ( x 2 ,   y 2 )   , then the distance, d, between them is given by the distance formula Given two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , calculate the distance d between them using the formula d = ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − √ . : d = ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − √   Example 6: Calculate the distance between (−3, −1) and (−2, 4). Solution: Use the distance formula. It is a good practice to include the formula in its general form as a part of the written solution before substituting values for the variables. This improves readability and reduces the chance for errors. Answer: 26 − − √ units   Try this! Calculate the distance between (−7, 5) and (−1, 13). Answer: 10 units Video Solution   Example 7: Do the three points (1, −1), (3, −3), and (3, 1) form a right triangle? Solution: The Pythagorean theorem states that having side lengths that satisfy the property a 2 + b 2 = c 2 is a necessary and sufficient condition of right triangles. In other words, if you can show that the sum of the squares of the leg lengths of the triangle is equal to the square of the length of the hypotenuse, then the figure must be a right triangle. First, calculate the length of each side using the distance formula. Now we check to see if a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . Answer: Yes, the three points form a right triangle. In fact, since two of the legs are equal in length, the points form an isosceles right triangle.  || Midpoint Formula The point that bisects the line segment formed by two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , is called the midpoint Given two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , the midpoint is an ordered pair given by ( x 1 + x 2 2 ,   y 1 + y 2 2 ) . and is given by the following formula: The midpoint is an ordered pair formed by finding the average of the x-values and the average of the y-values of the given points.   Example 8: Calculate the midpoint between (−1, −2) and (7, 4). Solution: First, calculate the average of the x- and y-values of the given points. Next, form the midpoint as an ordered pair using the averaged coordinates. Answer: (3, 1)   To verify that this is indeed the midpoint, calculate the distance between the two given points and verify that the result is equal to the sum of the two equal distances from the endpoints to this midpoint. This verification is left to the reader as an exercise.   Try this! Find the midpoint between (−6, 5) and (6, −11). Answer: (0, −3) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_1_1	Rectangular Coordinate System The rectangular coordinate system A system with two number lines at right angles uniquely specifying points in a plane using ordered pairs (x, y). consists of two real number lines that intersect at a right angle. The horizontal number line is called the x-axis The horizontal number line used as reference in the rectangular coordinate system. , and the vertical number line is called the y-axis The vertical number line used as reference in the rectangular coordinate system. . These two number lines define a flat surface called a plane The flat surface defined by the x- and y-axes. , and each point on this plane is associated with an ordered pair A pair (x, y) that identifies position relative to the origin on a rectangular coordinate plane. of real numbers (x, y). The first number is called the x-coordinate, and the second number is called the y-coordinate. The intersection of the two axes is known as the origin The point where the x- and y-axes cross, denoted by (0, 0). , which corresponds to the point (0, 0). An ordered pair (x, y) represents the position of a point relative to the origin. The x-coordinate represents a position to the right of the origin if it is positive and to the left of the origin if it is negative. The y-coordinate represents a position above the origin if it is positive and below the origin if it is negative. Using this system, every position (point) in the plane is uniquely identified. For example, the pair (2, 3) denotes the position relative to the origin as shown: Portrait of René Descartes (1596–1650) after Frans Hals, from http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Frans_Hals_-_Portret_van_Ren%C3%A9_Descartes.jpg. This system is often called the Cartesian coordinate system Used in honor of René Descartes when referring to the rectangular coordinate system. , named after the French mathematician René Descartes (1596–1650). The x- and y-axes break the plane into four regions called quadrants The four regions of a rectangular coordinate plane partly bounded by the x- and y-axes and numbered using the roman numerals I, II, III, and IV. , named using roman numerals I, II, III, and IV, as pictured. In quadrant I, both coordinates are positive. In quadrant II, the x-coordinate is negative and the y-coordinate is positive. In quadrant III, both coordinates are negative. In quadrant IV, the x-coordinate is positive and the y-coordinate is negative.   Example 1: Plot the ordered pair (−3, 5) and determine the quadrant in which it lies. Solution: The coordinates x = − 3 and y = 5 indicate a point 3 units to the left of and 5 units above the origin. Answer: The point is plotted in quadrant II (QII) because the x-coordinate is negative and the y-coordinate is positive.   Ordered pairs with 0 as one of the coordinates do not lie in a quadrant; these points are on one axis or the other (or the point is the origin if both coordinates are 0). Also, the scale indicated on the x-axis may be different from the scale indicated on the y-axis. Choose a scale that is convenient for the given situation.   Example 2: Plot this set of ordered pairs: {(4, 0), (−6, 0), (0, 3), (−2, 6), (−4, −6)}. Solution: Each tick mark on the x-axis represents 2 units and each tick mark on the y-axis represents 3 units.   Example 3: Plot this set of ordered pairs: {(−6, −5), (−3, −3), (0, −1), (3, 1), (6, 3)}. Solution: In this example, the points appear to be collinear Describes points that lie on the same line. , or to lie on the same line. The entire chapter focuses on finding and expressing points with this property.   Try this! Plot the set of points {(5, 3), (−3, 2), (−2, −4), (4, −3)} and indicate in which quadrant they lie. ([Link: Click here for printable graph paper in PDF.]) Answer: Video Solution Graphs are used in everyday life to display data visually. A line graph A set of related data values graphed on a coordinate plane and connected by line segments. consists of a set of related data values graphed on a coordinate plane and connected by line segments. Typically, the independent quantity, such as time, is displayed on the x-axis and the dependent quantity, such as distance traveled, on the y-axis.   Example 4: The following line graph shows the number of mathematics and statistics bachelor’s degrees awarded in the United States each year since 1970. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. a. How many mathematics and statistics bachelor’s degrees were awarded in 1975? b. In which years were the number of mathematics and statistics degrees awarded at the low of 11,000? Solution: a. The scale on the x-axis represents time since 1970, so to determine the number of degrees awarded in 1975, read the y-value of the graph at x = 5. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. The y-value corresponding to x = 5 is 18. The graph indicates that this is in thousands; there were 18,000 mathematics and statistics degrees awarded in 1975. b. To find the year a particular number of degrees was awarded, first look at the y-axis. In this case, 11,000 degrees is represented by 11 on the y-axis; look to the right to see in which years this occurred. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. The y-value of 11 occurs at two data points, one where x = 10 and the other where x = 30. These values correspond to the years 1980 and 2000, respectively. Answers: a. In the year 1975, 18,000 mathematics and statistics degrees were awarded. b. In the years 1980 and 2000, the lows of 11,000 mathematics and statistics degrees were awarded. Rectangular Coordinate System The rectangular coordinate system A system with two number lines at right angles uniquely specifying points in a plane using ordered pairs (x, y). consists of two real number lines that intersect at a right angle. The horizontal number line is called the x-axis The horizontal number line used as reference in the rectangular coordinate system. , and the vertical number line is called the y-axis The vertical number line used as reference in the rectangular coordinate system. . These two number lines define a flat surface called a plane The flat surface defined by the x- and y-axes. , and each point on this plane is associated with an ordered pair A pair (x, y) that identifies position relative to the origin on a rectangular coordinate plane. of real numbers (x, y). The first number is called the x-coordinate, and the second number is called the y-coordinate. The intersection of the two axes is known as the origin The point where the x- and y-axes cross, denoted by (0, 0). , which corresponds to the point (0, 0). An ordered pair (x, y) represents the position of a point relative to the origin. The x-coordinate represents a position to the right of the origin if it is positive and to the left of the origin if it is negative. The y-coordinate represents a position above the origin if it is positive and below the origin if it is negative. Using this system, every position (point) in the plane is uniquely identified. For example, the pair (2, 3) denotes the position relative to the origin as shown: Portrait of René Descartes (1596–1650) after Frans Hals, from http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Frans_Hals_-_Portret_van_Ren%C3%A9_Descartes.jpg. This system is often called the Cartesian coordinate system Used in honor of René Descartes when referring to the rectangular coordinate system. , named after the French mathematician René Descartes (1596–1650). The x- and y-axes break the plane into four regions called quadrants The four regions of a rectangular coordinate plane partly bounded by the x- and y-axes and numbered using the roman numerals I, II, III, and IV. , named using roman numerals I, II, III, and IV, as pictured. In quadrant I, both coordinates are positive. In quadrant II, the x-coordinate is negative and the y-coordinate is positive. In quadrant III, both coordinates are negative. In quadrant IV, the x-coordinate is positive and the y-coordinate is negative.   Example 1: Plot the ordered pair (−3, 5) and determine the quadrant in which it lies. Solution: The coordinates x = − 3 and y = 5 indicate a point 3 units to the left of and 5 units above the origin. Answer: The point is plotted in quadrant II (QII) because the x-coordinate is negative and the y-coordinate is positive.   Ordered pairs with 0 as one of the coordinates do not lie in a quadrant; these points are on one axis or the other (or the point is the origin if both coordinates are 0). Also, the scale indicated on the x-axis may be different from the scale indicated on the y-axis. Choose a scale that is convenient for the given situation.   Example 2: Plot this set of ordered pairs: {(4, 0), (−6, 0), (0, 3), (−2, 6), (−4, −6)}. Solution: Each tick mark on the x-axis represents 2 units and each tick mark on the y-axis represents 3 units.   Example 3: Plot this set of ordered pairs: {(−6, −5), (−3, −3), (0, −1), (3, 1), (6, 3)}. Solution: In this example, the points appear to be collinear Describes points that lie on the same line. , or to lie on the same line. The entire chapter focuses on finding and expressing points with this property.   Try this! Plot the set of points {(5, 3), (−3, 2), (−2, −4), (4, −3)} and indicate in which quadrant they lie. ([Link: Click here for printable graph paper in PDF.]) Answer: Video Solution Graphs are used in everyday life to display data visually. A line graph A set of related data values graphed on a coordinate plane and connected by line segments. consists of a set of related data values graphed on a coordinate plane and connected by line segments. Typically, the independent quantity, such as time, is displayed on the x-axis and the dependent quantity, such as distance traveled, on the y-axis.   Example 4: The following line graph shows the number of mathematics and statistics bachelor’s degrees awarded in the United States each year since 1970. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. a. How many mathematics and statistics bachelor’s degrees were awarded in 1975? b. In which years were the number of mathematics and statistics degrees awarded at the low of 11,000? Solution: a. The scale on the x-axis represents time since 1970, so to determine the number of degrees awarded in 1975, read the y-value of the graph at x = 5. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. The y-value corresponding to x = 5 is 18. The graph indicates that this is in thousands; there were 18,000 mathematics and statistics degrees awarded in 1975. b. To find the year a particular number of degrees was awarded, first look at the y-axis. In this case, 11,000 degrees is represented by 11 on the y-axis; look to the right to see in which years this occurred. Source: Digest of Education Statistics. The y-value of 11 occurs at two data points, one where x = 10 and the other where x = 30. These values correspond to the years 1980 and 2000, respectively. Answers: a. In the year 1975, 18,000 mathematics and statistics degrees were awarded. b. In the years 1980 and 2000, the lows of 11,000 mathematics and statistics degrees were awarded.  || 
book2_chapter3_1_2	Distance Formula Frequently you need to calculate the distance between two points in a plane. To do this, form a right triangle using the two points as vertices of the triangle and then apply the Pythagorean theorem. Recall that the Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . states that if given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units, then the square of the measure of the hypotenuse c is equal to the sum of the squares of the legs: a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . In other words, the hypotenuse of any right triangle is equal to the square root of the sum of the squares of its legs.   Example 5: Find the distance between (−1, 2) and (3, 5). Solution: Form a right triangle by drawing horizontal and vertical lines through the two points. This creates a right triangle as shown below: The length of leg b is calculated by finding the distance between the x-values of the given points, and the length of leg a is calculated by finding the distance between the given y-values. Next, use the Pythagorean theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: The distance between the two points is 5 units.   Generalize this process to produce a formula that can be used to algebraically calculate the distance between any two given points. Given two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 )   and ( x 2 ,   y 2 )   , then the distance, d, between them is given by the distance formula Given two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , calculate the distance d between them using the formula d = ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − √ . : d = ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − √   Example 6: Calculate the distance between (−3, −1) and (−2, 4). Solution: Use the distance formula. It is a good practice to include the formula in its general form as a part of the written solution before substituting values for the variables. This improves readability and reduces the chance for errors. Answer: 26 − − √ units   Try this! Calculate the distance between (−7, 5) and (−1, 13). Answer: 10 units Video Solution   Example 7: Do the three points (1, −1), (3, −3), and (3, 1) form a right triangle? Solution: The Pythagorean theorem states that having side lengths that satisfy the property a 2 + b 2 = c 2 is a necessary and sufficient condition of right triangles. In other words, if you can show that the sum of the squares of the leg lengths of the triangle is equal to the square of the length of the hypotenuse, then the figure must be a right triangle. First, calculate the length of each side using the distance formula. Now we check to see if a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . Answer: Yes, the three points form a right triangle. In fact, since two of the legs are equal in length, the points form an isosceles right triangle. Distance Formula Frequently you need to calculate the distance between two points in a plane. To do this, form a right triangle using the two points as vertices of the triangle and then apply the Pythagorean theorem. Recall that the Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . states that if given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units, then the square of the measure of the hypotenuse c is equal to the sum of the squares of the legs: a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . In other words, the hypotenuse of any right triangle is equal to the square root of the sum of the squares of its legs.   Example 5: Find the distance between (−1, 2) and (3, 5). Solution: Form a right triangle by drawing horizontal and vertical lines through the two points. This creates a right triangle as shown below: The length of leg b is calculated by finding the distance between the x-values of the given points, and the length of leg a is calculated by finding the distance between the given y-values. Next, use the Pythagorean theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: The distance between the two points is 5 units.   Generalize this process to produce a formula that can be used to algebraically calculate the distance between any two given points. Given two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 )   and ( x 2 ,   y 2 )   , then the distance, d, between them is given by the distance formula Given two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , calculate the distance d between them using the formula d = ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − √ . : d = ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − √   Example 6: Calculate the distance between (−3, −1) and (−2, 4). Solution: Use the distance formula. It is a good practice to include the formula in its general form as a part of the written solution before substituting values for the variables. This improves readability and reduces the chance for errors. Answer: 26 − − √ units   Try this! Calculate the distance between (−7, 5) and (−1, 13). Answer: 10 units Video Solution   Example 7: Do the three points (1, −1), (3, −3), and (3, 1) form a right triangle? Solution: The Pythagorean theorem states that having side lengths that satisfy the property a 2 + b 2 = c 2 is a necessary and sufficient condition of right triangles. In other words, if you can show that the sum of the squares of the leg lengths of the triangle is equal to the square of the length of the hypotenuse, then the figure must be a right triangle. First, calculate the length of each side using the distance formula. Now we check to see if a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . Answer: Yes, the three points form a right triangle. In fact, since two of the legs are equal in length, the points form an isosceles right triangle.  || 
book2_chapter3_1_3	Midpoint Formula The point that bisects the line segment formed by two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , is called the midpoint Given two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , the midpoint is an ordered pair given by ( x 1 + x 2 2 ,   y 1 + y 2 2 ) . and is given by the following formula: The midpoint is an ordered pair formed by finding the average of the x-values and the average of the y-values of the given points.   Example 8: Calculate the midpoint between (−1, −2) and (7, 4). Solution: First, calculate the average of the x- and y-values of the given points. Next, form the midpoint as an ordered pair using the averaged coordinates. Answer: (3, 1)   To verify that this is indeed the midpoint, calculate the distance between the two given points and verify that the result is equal to the sum of the two equal distances from the endpoints to this midpoint. This verification is left to the reader as an exercise.   Try this! Find the midpoint between (−6, 5) and (6, −11). Answer: (0, −3) Video Solution Midpoint Formula The point that bisects the line segment formed by two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , is called the midpoint Given two points, ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , the midpoint is an ordered pair given by ( x 1 + x 2 2 ,   y 1 + y 2 2 ) . and is given by the following formula: The midpoint is an ordered pair formed by finding the average of the x-values and the average of the y-values of the given points.   Example 8: Calculate the midpoint between (−1, −2) and (7, 4). Solution: First, calculate the average of the x- and y-values of the given points. Next, form the midpoint as an ordered pair using the averaged coordinates. Answer: (3, 1)   To verify that this is indeed the midpoint, calculate the distance between the two given points and verify that the result is equal to the sum of the two equal distances from the endpoints to this midpoint. This verification is left to the reader as an exercise.   Try this! Find the midpoint between (−6, 5) and (6, −11). Answer: (0, −3) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_2	 || Solutions to Equations with Two Variables A linear equation with two variables An equation with two variables that can be written in the standard form a x + b y = c , where the real numbers a and b are not both zero. has standard form a x + b y = c , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a and b are not both 0. Solutions to equations of this form are ordered pairs (x, y), where the coordinates, when substituted into the equation, produce a true statement.   Example 1: Determine whether (1, −2) and (−4, 1) are solutions to 6 x − 3 y = 12 . Solution: Substitute the x- and y-values into the equation to determine whether the ordered pair produces a true statement. Answer: (1, −2) is a solution, and (−4, 1) is not.   It is often the case that a linear equation is given in a form where one of the variables, usually y, is isolated. If this is the case, then we can check that an ordered pair is a solution by substituting in a value for one of the coordinates and simplifying to see if we obtain the other.   Example 2: Are (   1 2 ,   − 3 ) and ( − 5 ,   14 ) solutions to y = 2 x − 4 ? Solution: Substitute the x-values and simplify to see if the corresponding y-values are obtained. Answer: (   1 2 ,   − 3 ) is a solution, and ( − 5 ,   14 ) is not.   Try this! Is (6, −1) a solution to y = − 2 3 x + 3 ? Answer: Yes Video Solution When given linear equations with two variables, we can solve for one of the variables, usually y, and obtain an equivalent equation as follows: Written in this form, we can see that y depends on x. Here x is the independent variable The variable that determines the values of other variables. Usually we think of the x-value as the independent variable. and y is the dependent variable The variable whose value is determined by the value of the independent variable. Usually we think of the y-value as the dependent variable. . The linear equation y = 2 x − 4 can be used to find ordered pair solutions. If we substitute any real number for x, then we can simplify to find the corresponding y-value. For example, if x = 3 , then y = 2 ( 3 ) − 4 = 6 − 4 = 2 , and we can form an ordered pair solution, (3, 2). Since there are infinitely many real numbers to choose for x, the linear equation has infinitely many ordered pair solutions (x, y).   Example 3: Find ordered pair solutions to the equation 5 x − y = 14 with the given x-values {−2, −1, 0, 4, 6}. Solution: First, solve for y. Next, substitute the x-values in the equation y = 5 x − 14 to find the corresponding y-values. Answer: {(−2, −24), (−1, −19), (0, −14), (4, 6), (6, 16)}   In the previous example, certain x-values are given, but that is not always going to be the case. When treating x as the independent variable, we can choose any values for x and then substitute them into the equation to find the corresponding y-values. This method produces as many ordered pair solutions as we wish.   Example 4: Find five ordered pair solutions to 6 x + 2 y = 10 . Solution: First, solve for y. Next, choose any set of x-values. Usually we choose some negative values and some positive values. In this case, we will find the corresponding y-values when x is {−2, −1, 0, 1, 2}. Make the substitutions required to fill in the following table (often referred to as a t-chart): Answer: {(−2, 11), (−1, 8), (0, 5), (1, 2), (2, −1)}. Since there are infinitely many ordered pair solutions, answers may vary depending on the choice of values for the independent variable.   Try this! Find five ordered pair solutions to 10 x − 2 y = 2 . Answer: {(−2, −11), (−1, −6), (0, −1), (1, 4), (2, 9)} (answers may vary) Video Solution  || Graph by Plotting Points Since the solutions to linear equations are ordered pairs, they can be graphed using the rectangular coordinate system. The set of all solutions to a linear equation can be represented on a rectangular coordinate plane using a straight line connecting at least two points; this line is called its graph A point on the number line associated with a coordinate. . To illustrate this, plot five ordered pair solutions, {(−2, 11), (−1, 8), (0, 5), (1, 2), (2, −1)}, to the linear equation 6 x + 2 y = 10 . Notice that the points are collinear; this will be the case for any linear equation. Draw a line through the points with a straightedge, and add arrows on either end to indicate that the graph extends indefinitely. The resulting line represents all solutions to , of which there are infinitely many. The steps for graphing lines by plotting points are outlined in the following example.   Example 5: Find five ordered pair solutions and graph: . Solution: Step 1: Solve for y. Step2: Choose at least two x-values and find the corresponding y-values. In this section, we will choose five real numbers to use as x-values. It is a good practice to choose 0 and some negative numbers, as well as some positive numbers. Five ordered pair solutions are {(−2, −6), (−1, −4), (0, −2), (1, 0), (2, 2)} Step 3: Choose an appropriate scale, plot the points, and draw a line through them using a straightedge. In this case, choose a scale where each tick mark on the y-axis represents 2 units because all the y-values are multiples of 2. Answer: It will not always be the case that y can be solved in terms of x with integer coefficients. In fact, the coefficients often turn out to be fractions.   Example 6: Find five ordered pair solutions and graph: . Solution: Remember that you can choose any real number for the independent variable x, so choose wisely here. Since the denominator of the coefficient of the variable x is 2, you can avoid fractions by choosing multiples of 2 for the x-values. In this case, choose the set of x-values {−6, −4, −2, 0, 2} and find the corresponding y-values. Five solutions are {(−6, −10), (−4, −5), (−2, 0), (0, 5), (2, 10)}. Here we choose to scale the x-axis with multiples of 2 and the y-axis with multiples of 5. Answer:   Try this! Find five ordered pair solutions and graph: . Answer: {(−2, 4), (0, 3), (2, 2), (4, 1), (6, 0)} Video Solution  || Horizontal and Vertical Lines We need to recognize by inspection linear equations that represent a vertical or horizontal line.   Example 7: Graph by plotting five points: . Solution: Since the given equation does not have a variable x, we can rewrite it with a 0 coefficient for x. Choose any five values for x and see that the corresponding y-value is always −2. We now have five ordered pair solutions to plot {(−2, −2), (−1, −2), (0, −2), (1, −2), (2, −2)}. Answer: When the coefficient for the variable x is 0, the graph is a horizontal line. In general, the equation for a horizontal line Any line whose equation can be written in the form y = k, where k is a real number. can be written in the form , where k represents any real number.   Example 8: Graph by plotting five points: x = 3. Solution: Since the given equation does not have a variable y, rewrite it with a 0 coefficient for y. Choose any five values for y and see that the corresponding x-value is always 3. We now have five ordered pair solutions to plot: {(3, −2), (3, −1), (3, 0), (3, 1), (3, 2)}. Answer: When the coefficient for the variable y is 0, the graph is a vertical line. In general, the equation for a vertical line Any line whose equation can be written in the form x = k, where k is a real number. can be written as , where k represents any real number. To summarize, if k is a real number,   Try this! Graph and on the same set of axes and determine where they intersect. Answer: (−2, 5) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_2_1	Solutions to Equations with Two Variables A linear equation with two variables An equation with two variables that can be written in the standard form a x + b y = c , where the real numbers a and b are not both zero. has standard form a x + b y = c , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a and b are not both 0. Solutions to equations of this form are ordered pairs (x, y), where the coordinates, when substituted into the equation, produce a true statement.   Example 1: Determine whether (1, −2) and (−4, 1) are solutions to 6 x − 3 y = 12 . Solution: Substitute the x- and y-values into the equation to determine whether the ordered pair produces a true statement. Answer: (1, −2) is a solution, and (−4, 1) is not.   It is often the case that a linear equation is given in a form where one of the variables, usually y, is isolated. If this is the case, then we can check that an ordered pair is a solution by substituting in a value for one of the coordinates and simplifying to see if we obtain the other.   Example 2: Are (   1 2 ,   − 3 ) and ( − 5 ,   14 ) solutions to y = 2 x − 4 ? Solution: Substitute the x-values and simplify to see if the corresponding y-values are obtained. Answer: (   1 2 ,   − 3 ) is a solution, and ( − 5 ,   14 ) is not.   Try this! Is (6, −1) a solution to y = − 2 3 x + 3 ? Answer: Yes Video Solution When given linear equations with two variables, we can solve for one of the variables, usually y, and obtain an equivalent equation as follows: Written in this form, we can see that y depends on x. Here x is the independent variable The variable that determines the values of other variables. Usually we think of the x-value as the independent variable. and y is the dependent variable The variable whose value is determined by the value of the independent variable. Usually we think of the y-value as the dependent variable. . The linear equation y = 2 x − 4 can be used to find ordered pair solutions. If we substitute any real number for x, then we can simplify to find the corresponding y-value. For example, if x = 3 , then y = 2 ( 3 ) − 4 = 6 − 4 = 2 , and we can form an ordered pair solution, (3, 2). Since there are infinitely many real numbers to choose for x, the linear equation has infinitely many ordered pair solutions (x, y).   Example 3: Find ordered pair solutions to the equation 5 x − y = 14 with the given x-values {−2, −1, 0, 4, 6}. Solution: First, solve for y. Next, substitute the x-values in the equation y = 5 x − 14 to find the corresponding y-values. Answer: {(−2, −24), (−1, −19), (0, −14), (4, 6), (6, 16)}   In the previous example, certain x-values are given, but that is not always going to be the case. When treating x as the independent variable, we can choose any values for x and then substitute them into the equation to find the corresponding y-values. This method produces as many ordered pair solutions as we wish.   Example 4: Find five ordered pair solutions to 6 x + 2 y = 10 . Solution: First, solve for y. Next, choose any set of x-values. Usually we choose some negative values and some positive values. In this case, we will find the corresponding y-values when x is {−2, −1, 0, 1, 2}. Make the substitutions required to fill in the following table (often referred to as a t-chart): Answer: {(−2, 11), (−1, 8), (0, 5), (1, 2), (2, −1)}. Since there are infinitely many ordered pair solutions, answers may vary depending on the choice of values for the independent variable.   Try this! Find five ordered pair solutions to 10 x − 2 y = 2 . Answer: {(−2, −11), (−1, −6), (0, −1), (1, 4), (2, 9)} (answers may vary) Video Solution Solutions to Equations with Two Variables A linear equation with two variables An equation with two variables that can be written in the standard form a x + b y = c , where the real numbers a and b are not both zero. has standard form a x + b y = c , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a and b are not both 0. Solutions to equations of this form are ordered pairs (x, y), where the coordinates, when substituted into the equation, produce a true statement.   Example 1: Determine whether (1, −2) and (−4, 1) are solutions to 6 x − 3 y = 12 . Solution: Substitute the x- and y-values into the equation to determine whether the ordered pair produces a true statement. Answer: (1, −2) is a solution, and (−4, 1) is not.   It is often the case that a linear equation is given in a form where one of the variables, usually y, is isolated. If this is the case, then we can check that an ordered pair is a solution by substituting in a value for one of the coordinates and simplifying to see if we obtain the other.   Example 2: Are (   1 2 ,   − 3 ) and ( − 5 ,   14 ) solutions to y = 2 x − 4 ? Solution: Substitute the x-values and simplify to see if the corresponding y-values are obtained. Answer: (   1 2 ,   − 3 ) is a solution, and ( − 5 ,   14 ) is not.   Try this! Is (6, −1) a solution to y = − 2 3 x + 3 ? Answer: Yes Video Solution When given linear equations with two variables, we can solve for one of the variables, usually y, and obtain an equivalent equation as follows: Written in this form, we can see that y depends on x. Here x is the independent variable The variable that determines the values of other variables. Usually we think of the x-value as the independent variable. and y is the dependent variable The variable whose value is determined by the value of the independent variable. Usually we think of the y-value as the dependent variable. . The linear equation y = 2 x − 4 can be used to find ordered pair solutions. If we substitute any real number for x, then we can simplify to find the corresponding y-value. For example, if x = 3 , then y = 2 ( 3 ) − 4 = 6 − 4 = 2 , and we can form an ordered pair solution, (3, 2). Since there are infinitely many real numbers to choose for x, the linear equation has infinitely many ordered pair solutions (x, y).   Example 3: Find ordered pair solutions to the equation 5 x − y = 14 with the given x-values {−2, −1, 0, 4, 6}. Solution: First, solve for y. Next, substitute the x-values in the equation y = 5 x − 14 to find the corresponding y-values. Answer: {(−2, −24), (−1, −19), (0, −14), (4, 6), (6, 16)}   In the previous example, certain x-values are given, but that is not always going to be the case. When treating x as the independent variable, we can choose any values for x and then substitute them into the equation to find the corresponding y-values. This method produces as many ordered pair solutions as we wish.   Example 4: Find five ordered pair solutions to 6 x + 2 y = 10 . Solution: First, solve for y. Next, choose any set of x-values. Usually we choose some negative values and some positive values. In this case, we will find the corresponding y-values when x is {−2, −1, 0, 1, 2}. Make the substitutions required to fill in the following table (often referred to as a t-chart): Answer: {(−2, 11), (−1, 8), (0, 5), (1, 2), (2, −1)}. Since there are infinitely many ordered pair solutions, answers may vary depending on the choice of values for the independent variable.   Try this! Find five ordered pair solutions to 10 x − 2 y = 2 . Answer: {(−2, −11), (−1, −6), (0, −1), (1, 4), (2, 9)} (answers may vary) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_2_2	Graph by Plotting Points Since the solutions to linear equations are ordered pairs, they can be graphed using the rectangular coordinate system. The set of all solutions to a linear equation can be represented on a rectangular coordinate plane using a straight line connecting at least two points; this line is called its graph A point on the number line associated with a coordinate. . To illustrate this, plot five ordered pair solutions, {(−2, 11), (−1, 8), (0, 5), (1, 2), (2, −1)}, to the linear equation 6 x + 2 y = 10 . Notice that the points are collinear; this will be the case for any linear equation. Draw a line through the points with a straightedge, and add arrows on either end to indicate that the graph extends indefinitely. The resulting line represents all solutions to , of which there are infinitely many. The steps for graphing lines by plotting points are outlined in the following example.   Example 5: Find five ordered pair solutions and graph: . Solution: Step 1: Solve for y. Step2: Choose at least two x-values and find the corresponding y-values. In this section, we will choose five real numbers to use as x-values. It is a good practice to choose 0 and some negative numbers, as well as some positive numbers. Five ordered pair solutions are {(−2, −6), (−1, −4), (0, −2), (1, 0), (2, 2)} Step 3: Choose an appropriate scale, plot the points, and draw a line through them using a straightedge. In this case, choose a scale where each tick mark on the y-axis represents 2 units because all the y-values are multiples of 2. Answer: It will not always be the case that y can be solved in terms of x with integer coefficients. In fact, the coefficients often turn out to be fractions.   Example 6: Find five ordered pair solutions and graph: . Solution: Remember that you can choose any real number for the independent variable x, so choose wisely here. Since the denominator of the coefficient of the variable x is 2, you can avoid fractions by choosing multiples of 2 for the x-values. In this case, choose the set of x-values {−6, −4, −2, 0, 2} and find the corresponding y-values. Five solutions are {(−6, −10), (−4, −5), (−2, 0), (0, 5), (2, 10)}. Here we choose to scale the x-axis with multiples of 2 and the y-axis with multiples of 5. Answer:   Try this! Find five ordered pair solutions and graph: . Answer: {(−2, 4), (0, 3), (2, 2), (4, 1), (6, 0)} Video Solution Graph by Plotting Points Since the solutions to linear equations are ordered pairs, they can be graphed using the rectangular coordinate system. The set of all solutions to a linear equation can be represented on a rectangular coordinate plane using a straight line connecting at least two points; this line is called its graph A point on the number line associated with a coordinate. . To illustrate this, plot five ordered pair solutions, {(−2, 11), (−1, 8), (0, 5), (1, 2), (2, −1)}, to the linear equation 6 x + 2 y = 10 . Notice that the points are collinear; this will be the case for any linear equation. Draw a line through the points with a straightedge, and add arrows on either end to indicate that the graph extends indefinitely. The resulting line represents all solutions to , of which there are infinitely many. The steps for graphing lines by plotting points are outlined in the following example.   Example 5: Find five ordered pair solutions and graph: . Solution: Step 1: Solve for y. Step2: Choose at least two x-values and find the corresponding y-values. In this section, we will choose five real numbers to use as x-values. It is a good practice to choose 0 and some negative numbers, as well as some positive numbers. Five ordered pair solutions are {(−2, −6), (−1, −4), (0, −2), (1, 0), (2, 2)} Step 3: Choose an appropriate scale, plot the points, and draw a line through them using a straightedge. In this case, choose a scale where each tick mark on the y-axis represents 2 units because all the y-values are multiples of 2. Answer: It will not always be the case that y can be solved in terms of x with integer coefficients. In fact, the coefficients often turn out to be fractions.   Example 6: Find five ordered pair solutions and graph: . Solution: Remember that you can choose any real number for the independent variable x, so choose wisely here. Since the denominator of the coefficient of the variable x is 2, you can avoid fractions by choosing multiples of 2 for the x-values. In this case, choose the set of x-values {−6, −4, −2, 0, 2} and find the corresponding y-values. Five solutions are {(−6, −10), (−4, −5), (−2, 0), (0, 5), (2, 10)}. Here we choose to scale the x-axis with multiples of 2 and the y-axis with multiples of 5. Answer:   Try this! Find five ordered pair solutions and graph: . Answer: {(−2, 4), (0, 3), (2, 2), (4, 1), (6, 0)} Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_2_3	Horizontal and Vertical Lines We need to recognize by inspection linear equations that represent a vertical or horizontal line.   Example 7: Graph by plotting five points: . Solution: Since the given equation does not have a variable x, we can rewrite it with a 0 coefficient for x. Choose any five values for x and see that the corresponding y-value is always −2. We now have five ordered pair solutions to plot {(−2, −2), (−1, −2), (0, −2), (1, −2), (2, −2)}. Answer: When the coefficient for the variable x is 0, the graph is a horizontal line. In general, the equation for a horizontal line Any line whose equation can be written in the form y = k, where k is a real number. can be written in the form , where k represents any real number.   Example 8: Graph by plotting five points: x = 3. Solution: Since the given equation does not have a variable y, rewrite it with a 0 coefficient for y. Choose any five values for y and see that the corresponding x-value is always 3. We now have five ordered pair solutions to plot: {(3, −2), (3, −1), (3, 0), (3, 1), (3, 2)}. Answer: When the coefficient for the variable y is 0, the graph is a vertical line. In general, the equation for a vertical line Any line whose equation can be written in the form x = k, where k is a real number. can be written as , where k represents any real number. To summarize, if k is a real number,   Try this! Graph and on the same set of axes and determine where they intersect. Answer: (−2, 5) Video Solution Horizontal and Vertical Lines We need to recognize by inspection linear equations that represent a vertical or horizontal line.   Example 7: Graph by plotting five points: . Solution: Since the given equation does not have a variable x, we can rewrite it with a 0 coefficient for x. Choose any five values for x and see that the corresponding y-value is always −2. We now have five ordered pair solutions to plot {(−2, −2), (−1, −2), (0, −2), (1, −2), (2, −2)}. Answer: When the coefficient for the variable x is 0, the graph is a horizontal line. In general, the equation for a horizontal line Any line whose equation can be written in the form y = k, where k is a real number. can be written in the form , where k represents any real number.   Example 8: Graph by plotting five points: x = 3. Solution: Since the given equation does not have a variable y, rewrite it with a 0 coefficient for y. Choose any five values for y and see that the corresponding x-value is always 3. We now have five ordered pair solutions to plot: {(3, −2), (3, −1), (3, 0), (3, 1), (3, 2)}. Answer: When the coefficient for the variable y is 0, the graph is a vertical line. In general, the equation for a vertical line Any line whose equation can be written in the form x = k, where k is a real number. can be written as , where k represents any real number. To summarize, if k is a real number,   Try this! Graph and on the same set of axes and determine where they intersect. Answer: (−2, 5) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_3	 || Definition of x- and y-Intercepts The x-intercept The point (or points) where a graph intersects the x-axis, expressed as an ordered pair (x, 0). is the point where the graph of a line intersects the x-axis. The y-intercept The point (or points) where a graph intersects the y-axis, expressed as an ordered pair (0, y). is the point where the graph of a line intersects the y-axis. These points have the form (x, 0) and (0, y), respectively. To find the x- and y-intercepts algebraically, use the fact that all x-intercepts have a y-value of zero and all y-intercepts have an x-value of zero. To find the y-intercept, set x = 0 and determine the corresponding y-value. Similarly, to find the x-intercept, set y = 0 and determine the corresponding x-value.   Example 1: Find the x- and y-intercepts: − 3 x + 2 y = 12 . Solution: To find the x-intercept, set y = 0. Therefore, the x-intercept is (−4, 0). To find the y-intercept, set x = 0. Hence the y-intercept is (0, 6). Note that this linear equation is graphed above. Answer: x-intercept: (−4, 0); y-intercept: (0, 6)   Example 2: Find the x- and y-intercepts: y = − 3 x + 9 . Solution: Begin by finding the x-intercept. The x-intercept is (3, 0). Next, determine the y-intercept. The y-intercept is (0, 9). Answer: x-intercept: (3, 0); y-intercept: (0, 9)   Keep in mind that the intercepts are ordered pairs and not numbers. In other words, the x-intercept is not x = 2 but rather (2, 0). In addition, not all graphs necessarily have both intercepts: for example, The horizontal line graphed above has a y-intercept of (0, −2) and no x-intercept. The vertical line graphed above has an x-intercept (3, 0) and no y-intercept.   Try this! Find the x- and y-intercepts: 4 x − y = 2 . Answer: x-intercept: (1/2, 0); y-intercept: (0, −2) Video Solution  || Graphing Lines Using Intercepts Since two points determine a line, we can use the x- and y-intercepts to graph linear equations. We have just outlined an easy method for finding intercepts; now we outline the steps for graphing lines using the intercepts.   Example 3: Graph using intercepts: 2 x − 3 y = 12 . Solution: Step 1: Find the x- and y-intercepts. Step 2: Plot the intercepts and draw the line through them. Use a straightedge to create a nice straight line. Add an arrow on either end to indicate that the line continues indefinitely in either direction. Answer:   Example 4: Graph using intercepts: y = − 1 5 x + 3 . Solution: Begin by determining the x- and y-intercepts. Next, graph the two points and draw a line through them with a straightedge. Answer:   Example 5: Graph using intercepts: y = − 2 x . Solution: Here the x- and y-intercepts are actually the same point, the origin. We will need at least one more point so that we can graph the line. Choose any value for x and determine the corresponding value for y. Use the ordered pair solutions (0, 0), (−1, 2), and (1, −2) to graph the line. Answer: To summarize, any linear equation can be graphed by finding two points and connecting them with a line drawn with a straightedge. Two important and useful points are the x- and y-intercepts; find these points by substituting y = 0 and x = 0, respectively. This method for finding intercepts will be used throughout our study of algebra.   Try this! Graph using intercepts: 3 x − 5 y = 15 . Answer: x-intercept: (5, 0); y-intercept: (0, −3) Video Solution  || Finding Intercepts Given the Graph The x- and y-intercepts are important points on any graph. This chapter will focus on the graphs of linear equations. However, at this point, we can use these ideas to determine intercepts of nonlinear graphs. Remember that intercepts are ordered pairs that indicate where the graph intersects the axes.   Example 6: Find the x- and y-intercepts given the following graph: Solution: We see that the graph intersects the x-axis in two places. This graph has two x-intercepts, namely, (−4, 0) and (2, 0). Furthermore, the graph intersects the y-axis in one place. The only y-intercept is (0, −3). Answer: x-intercepts: (−4, 0), (2, 0); y-intercept: (0, −3)   In our study of algebra, we will see that some graphs have many intercepts. Also, we will see that some graphs do not have any.   Example 7: Given the following graph, find the x- and y-intercepts: Solution: This is a graph of a circle; we can see that it does not intersect either axis. Therefore, this graph does not have any intercepts. Answer: None  || 
book2_chapter3_3_1	Definition of x- and y-Intercepts The x-intercept The point (or points) where a graph intersects the x-axis, expressed as an ordered pair (x, 0). is the point where the graph of a line intersects the x-axis. The y-intercept The point (or points) where a graph intersects the y-axis, expressed as an ordered pair (0, y). is the point where the graph of a line intersects the y-axis. These points have the form (x, 0) and (0, y), respectively. To find the x- and y-intercepts algebraically, use the fact that all x-intercepts have a y-value of zero and all y-intercepts have an x-value of zero. To find the y-intercept, set x = 0 and determine the corresponding y-value. Similarly, to find the x-intercept, set y = 0 and determine the corresponding x-value.   Example 1: Find the x- and y-intercepts: − 3 x + 2 y = 12 . Solution: To find the x-intercept, set y = 0. Therefore, the x-intercept is (−4, 0). To find the y-intercept, set x = 0. Hence the y-intercept is (0, 6). Note that this linear equation is graphed above. Answer: x-intercept: (−4, 0); y-intercept: (0, 6)   Example 2: Find the x- and y-intercepts: y = − 3 x + 9 . Solution: Begin by finding the x-intercept. The x-intercept is (3, 0). Next, determine the y-intercept. The y-intercept is (0, 9). Answer: x-intercept: (3, 0); y-intercept: (0, 9)   Keep in mind that the intercepts are ordered pairs and not numbers. In other words, the x-intercept is not x = 2 but rather (2, 0). In addition, not all graphs necessarily have both intercepts: for example, The horizontal line graphed above has a y-intercept of (0, −2) and no x-intercept. The vertical line graphed above has an x-intercept (3, 0) and no y-intercept.   Try this! Find the x- and y-intercepts: 4 x − y = 2 . Answer: x-intercept: (1/2, 0); y-intercept: (0, −2) Video Solution Definition of x- and y-Intercepts The x-intercept The point (or points) where a graph intersects the x-axis, expressed as an ordered pair (x, 0). is the point where the graph of a line intersects the x-axis. The y-intercept The point (or points) where a graph intersects the y-axis, expressed as an ordered pair (0, y). is the point where the graph of a line intersects the y-axis. These points have the form (x, 0) and (0, y), respectively. To find the x- and y-intercepts algebraically, use the fact that all x-intercepts have a y-value of zero and all y-intercepts have an x-value of zero. To find the y-intercept, set x = 0 and determine the corresponding y-value. Similarly, to find the x-intercept, set y = 0 and determine the corresponding x-value.   Example 1: Find the x- and y-intercepts: − 3 x + 2 y = 12 . Solution: To find the x-intercept, set y = 0. Therefore, the x-intercept is (−4, 0). To find the y-intercept, set x = 0. Hence the y-intercept is (0, 6). Note that this linear equation is graphed above. Answer: x-intercept: (−4, 0); y-intercept: (0, 6)   Example 2: Find the x- and y-intercepts: y = − 3 x + 9 . Solution: Begin by finding the x-intercept. The x-intercept is (3, 0). Next, determine the y-intercept. The y-intercept is (0, 9). Answer: x-intercept: (3, 0); y-intercept: (0, 9)   Keep in mind that the intercepts are ordered pairs and not numbers. In other words, the x-intercept is not x = 2 but rather (2, 0). In addition, not all graphs necessarily have both intercepts: for example, The horizontal line graphed above has a y-intercept of (0, −2) and no x-intercept. The vertical line graphed above has an x-intercept (3, 0) and no y-intercept.   Try this! Find the x- and y-intercepts: 4 x − y = 2 . Answer: x-intercept: (1/2, 0); y-intercept: (0, −2) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_3_2	Graphing Lines Using Intercepts Since two points determine a line, we can use the x- and y-intercepts to graph linear equations. We have just outlined an easy method for finding intercepts; now we outline the steps for graphing lines using the intercepts.   Example 3: Graph using intercepts: 2 x − 3 y = 12 . Solution: Step 1: Find the x- and y-intercepts. Step 2: Plot the intercepts and draw the line through them. Use a straightedge to create a nice straight line. Add an arrow on either end to indicate that the line continues indefinitely in either direction. Answer:   Example 4: Graph using intercepts: y = − 1 5 x + 3 . Solution: Begin by determining the x- and y-intercepts. Next, graph the two points and draw a line through them with a straightedge. Answer:   Example 5: Graph using intercepts: y = − 2 x . Solution: Here the x- and y-intercepts are actually the same point, the origin. We will need at least one more point so that we can graph the line. Choose any value for x and determine the corresponding value for y. Use the ordered pair solutions (0, 0), (−1, 2), and (1, −2) to graph the line. Answer: To summarize, any linear equation can be graphed by finding two points and connecting them with a line drawn with a straightedge. Two important and useful points are the x- and y-intercepts; find these points by substituting y = 0 and x = 0, respectively. This method for finding intercepts will be used throughout our study of algebra.   Try this! Graph using intercepts: 3 x − 5 y = 15 . Answer: x-intercept: (5, 0); y-intercept: (0, −3) Video Solution Graphing Lines Using Intercepts Since two points determine a line, we can use the x- and y-intercepts to graph linear equations. We have just outlined an easy method for finding intercepts; now we outline the steps for graphing lines using the intercepts.   Example 3: Graph using intercepts: 2 x − 3 y = 12 . Solution: Step 1: Find the x- and y-intercepts. Step 2: Plot the intercepts and draw the line through them. Use a straightedge to create a nice straight line. Add an arrow on either end to indicate that the line continues indefinitely in either direction. Answer:   Example 4: Graph using intercepts: y = − 1 5 x + 3 . Solution: Begin by determining the x- and y-intercepts. Next, graph the two points and draw a line through them with a straightedge. Answer:   Example 5: Graph using intercepts: y = − 2 x . Solution: Here the x- and y-intercepts are actually the same point, the origin. We will need at least one more point so that we can graph the line. Choose any value for x and determine the corresponding value for y. Use the ordered pair solutions (0, 0), (−1, 2), and (1, −2) to graph the line. Answer: To summarize, any linear equation can be graphed by finding two points and connecting them with a line drawn with a straightedge. Two important and useful points are the x- and y-intercepts; find these points by substituting y = 0 and x = 0, respectively. This method for finding intercepts will be used throughout our study of algebra.   Try this! Graph using intercepts: 3 x − 5 y = 15 . Answer: x-intercept: (5, 0); y-intercept: (0, −3) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_3_3	Finding Intercepts Given the Graph The x- and y-intercepts are important points on any graph. This chapter will focus on the graphs of linear equations. However, at this point, we can use these ideas to determine intercepts of nonlinear graphs. Remember that intercepts are ordered pairs that indicate where the graph intersects the axes.   Example 6: Find the x- and y-intercepts given the following graph: Solution: We see that the graph intersects the x-axis in two places. This graph has two x-intercepts, namely, (−4, 0) and (2, 0). Furthermore, the graph intersects the y-axis in one place. The only y-intercept is (0, −3). Answer: x-intercepts: (−4, 0), (2, 0); y-intercept: (0, −3)   In our study of algebra, we will see that some graphs have many intercepts. Also, we will see that some graphs do not have any.   Example 7: Given the following graph, find the x- and y-intercepts: Solution: This is a graph of a circle; we can see that it does not intersect either axis. Therefore, this graph does not have any intercepts. Answer: None Finding Intercepts Given the Graph The x- and y-intercepts are important points on any graph. This chapter will focus on the graphs of linear equations. However, at this point, we can use these ideas to determine intercepts of nonlinear graphs. Remember that intercepts are ordered pairs that indicate where the graph intersects the axes.   Example 6: Find the x- and y-intercepts given the following graph: Solution: We see that the graph intersects the x-axis in two places. This graph has two x-intercepts, namely, (−4, 0) and (2, 0). Furthermore, the graph intersects the y-axis in one place. The only y-intercept is (0, −3). Answer: x-intercepts: (−4, 0), (2, 0); y-intercept: (0, −3)   In our study of algebra, we will see that some graphs have many intercepts. Also, we will see that some graphs do not have any.   Example 7: Given the following graph, find the x- and y-intercepts: Solution: This is a graph of a circle; we can see that it does not intersect either axis. Therefore, this graph does not have any intercepts. Answer: None  || 
book2_chapter3_4	 || Slope The steepness of any incline can be measured as the ratio of the vertical change to the horizontal change. For example, a 5% incline can be written as 5/100, which means that for every 100 feet forward, the height increases 5 feet. In mathematics, we call the incline of a line the slope The incline of a line measured as the ratio of the vertical change to the horizontal change, often referred to as rise over run. and use the letter m to denote it. The vertical change is called the rise The vertical change between any two points on a line. and the horizontal change is called the run The horizontal change between any two points on a line. . The rise and the run can be positive or negative. A positive rise corresponds to a vertical change up and a negative rise corresponds to a vertical change down. A positive run denotes a horizontal change to the right and a negative run corresponds to a horizontal change to the left. Given the graph, we can calculate the slope by determining the vertical and horizontal changes between any two points.   Example 1: Find the slope of the given line: Solution: From the given points on the graph, count 3 units down and 4 units right. Answer: m = − 3 4   Here we have a negative slope, which means that for every 4 units of movement to the right, the vertical change is 3 units downward. There are four geometric cases for the value of the slope. Reading the graph from left to right, we see that lines with an upward incline have positive slopes and lines with a downward incline have negative slopes. If the line is horizontal, then the rise is 0: The slope of a horizontal line is 0. If the line is vertical, then the run is 0: The slope of a vertical line is undefined.   Try this! Find the slope of the given line: Answer: m = 2 3 Video Solution Calculating the slope can be difficult if the graph does not have points with integer coordinates. Therefore, we next develop a formula that allows us to calculate the slope algebraically. Given any two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , we can obtain the rise and run by subtracting the corresponding coordinates. This leads us to the slope formula Given two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , then the slope of the line is given by the formula m = r i s e r u n = y 2 − y 1 x 2 − x 1 . . Given any two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , the slope is given by   Example 2: Find the slope of the line passing through (−3, −5) and (2, 1). Solution: Given (−3, −5) and (2, 1), calculate the difference of the y-values divided by the difference of the x-values. Since subtraction is not commutative, take care to be consistent when subtracting the coordinates. Answer: m = 6 5   We can graph the line described in the previous example and verify that the slope is 6/5. Certainly the graph is optional; the beauty of the slope formula is that we can obtain the slope, given two points, using only algebra.   Example 3: Find the slope of the line passing through (−4, 3) and (−1, −7). Solution: Answer: m = − 10 3   When using the slope formula, take care to be consistent since order does matter. You must subtract the coordinates of the first point from the coordinates of the second point for both the numerator and the denominator in the same order.   Example 4: Find the slope of the line passing through (7, −2) and (−5, −2). Solution: Answer: m = 0 . As an exercise, plot the given two points and verify that they lie on a horizontal line.   Example 5: Find the slope of the line passing through (−4, −3) and (−4, 5). Solution: Answer: The slope m is undefined. As an exercise, plot the given two points and verify that they lie on a vertical line.   Try this! Calculate the slope of the line passing through (−2, 3) and (5, −5). Answer: m = − 8 7 Video Solution When considering the slope as a rate of change it is important to include the correct units.   Example 6: A Corvette Coupe was purchased new in 1970 for about $5,200 and depreciated in value over time until it was sold in 1985 for $1,300. At this point, the car was beginning to be considered a classic and started to increase in value. In the year 2000, when the car was 30 years old, it sold at auction for $10,450. The following line graph depicts the value of the car over time. a. Determine the rate at which the car depreciated in value from 1970 to 1985. b. Determine the rate at which the car appreciated in value from 1985 to 2000. Solution: Notice that the value depends on the age of the car and that the slope measures the rate in dollars per year. a. The slope of the line segment depicting the value for the first 15 years is Answer: The value of the car depreciated $260 per year from 1970 to 1985. b. The slope of the line segment depicting the value for the next 15 years is Answer: The value of the car appreciated $610 per year from 1985 to 2000.  || Slope-Intercept Form of a Line To this point, we have learned how to graph lines by plotting points and by using the x- and y-intercepts. In addition, we have seen that we need only two points to graph a line. In this section, we outline a process to easily determine two points using the y-intercept and the slope. The equation of any nonvertical line can be written in slope-intercept form Any nonvertical line can be written in the form y = m x + b , where m is the slope and (0, b) is the y-intercept. y = m x + b . In this form, we can identify the slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0, b).   Example 7: Determine the slope and y-intercept: y = − 4 5 x + 7 . Solution: In this form, the coefficient of x is the slope, and the constant is the y-value of the y-intercept. Therefore, by inspection, we have Answer: The y-intercept is (0, 7), and the slope is m = − 4 5 .   It is not always the case that the linear equation is given in slope-intercept form. When it is given in standard form, you have to first solve for y to obtain slope-intercept form.   Example 8: Express 3 x + 5 y = 30 in slope-intercept form and then identify the slope and y-intercept. Solution: Begin by solving for y. To do this, apply the properties of equality to first isolate 5y and then divide both sides by 5. Answer: Slope-intercept form: y = − 3 5 x + 6 ; y-intercept: (0, 6); slope: m = − 3 5   Once the equation is in slope-intercept form, we immediately have one point to plot, the y-intercept. From the intercept, you can mark off the slope to plot another point on the line. From the previous example we have Starting from the point (0, 6), use the slope to mark another point 3 units down and 5 units to the right. It is not necessary to check that the second point, (5, 3), solves the original linear equation. However, we do it here for the sake of completeness. Marking off the slope in this fashion produces as many ordered pair solutions as we desire. Notice that if we mark off the slope again, from the point (5, 3), then we obtain the x-intercept, (10, 0).   Example 9: Graph: − x + 2 y = 4 . Solution: In this example, we outline the general steps for graphing a line using slope-intercept form. Step 1: Solve for y to obtain slope-intercept form. Step 2: Identify the y-intercept and slope. Step 3: Plot the y-intercept and use the slope to find another ordered pair solution. Starting from the y-intercept, mark off the slope and identify a second point. In this case, mark a point after a rise of 1 unit and a run of 2 units. Step 4: Draw the line through the two points with a straightedge. Answer: In this example, we notice that we could get the x-intercept by marking off the slope in a different but equivalent manner. Consider the slope as the ratio of two negative numbers as follows: We could obtain another point on the line by marking off the equivalent slope down 1 unit and left 2 units. We do this twice to obtain the x-intercept, (−4, 0). Marking off the slope multiple times is not necessarily always going to give us the x-intercept, but when it does, we obtain a valuable point with little effort. In fact, it is a good practice to mark off the slope multiple times; doing so allows you to obtain more points on the line and produce a more accurate graph.   Example 10: Graph and find the x-intercept: y = 3 4 x − 2 . Solution: The equation is given in slope-intercept form. Therefore, by inspection, we have the y-intercept and slope. We can see that the x-value of the x-intercept is a mixed number between 2 and 3. To algebraically find x-intercepts, recall that we must set y = 0 and solve for x. Answer: The x-intercept is ( 2 2 3 ,   0 ) .   Example 11: Graph: x − y = 0 . Solution: Begin by solving for y. The equation y = x can be written y = 1 x + 0 , and we have Answer:   Try this! Graph − 2 x + 5 y = 20 and label the x-intercept. Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_4_1	Slope The steepness of any incline can be measured as the ratio of the vertical change to the horizontal change. For example, a 5% incline can be written as 5/100, which means that for every 100 feet forward, the height increases 5 feet. In mathematics, we call the incline of a line the slope The incline of a line measured as the ratio of the vertical change to the horizontal change, often referred to as rise over run. and use the letter m to denote it. The vertical change is called the rise The vertical change between any two points on a line. and the horizontal change is called the run The horizontal change between any two points on a line. . The rise and the run can be positive or negative. A positive rise corresponds to a vertical change up and a negative rise corresponds to a vertical change down. A positive run denotes a horizontal change to the right and a negative run corresponds to a horizontal change to the left. Given the graph, we can calculate the slope by determining the vertical and horizontal changes between any two points.   Example 1: Find the slope of the given line: Solution: From the given points on the graph, count 3 units down and 4 units right. Answer: m = − 3 4   Here we have a negative slope, which means that for every 4 units of movement to the right, the vertical change is 3 units downward. There are four geometric cases for the value of the slope. Reading the graph from left to right, we see that lines with an upward incline have positive slopes and lines with a downward incline have negative slopes. If the line is horizontal, then the rise is 0: The slope of a horizontal line is 0. If the line is vertical, then the run is 0: The slope of a vertical line is undefined.   Try this! Find the slope of the given line: Answer: m = 2 3 Video Solution Calculating the slope can be difficult if the graph does not have points with integer coordinates. Therefore, we next develop a formula that allows us to calculate the slope algebraically. Given any two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , we can obtain the rise and run by subtracting the corresponding coordinates. This leads us to the slope formula Given two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , then the slope of the line is given by the formula m = r i s e r u n = y 2 − y 1 x 2 − x 1 . . Given any two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , the slope is given by   Example 2: Find the slope of the line passing through (−3, −5) and (2, 1). Solution: Given (−3, −5) and (2, 1), calculate the difference of the y-values divided by the difference of the x-values. Since subtraction is not commutative, take care to be consistent when subtracting the coordinates. Answer: m = 6 5   We can graph the line described in the previous example and verify that the slope is 6/5. Certainly the graph is optional; the beauty of the slope formula is that we can obtain the slope, given two points, using only algebra.   Example 3: Find the slope of the line passing through (−4, 3) and (−1, −7). Solution: Answer: m = − 10 3   When using the slope formula, take care to be consistent since order does matter. You must subtract the coordinates of the first point from the coordinates of the second point for both the numerator and the denominator in the same order.   Example 4: Find the slope of the line passing through (7, −2) and (−5, −2). Solution: Answer: m = 0 . As an exercise, plot the given two points and verify that they lie on a horizontal line.   Example 5: Find the slope of the line passing through (−4, −3) and (−4, 5). Solution: Answer: The slope m is undefined. As an exercise, plot the given two points and verify that they lie on a vertical line.   Try this! Calculate the slope of the line passing through (−2, 3) and (5, −5). Answer: m = − 8 7 Video Solution When considering the slope as a rate of change it is important to include the correct units.   Example 6: A Corvette Coupe was purchased new in 1970 for about $5,200 and depreciated in value over time until it was sold in 1985 for $1,300. At this point, the car was beginning to be considered a classic and started to increase in value. In the year 2000, when the car was 30 years old, it sold at auction for $10,450. The following line graph depicts the value of the car over time. a. Determine the rate at which the car depreciated in value from 1970 to 1985. b. Determine the rate at which the car appreciated in value from 1985 to 2000. Solution: Notice that the value depends on the age of the car and that the slope measures the rate in dollars per year. a. The slope of the line segment depicting the value for the first 15 years is Answer: The value of the car depreciated $260 per year from 1970 to 1985. b. The slope of the line segment depicting the value for the next 15 years is Answer: The value of the car appreciated $610 per year from 1985 to 2000. Slope The steepness of any incline can be measured as the ratio of the vertical change to the horizontal change. For example, a 5% incline can be written as 5/100, which means that for every 100 feet forward, the height increases 5 feet. In mathematics, we call the incline of a line the slope The incline of a line measured as the ratio of the vertical change to the horizontal change, often referred to as rise over run. and use the letter m to denote it. The vertical change is called the rise The vertical change between any two points on a line. and the horizontal change is called the run The horizontal change between any two points on a line. . The rise and the run can be positive or negative. A positive rise corresponds to a vertical change up and a negative rise corresponds to a vertical change down. A positive run denotes a horizontal change to the right and a negative run corresponds to a horizontal change to the left. Given the graph, we can calculate the slope by determining the vertical and horizontal changes between any two points.   Example 1: Find the slope of the given line: Solution: From the given points on the graph, count 3 units down and 4 units right. Answer: m = − 3 4   Here we have a negative slope, which means that for every 4 units of movement to the right, the vertical change is 3 units downward. There are four geometric cases for the value of the slope. Reading the graph from left to right, we see that lines with an upward incline have positive slopes and lines with a downward incline have negative slopes. If the line is horizontal, then the rise is 0: The slope of a horizontal line is 0. If the line is vertical, then the run is 0: The slope of a vertical line is undefined.   Try this! Find the slope of the given line: Answer: m = 2 3 Video Solution Calculating the slope can be difficult if the graph does not have points with integer coordinates. Therefore, we next develop a formula that allows us to calculate the slope algebraically. Given any two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , we can obtain the rise and run by subtracting the corresponding coordinates. This leads us to the slope formula Given two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , then the slope of the line is given by the formula m = r i s e r u n = y 2 − y 1 x 2 − x 1 . . Given any two points ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,   y 2 ) , the slope is given by   Example 2: Find the slope of the line passing through (−3, −5) and (2, 1). Solution: Given (−3, −5) and (2, 1), calculate the difference of the y-values divided by the difference of the x-values. Since subtraction is not commutative, take care to be consistent when subtracting the coordinates. Answer: m = 6 5   We can graph the line described in the previous example and verify that the slope is 6/5. Certainly the graph is optional; the beauty of the slope formula is that we can obtain the slope, given two points, using only algebra.   Example 3: Find the slope of the line passing through (−4, 3) and (−1, −7). Solution: Answer: m = − 10 3   When using the slope formula, take care to be consistent since order does matter. You must subtract the coordinates of the first point from the coordinates of the second point for both the numerator and the denominator in the same order.   Example 4: Find the slope of the line passing through (7, −2) and (−5, −2). Solution: Answer: m = 0 . As an exercise, plot the given two points and verify that they lie on a horizontal line.   Example 5: Find the slope of the line passing through (−4, −3) and (−4, 5). Solution: Answer: The slope m is undefined. As an exercise, plot the given two points and verify that they lie on a vertical line.   Try this! Calculate the slope of the line passing through (−2, 3) and (5, −5). Answer: m = − 8 7 Video Solution When considering the slope as a rate of change it is important to include the correct units.   Example 6: A Corvette Coupe was purchased new in 1970 for about $5,200 and depreciated in value over time until it was sold in 1985 for $1,300. At this point, the car was beginning to be considered a classic and started to increase in value. In the year 2000, when the car was 30 years old, it sold at auction for $10,450. The following line graph depicts the value of the car over time. a. Determine the rate at which the car depreciated in value from 1970 to 1985. b. Determine the rate at which the car appreciated in value from 1985 to 2000. Solution: Notice that the value depends on the age of the car and that the slope measures the rate in dollars per year. a. The slope of the line segment depicting the value for the first 15 years is Answer: The value of the car depreciated $260 per year from 1970 to 1985. b. The slope of the line segment depicting the value for the next 15 years is Answer: The value of the car appreciated $610 per year from 1985 to 2000.  || 
book2_chapter3_4_2	Slope-Intercept Form of a Line To this point, we have learned how to graph lines by plotting points and by using the x- and y-intercepts. In addition, we have seen that we need only two points to graph a line. In this section, we outline a process to easily determine two points using the y-intercept and the slope. The equation of any nonvertical line can be written in slope-intercept form Any nonvertical line can be written in the form y = m x + b , where m is the slope and (0, b) is the y-intercept. y = m x + b . In this form, we can identify the slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0, b).   Example 7: Determine the slope and y-intercept: y = − 4 5 x + 7 . Solution: In this form, the coefficient of x is the slope, and the constant is the y-value of the y-intercept. Therefore, by inspection, we have Answer: The y-intercept is (0, 7), and the slope is m = − 4 5 .   It is not always the case that the linear equation is given in slope-intercept form. When it is given in standard form, you have to first solve for y to obtain slope-intercept form.   Example 8: Express 3 x + 5 y = 30 in slope-intercept form and then identify the slope and y-intercept. Solution: Begin by solving for y. To do this, apply the properties of equality to first isolate 5y and then divide both sides by 5. Answer: Slope-intercept form: y = − 3 5 x + 6 ; y-intercept: (0, 6); slope: m = − 3 5   Once the equation is in slope-intercept form, we immediately have one point to plot, the y-intercept. From the intercept, you can mark off the slope to plot another point on the line. From the previous example we have Starting from the point (0, 6), use the slope to mark another point 3 units down and 5 units to the right. It is not necessary to check that the second point, (5, 3), solves the original linear equation. However, we do it here for the sake of completeness. Marking off the slope in this fashion produces as many ordered pair solutions as we desire. Notice that if we mark off the slope again, from the point (5, 3), then we obtain the x-intercept, (10, 0).   Example 9: Graph: − x + 2 y = 4 . Solution: In this example, we outline the general steps for graphing a line using slope-intercept form. Step 1: Solve for y to obtain slope-intercept form. Step 2: Identify the y-intercept and slope. Step 3: Plot the y-intercept and use the slope to find another ordered pair solution. Starting from the y-intercept, mark off the slope and identify a second point. In this case, mark a point after a rise of 1 unit and a run of 2 units. Step 4: Draw the line through the two points with a straightedge. Answer: In this example, we notice that we could get the x-intercept by marking off the slope in a different but equivalent manner. Consider the slope as the ratio of two negative numbers as follows: We could obtain another point on the line by marking off the equivalent slope down 1 unit and left 2 units. We do this twice to obtain the x-intercept, (−4, 0). Marking off the slope multiple times is not necessarily always going to give us the x-intercept, but when it does, we obtain a valuable point with little effort. In fact, it is a good practice to mark off the slope multiple times; doing so allows you to obtain more points on the line and produce a more accurate graph.   Example 10: Graph and find the x-intercept: y = 3 4 x − 2 . Solution: The equation is given in slope-intercept form. Therefore, by inspection, we have the y-intercept and slope. We can see that the x-value of the x-intercept is a mixed number between 2 and 3. To algebraically find x-intercepts, recall that we must set y = 0 and solve for x. Answer: The x-intercept is ( 2 2 3 ,   0 ) .   Example 11: Graph: x − y = 0 . Solution: Begin by solving for y. The equation y = x can be written y = 1 x + 0 , and we have Answer:   Try this! Graph − 2 x + 5 y = 20 and label the x-intercept. Answer: Video Solution Slope-Intercept Form of a Line To this point, we have learned how to graph lines by plotting points and by using the x- and y-intercepts. In addition, we have seen that we need only two points to graph a line. In this section, we outline a process to easily determine two points using the y-intercept and the slope. The equation of any nonvertical line can be written in slope-intercept form Any nonvertical line can be written in the form y = m x + b , where m is the slope and (0, b) is the y-intercept. y = m x + b . In this form, we can identify the slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0, b).   Example 7: Determine the slope and y-intercept: y = − 4 5 x + 7 . Solution: In this form, the coefficient of x is the slope, and the constant is the y-value of the y-intercept. Therefore, by inspection, we have Answer: The y-intercept is (0, 7), and the slope is m = − 4 5 .   It is not always the case that the linear equation is given in slope-intercept form. When it is given in standard form, you have to first solve for y to obtain slope-intercept form.   Example 8: Express 3 x + 5 y = 30 in slope-intercept form and then identify the slope and y-intercept. Solution: Begin by solving for y. To do this, apply the properties of equality to first isolate 5y and then divide both sides by 5. Answer: Slope-intercept form: y = − 3 5 x + 6 ; y-intercept: (0, 6); slope: m = − 3 5   Once the equation is in slope-intercept form, we immediately have one point to plot, the y-intercept. From the intercept, you can mark off the slope to plot another point on the line. From the previous example we have Starting from the point (0, 6), use the slope to mark another point 3 units down and 5 units to the right. It is not necessary to check that the second point, (5, 3), solves the original linear equation. However, we do it here for the sake of completeness. Marking off the slope in this fashion produces as many ordered pair solutions as we desire. Notice that if we mark off the slope again, from the point (5, 3), then we obtain the x-intercept, (10, 0).   Example 9: Graph: − x + 2 y = 4 . Solution: In this example, we outline the general steps for graphing a line using slope-intercept form. Step 1: Solve for y to obtain slope-intercept form. Step 2: Identify the y-intercept and slope. Step 3: Plot the y-intercept and use the slope to find another ordered pair solution. Starting from the y-intercept, mark off the slope and identify a second point. In this case, mark a point after a rise of 1 unit and a run of 2 units. Step 4: Draw the line through the two points with a straightedge. Answer: In this example, we notice that we could get the x-intercept by marking off the slope in a different but equivalent manner. Consider the slope as the ratio of two negative numbers as follows: We could obtain another point on the line by marking off the equivalent slope down 1 unit and left 2 units. We do this twice to obtain the x-intercept, (−4, 0). Marking off the slope multiple times is not necessarily always going to give us the x-intercept, but when it does, we obtain a valuable point with little effort. In fact, it is a good practice to mark off the slope multiple times; doing so allows you to obtain more points on the line and produce a more accurate graph.   Example 10: Graph and find the x-intercept: y = 3 4 x − 2 . Solution: The equation is given in slope-intercept form. Therefore, by inspection, we have the y-intercept and slope. We can see that the x-value of the x-intercept is a mixed number between 2 and 3. To algebraically find x-intercepts, recall that we must set y = 0 and solve for x. Answer: The x-intercept is ( 2 2 3 ,   0 ) .   Example 11: Graph: x − y = 0 . Solution: Begin by solving for y. The equation y = x can be written y = 1 x + 0 , and we have Answer:   Try this! Graph − 2 x + 5 y = 20 and label the x-intercept. Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_5	 || Finding Equations Using Slope-Intercept Form Given the algebraic equation of a line, we are able to graph it in a number of ways. In this section, we will be given a geometric description of a line and be asked to find the algebraic equation. Finding the equation of a line can be accomplished in a number of ways, the first of which makes use of slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . If we know the slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0, b), we can construct the equation.   Example 1: Find the equation of a line with slope m = − 5 8 and y-intercept (0, 1). Solution: The given y-intercept implies that b = 1 . Substitute the slope m and the y-value of the y-intercept b into the equation y = m x + b . Answer: y = − 5 8 x + 1   Finding a linear equation is very straightforward if the slope and y-intercept are given. This is certainly not always the case; however, the example demonstrates that the algebraic equation of a line depends on these two pieces of information. If the graph is given, then we can often read it to determine the y-intercept and slope.   Example 2: Find the equation of the line given the graph: Solution: By reading the graph, we can see that the y-intercept is (0, 4), and thus Furthermore, from the points (0, 4) to (4, 2), we can see that the rise is −2 units and the run is 4 units. Now substitute m and b into slope-intercept form: Answer: y = − 1 2 x + 4   Often the y-intercept and slope will not be given or are not easily discernible from the graph. For this reason, we will develop some algebraic techniques that allow us to calculate these quantities.   Example 3: Find the equation of the line with slope m = − 2 3 passing through (−6, 3). Solution: Begin by substituting the given slope into slope-intercept form. For the ordered pair (−6, 3) to be a solution, it must solve the equation. Therefore, we can use it to find b. Substitute the appropriate x- and y-values as follows: After substituting the appropriate values, solve for the only remaining variable, b. Once we have b, we can then complete the equation: As a check, verify that (−6, 3) solves this linear equation as follows: Answer: y = − 2 3 x − 1   Example 4: Find the equation of the line given the graph: Solution: Use the graph to determine the slope. From the points (−5, 2) to (−1, 0), we can see that the rise between the points is −2 units and the run is 4 units. Therefore, we calculate the slope as follows: Substitute the slope into slope-intercept form. Now substitute the coordinates of one of the given points to find b. It does not matter which one you choose. Here choose (−1, 0): Next, put it all together. Answer: y = − 1 2 x − 1 2   As an exercise, substitute the coordinates of the point (−5, 2) to see that b will turn out to be the same value. In fact, you can substitute any ordered pair solution of the line to find b. We next outline an algebraic technique for finding the equation of a nonvertical line passing through two given points.   Example 5: Find the equation of the line passing through (−4, −2) and (1, 3). Solution: When finding a linear equation using slope-intercept form y = m x + b , the goal is to find m and then b. Step 1: Find the slope m. In this case, given two points, use the slope formula. Substitute m = 1 into slope-intercept form. Step 2: Find b. To do this, substitute the coordinates of any given ordered pair solution. Use (1, 3): Step 3: Finish building the equation by substituting in the value for b. In this case, we use b = 2 . Answer: y = x + 2   These three steps outline the process for finding the equation of any nonvertical line in slope-intercept form. This is a completely algebraic method, but always keep in mind the geometry behind the technique. Note that the line has a y-intercept at (0, 2), with slope m = 1 .   Example 6: Find the equation of the line passing through (−1, 3) and (5, 1). Solution: First, find m, the slope. Given two points, use the slope formula as follows: Substitute m = − 1 3 into slope-intercept form. Next, find b. Substitute the coordinates of the point (−1, 3). Finally, substitute b = 8 3 into the equation. Answer: y = − 1 3 x + 8 3   Try this! Find the equation of the line passing through (−3, 4) and (6, −2). Answer: y = − 2 3 x + 2 Video Solution  || Finding Equations Using a Point and the Slope Given any point on a line and its slope, we can find the equation of that line. Begin by applying the slope formula with a given point ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and a variable point ( x ,   y ) . The equation y − y 1 =   m ( x − x 1 ) is called the point-slope form of a line Any nonvertical line can be written in the form y − y 1 =   m ( x − x 1 ) , where m is the slope and ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) is any point on the line. . Any nonvertical linear equation can be written in this form. It is useful for finding the equation of a line given the slope and any ordered pair solution.   Example 7: Find the equation of the line with slope m = 1 2 passing through (4, −1). Solution: Use point-slope form, where m = 1 2 and ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) = ( 4 , − 1 ) . At this point, we must choose to present the equation of our line in either standard form or slope-intercept form. In this textbook, we will present our lines in slope-intercept form. This facilitates future graphing. Answer: y = 1 2 x − 3   Example 8: Find the equation of the line passing through (−5, 3) with slope m = − 2 5 . Solution: Substitute (−5, 3) and m = − 2 5 into point-slope form. Answer: y = − 2 5 x + 1   It is always important to understand what is occurring geometrically. Compare the answer for the last example to the corresponding graph below. The geometric understanding is important because you will often be given graphs from which you will need to determine a point on the line and the slope.   Example 9: Find an equation of the given graph: Solution: Between the points (1, 1) to (3, 0), we can see that the rise is −1 unit and the run is 2 units. The slope of the line is m = r i s e r u n = − 1 2 = − 1 2 . Use this and the point (3, 0) to find the equation as follows: Answer: y = − 1 2 x + 3 2   Example 10: Find the equation of the line passing through (−1, 1) and (7, −1). Solution: Begin by calculating the slope using the slope formula. Next, substitute into point-slope form using one of the given points; it does not matter which point is used. Use m = − 1 4 and the point (−1, 1). Answer: y = − 1 4 x + 3 4   Try this! Find the equation of the line passing through (4, −5) and (−4, 1). Answer: y = − 3 4 x − 2 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_5_1	Finding Equations Using Slope-Intercept Form Given the algebraic equation of a line, we are able to graph it in a number of ways. In this section, we will be given a geometric description of a line and be asked to find the algebraic equation. Finding the equation of a line can be accomplished in a number of ways, the first of which makes use of slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . If we know the slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0, b), we can construct the equation.   Example 1: Find the equation of a line with slope m = − 5 8 and y-intercept (0, 1). Solution: The given y-intercept implies that b = 1 . Substitute the slope m and the y-value of the y-intercept b into the equation y = m x + b . Answer: y = − 5 8 x + 1   Finding a linear equation is very straightforward if the slope and y-intercept are given. This is certainly not always the case; however, the example demonstrates that the algebraic equation of a line depends on these two pieces of information. If the graph is given, then we can often read it to determine the y-intercept and slope.   Example 2: Find the equation of the line given the graph: Solution: By reading the graph, we can see that the y-intercept is (0, 4), and thus Furthermore, from the points (0, 4) to (4, 2), we can see that the rise is −2 units and the run is 4 units. Now substitute m and b into slope-intercept form: Answer: y = − 1 2 x + 4   Often the y-intercept and slope will not be given or are not easily discernible from the graph. For this reason, we will develop some algebraic techniques that allow us to calculate these quantities.   Example 3: Find the equation of the line with slope m = − 2 3 passing through (−6, 3). Solution: Begin by substituting the given slope into slope-intercept form. For the ordered pair (−6, 3) to be a solution, it must solve the equation. Therefore, we can use it to find b. Substitute the appropriate x- and y-values as follows: After substituting the appropriate values, solve for the only remaining variable, b. Once we have b, we can then complete the equation: As a check, verify that (−6, 3) solves this linear equation as follows: Answer: y = − 2 3 x − 1   Example 4: Find the equation of the line given the graph: Solution: Use the graph to determine the slope. From the points (−5, 2) to (−1, 0), we can see that the rise between the points is −2 units and the run is 4 units. Therefore, we calculate the slope as follows: Substitute the slope into slope-intercept form. Now substitute the coordinates of one of the given points to find b. It does not matter which one you choose. Here choose (−1, 0): Next, put it all together. Answer: y = − 1 2 x − 1 2   As an exercise, substitute the coordinates of the point (−5, 2) to see that b will turn out to be the same value. In fact, you can substitute any ordered pair solution of the line to find b. We next outline an algebraic technique for finding the equation of a nonvertical line passing through two given points.   Example 5: Find the equation of the line passing through (−4, −2) and (1, 3). Solution: When finding a linear equation using slope-intercept form y = m x + b , the goal is to find m and then b. Step 1: Find the slope m. In this case, given two points, use the slope formula. Substitute m = 1 into slope-intercept form. Step 2: Find b. To do this, substitute the coordinates of any given ordered pair solution. Use (1, 3): Step 3: Finish building the equation by substituting in the value for b. In this case, we use b = 2 . Answer: y = x + 2   These three steps outline the process for finding the equation of any nonvertical line in slope-intercept form. This is a completely algebraic method, but always keep in mind the geometry behind the technique. Note that the line has a y-intercept at (0, 2), with slope m = 1 .   Example 6: Find the equation of the line passing through (−1, 3) and (5, 1). Solution: First, find m, the slope. Given two points, use the slope formula as follows: Substitute m = − 1 3 into slope-intercept form. Next, find b. Substitute the coordinates of the point (−1, 3). Finally, substitute b = 8 3 into the equation. Answer: y = − 1 3 x + 8 3   Try this! Find the equation of the line passing through (−3, 4) and (6, −2). Answer: y = − 2 3 x + 2 Video Solution Finding Equations Using Slope-Intercept Form Given the algebraic equation of a line, we are able to graph it in a number of ways. In this section, we will be given a geometric description of a line and be asked to find the algebraic equation. Finding the equation of a line can be accomplished in a number of ways, the first of which makes use of slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . If we know the slope, m, and the y-intercept, (0, b), we can construct the equation.   Example 1: Find the equation of a line with slope m = − 5 8 and y-intercept (0, 1). Solution: The given y-intercept implies that b = 1 . Substitute the slope m and the y-value of the y-intercept b into the equation y = m x + b . Answer: y = − 5 8 x + 1   Finding a linear equation is very straightforward if the slope and y-intercept are given. This is certainly not always the case; however, the example demonstrates that the algebraic equation of a line depends on these two pieces of information. If the graph is given, then we can often read it to determine the y-intercept and slope.   Example 2: Find the equation of the line given the graph: Solution: By reading the graph, we can see that the y-intercept is (0, 4), and thus Furthermore, from the points (0, 4) to (4, 2), we can see that the rise is −2 units and the run is 4 units. Now substitute m and b into slope-intercept form: Answer: y = − 1 2 x + 4   Often the y-intercept and slope will not be given or are not easily discernible from the graph. For this reason, we will develop some algebraic techniques that allow us to calculate these quantities.   Example 3: Find the equation of the line with slope m = − 2 3 passing through (−6, 3). Solution: Begin by substituting the given slope into slope-intercept form. For the ordered pair (−6, 3) to be a solution, it must solve the equation. Therefore, we can use it to find b. Substitute the appropriate x- and y-values as follows: After substituting the appropriate values, solve for the only remaining variable, b. Once we have b, we can then complete the equation: As a check, verify that (−6, 3) solves this linear equation as follows: Answer: y = − 2 3 x − 1   Example 4: Find the equation of the line given the graph: Solution: Use the graph to determine the slope. From the points (−5, 2) to (−1, 0), we can see that the rise between the points is −2 units and the run is 4 units. Therefore, we calculate the slope as follows: Substitute the slope into slope-intercept form. Now substitute the coordinates of one of the given points to find b. It does not matter which one you choose. Here choose (−1, 0): Next, put it all together. Answer: y = − 1 2 x − 1 2   As an exercise, substitute the coordinates of the point (−5, 2) to see that b will turn out to be the same value. In fact, you can substitute any ordered pair solution of the line to find b. We next outline an algebraic technique for finding the equation of a nonvertical line passing through two given points.   Example 5: Find the equation of the line passing through (−4, −2) and (1, 3). Solution: When finding a linear equation using slope-intercept form y = m x + b , the goal is to find m and then b. Step 1: Find the slope m. In this case, given two points, use the slope formula. Substitute m = 1 into slope-intercept form. Step 2: Find b. To do this, substitute the coordinates of any given ordered pair solution. Use (1, 3): Step 3: Finish building the equation by substituting in the value for b. In this case, we use b = 2 . Answer: y = x + 2   These three steps outline the process for finding the equation of any nonvertical line in slope-intercept form. This is a completely algebraic method, but always keep in mind the geometry behind the technique. Note that the line has a y-intercept at (0, 2), with slope m = 1 .   Example 6: Find the equation of the line passing through (−1, 3) and (5, 1). Solution: First, find m, the slope. Given two points, use the slope formula as follows: Substitute m = − 1 3 into slope-intercept form. Next, find b. Substitute the coordinates of the point (−1, 3). Finally, substitute b = 8 3 into the equation. Answer: y = − 1 3 x + 8 3   Try this! Find the equation of the line passing through (−3, 4) and (6, −2). Answer: y = − 2 3 x + 2 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_5_2	Finding Equations Using a Point and the Slope Given any point on a line and its slope, we can find the equation of that line. Begin by applying the slope formula with a given point ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and a variable point ( x ,   y ) . The equation y − y 1 =   m ( x − x 1 ) is called the point-slope form of a line Any nonvertical line can be written in the form y − y 1 =   m ( x − x 1 ) , where m is the slope and ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) is any point on the line. . Any nonvertical linear equation can be written in this form. It is useful for finding the equation of a line given the slope and any ordered pair solution.   Example 7: Find the equation of the line with slope m = 1 2 passing through (4, −1). Solution: Use point-slope form, where m = 1 2 and ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) = ( 4 , − 1 ) . At this point, we must choose to present the equation of our line in either standard form or slope-intercept form. In this textbook, we will present our lines in slope-intercept form. This facilitates future graphing. Answer: y = 1 2 x − 3   Example 8: Find the equation of the line passing through (−5, 3) with slope m = − 2 5 . Solution: Substitute (−5, 3) and m = − 2 5 into point-slope form. Answer: y = − 2 5 x + 1   It is always important to understand what is occurring geometrically. Compare the answer for the last example to the corresponding graph below. The geometric understanding is important because you will often be given graphs from which you will need to determine a point on the line and the slope.   Example 9: Find an equation of the given graph: Solution: Between the points (1, 1) to (3, 0), we can see that the rise is −1 unit and the run is 2 units. The slope of the line is m = r i s e r u n = − 1 2 = − 1 2 . Use this and the point (3, 0) to find the equation as follows: Answer: y = − 1 2 x + 3 2   Example 10: Find the equation of the line passing through (−1, 1) and (7, −1). Solution: Begin by calculating the slope using the slope formula. Next, substitute into point-slope form using one of the given points; it does not matter which point is used. Use m = − 1 4 and the point (−1, 1). Answer: y = − 1 4 x + 3 4   Try this! Find the equation of the line passing through (4, −5) and (−4, 1). Answer: y = − 3 4 x − 2 Video Solution Finding Equations Using a Point and the Slope Given any point on a line and its slope, we can find the equation of that line. Begin by applying the slope formula with a given point ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) and a variable point ( x ,   y ) . The equation y − y 1 =   m ( x − x 1 ) is called the point-slope form of a line Any nonvertical line can be written in the form y − y 1 =   m ( x − x 1 ) , where m is the slope and ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) is any point on the line. . Any nonvertical linear equation can be written in this form. It is useful for finding the equation of a line given the slope and any ordered pair solution.   Example 7: Find the equation of the line with slope m = 1 2 passing through (4, −1). Solution: Use point-slope form, where m = 1 2 and ( x 1 ,   y 1 ) = ( 4 , − 1 ) . At this point, we must choose to present the equation of our line in either standard form or slope-intercept form. In this textbook, we will present our lines in slope-intercept form. This facilitates future graphing. Answer: y = 1 2 x − 3   Example 8: Find the equation of the line passing through (−5, 3) with slope m = − 2 5 . Solution: Substitute (−5, 3) and m = − 2 5 into point-slope form. Answer: y = − 2 5 x + 1   It is always important to understand what is occurring geometrically. Compare the answer for the last example to the corresponding graph below. The geometric understanding is important because you will often be given graphs from which you will need to determine a point on the line and the slope.   Example 9: Find an equation of the given graph: Solution: Between the points (1, 1) to (3, 0), we can see that the rise is −1 unit and the run is 2 units. The slope of the line is m = r i s e r u n = − 1 2 = − 1 2 . Use this and the point (3, 0) to find the equation as follows: Answer: y = − 1 2 x + 3 2   Example 10: Find the equation of the line passing through (−1, 1) and (7, −1). Solution: Begin by calculating the slope using the slope formula. Next, substitute into point-slope form using one of the given points; it does not matter which point is used. Use m = − 1 4 and the point (−1, 1). Answer: y = − 1 4 x + 3 4   Try this! Find the equation of the line passing through (4, −5) and (−4, 1). Answer: y = − 3 4 x − 2 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_6	 || Definition of Parallel and Perpendicular Parallel lines Lines in the same plane that do not intersect; their slopes are the same. are lines in the same plane that never intersect. Two nonvertical lines in the same plane, with slopes m 1 and m 2 , are parallel if their slopes are the same, m 1 = m 2 . Consider the following two lines: Consider their corresponding graphs: Both lines have a slope m = 3 4 and thus are parallel. Perpendicular lines Lines in the same plane that intersect at right angles; their slopes are opposite reciprocals. are lines in the same plane that intersect at right angles (90 degrees). Two nonvertical lines in the same plane, with slopes m 1 and m 2 , are perpendicular if the product of their slopes is −1: m 1 ⋅ m 2 = − 1 . We can solve for m 1 and obtain m 1 = − 1 m 2 . In this form, we see that perpendicular lines have slopes that are negative reciprocals, or opposite reciprocals Two real numbers whose product is −1. Given a real number a b , the opposite reciprocal is − b a . . For example, if given a slope then the slope of a perpendicular line is the opposite reciprocal: The mathematical notation m ⊥ reads “m perpendicular.” We can verify that two slopes produce perpendicular lines if their product is −1. Geometrically, we note that if a line has a positive slope, then any perpendicular line will have a negative slope. Furthermore, the rise and run between two perpendicular lines are interchanged. Perpendicular lines have slopes that are opposite reciprocals, so remember to find the reciprocal and change the sign. In other words, Determining the slope of a perpendicular line can be performed mentally. Some examples follow. Given slope Slope of perpendicular line m = 1 2 m ⊥ = − 2 m = − 3 4 m ⊥ = 4 3 m = 3 m ⊥ = − 1 3 m = − 4 m ⊥ = 1 4   Example 1: Determine the slope of a line parallel to y = − 5 x + 3 . Solution: Since the given line is in slope-intercept form, we can see that its slope is m = − 5 . Thus the slope of any line parallel to the given line must be the same, m ∥ = − 5 . The mathematical notation m ∥ reads “m parallel.” Answer: m ∥ = − 5   Example 2: Determine the slope of a line perpendicular to 3 x − 7 y = 21 . Solution: First, solve for y and express the line in slope-intercept form. In this form, we can see that the slope of the given line is m = 3 7 , and thus m ⊥ = − 7 3 . Answer: m ⊥ = − 7 3   Try this! Find the slope of the line perpendicular to 15 x + 5 y = 20 . Answer: m ⊥ = 1 3 Video Solution  || Finding Equations of Parallel and Perpendicular Lines We have seen that the graph of a line is completely determined by two points or one point and its slope. Often you will be asked to find the equation of a line given some geometric relationship—for instance, whether the line is parallel or perpendicular to another line.   Example 3: Find the equation of the line passing through (6, −1) and parallel to y = 1 2 x + 2 . Solution: Here the given line has slope m = 1 2 , and the slope of a line parallel is m ∥ = 1 2 . Since you are given a point and the slope, use the point-slope form of a line to determine the equation. Answer: y = 1 2 x − 4   It is important to have a geometric understanding of this question. We were asked to find the equation of a line parallel to another line passing through a certain point. Through the point (6, −1) we found a parallel line, y = 1 2 x − 4 , shown dashed. Notice that the slope is the same as the given line, but the y-intercept is different. If we keep in mind the geometric interpretation, then it will be easier to remember the process needed to solve the problem.   Example 4: Find the equation of the line passing through (−1, −5) and perpendicular to y = − 1 4 x + 2 . Solution: The given line has slope m = − 1 4 , and thus m ⊥ = + 4 1 = 4 . Substitute this slope and the given point into point-slope form. Answer: y = 4 x − 1   Geometrically, we see that the line y = 4 x − 1 , shown dashed below, passes through (−1, −5) and is perpendicular to the given line. It is not always the case that the given line is in slope-intercept form. Often you have to perform additional steps to determine the slope. The general steps for finding the equation of a line are outlined in the following example.   Example 5: Find the equation of the line passing through (8, −2) and perpendicular to 6 x + 3 y = 1 . Solution: Step 1: Find the slope m. First, find the slope of the given line. To do this, solve for y to change standard form to slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . In this form, you can see that the slope is m = − 2 = − 2 1 , and thus m ⊥ = − 1 − 2 = + 1 2 . Step 2: Substitute the slope you found and the given point into the point-slope form of an equation for a line. In this case, the slope is m ⊥ = 1 2 and the given point is (8, −2). Step 3: Solve for y. Answer: y = 1 2 x − 6   Example 6: Find the equation of the line passing through ( 7 2 ,   1 ) and parallel to 2 x + 14 y = 7 . Solution: Find the slope m by solving for y. The given line has the slope m = − 1 7 , and so m ∥ = − 1 7 . We use this and the point ( 7 2 ,   1 ) in point-slope form. Answer: y = − 1 7 x + 3 2   Try this! Find the equation of the line perpendicular to x − 3 y = 9 and passing through ( − 1 2 ,   2 ) . Answer: y = − 3 x + 1 2 Video Solution When finding an equation of a line perpendicular to a horizontal or vertical line, it is best to consider the geometric interpretation.   Example 7: Find the equation of the line passing through (−3, −2) and perpendicular to y = 4 . Solution: We recognize that y = 4 is a horizontal line and we want to find a perpendicular line passing through (−3, −2). If we draw the line perpendicular to the given horizontal line, the result is a vertical line. Equations of vertical lines look like x = k . Since it must pass through (−3, −2), we conclude that x = − 3 is the equation. All ordered pair solutions of a vertical line must share the same x-coordinate. Answer: x = − 3   We can rewrite the equation of any horizontal line, y = k , in slope-intercept form as follows: Written in this form, we see that the slope is m = 0 = 0 1 . If we try to find the slope of a perpendicular line by finding the opposite reciprocal, we run into a problem: m ⊥ = − 1 0 , which is undefined. This is why we took care to restrict the definition to two nonvertical lines. Remember that horizontal lines are perpendicular to vertical lines.  || 
book2_chapter3_6_1	Definition of Parallel and Perpendicular Parallel lines Lines in the same plane that do not intersect; their slopes are the same. are lines in the same plane that never intersect. Two nonvertical lines in the same plane, with slopes m 1 and m 2 , are parallel if their slopes are the same, m 1 = m 2 . Consider the following two lines: Consider their corresponding graphs: Both lines have a slope m = 3 4 and thus are parallel. Perpendicular lines Lines in the same plane that intersect at right angles; their slopes are opposite reciprocals. are lines in the same plane that intersect at right angles (90 degrees). Two nonvertical lines in the same plane, with slopes m 1 and m 2 , are perpendicular if the product of their slopes is −1: m 1 ⋅ m 2 = − 1 . We can solve for m 1 and obtain m 1 = − 1 m 2 . In this form, we see that perpendicular lines have slopes that are negative reciprocals, or opposite reciprocals Two real numbers whose product is −1. Given a real number a b , the opposite reciprocal is − b a . . For example, if given a slope then the slope of a perpendicular line is the opposite reciprocal: The mathematical notation m ⊥ reads “m perpendicular.” We can verify that two slopes produce perpendicular lines if their product is −1. Geometrically, we note that if a line has a positive slope, then any perpendicular line will have a negative slope. Furthermore, the rise and run between two perpendicular lines are interchanged. Perpendicular lines have slopes that are opposite reciprocals, so remember to find the reciprocal and change the sign. In other words, Determining the slope of a perpendicular line can be performed mentally. Some examples follow. Given slope Slope of perpendicular line m = 1 2 m ⊥ = − 2 m = − 3 4 m ⊥ = 4 3 m = 3 m ⊥ = − 1 3 m = − 4 m ⊥ = 1 4   Example 1: Determine the slope of a line parallel to y = − 5 x + 3 . Solution: Since the given line is in slope-intercept form, we can see that its slope is m = − 5 . Thus the slope of any line parallel to the given line must be the same, m ∥ = − 5 . The mathematical notation m ∥ reads “m parallel.” Answer: m ∥ = − 5   Example 2: Determine the slope of a line perpendicular to 3 x − 7 y = 21 . Solution: First, solve for y and express the line in slope-intercept form. In this form, we can see that the slope of the given line is m = 3 7 , and thus m ⊥ = − 7 3 . Answer: m ⊥ = − 7 3   Try this! Find the slope of the line perpendicular to 15 x + 5 y = 20 . Answer: m ⊥ = 1 3 Video Solution Definition of Parallel and Perpendicular Parallel lines Lines in the same plane that do not intersect; their slopes are the same. are lines in the same plane that never intersect. Two nonvertical lines in the same plane, with slopes m 1 and m 2 , are parallel if their slopes are the same, m 1 = m 2 . Consider the following two lines: Consider their corresponding graphs: Both lines have a slope m = 3 4 and thus are parallel. Perpendicular lines Lines in the same plane that intersect at right angles; their slopes are opposite reciprocals. are lines in the same plane that intersect at right angles (90 degrees). Two nonvertical lines in the same plane, with slopes m 1 and m 2 , are perpendicular if the product of their slopes is −1: m 1 ⋅ m 2 = − 1 . We can solve for m 1 and obtain m 1 = − 1 m 2 . In this form, we see that perpendicular lines have slopes that are negative reciprocals, or opposite reciprocals Two real numbers whose product is −1. Given a real number a b , the opposite reciprocal is − b a . . For example, if given a slope then the slope of a perpendicular line is the opposite reciprocal: The mathematical notation m ⊥ reads “m perpendicular.” We can verify that two slopes produce perpendicular lines if their product is −1. Geometrically, we note that if a line has a positive slope, then any perpendicular line will have a negative slope. Furthermore, the rise and run between two perpendicular lines are interchanged. Perpendicular lines have slopes that are opposite reciprocals, so remember to find the reciprocal and change the sign. In other words, Determining the slope of a perpendicular line can be performed mentally. Some examples follow. Given slope Slope of perpendicular line m = 1 2 m ⊥ = − 2 m = − 3 4 m ⊥ = 4 3 m = 3 m ⊥ = − 1 3 m = − 4 m ⊥ = 1 4   Example 1: Determine the slope of a line parallel to y = − 5 x + 3 . Solution: Since the given line is in slope-intercept form, we can see that its slope is m = − 5 . Thus the slope of any line parallel to the given line must be the same, m ∥ = − 5 . The mathematical notation m ∥ reads “m parallel.” Answer: m ∥ = − 5   Example 2: Determine the slope of a line perpendicular to 3 x − 7 y = 21 . Solution: First, solve for y and express the line in slope-intercept form. In this form, we can see that the slope of the given line is m = 3 7 , and thus m ⊥ = − 7 3 . Answer: m ⊥ = − 7 3   Try this! Find the slope of the line perpendicular to 15 x + 5 y = 20 . Answer: m ⊥ = 1 3 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_6_2	Finding Equations of Parallel and Perpendicular Lines We have seen that the graph of a line is completely determined by two points or one point and its slope. Often you will be asked to find the equation of a line given some geometric relationship—for instance, whether the line is parallel or perpendicular to another line.   Example 3: Find the equation of the line passing through (6, −1) and parallel to y = 1 2 x + 2 . Solution: Here the given line has slope m = 1 2 , and the slope of a line parallel is m ∥ = 1 2 . Since you are given a point and the slope, use the point-slope form of a line to determine the equation. Answer: y = 1 2 x − 4   It is important to have a geometric understanding of this question. We were asked to find the equation of a line parallel to another line passing through a certain point. Through the point (6, −1) we found a parallel line, y = 1 2 x − 4 , shown dashed. Notice that the slope is the same as the given line, but the y-intercept is different. If we keep in mind the geometric interpretation, then it will be easier to remember the process needed to solve the problem.   Example 4: Find the equation of the line passing through (−1, −5) and perpendicular to y = − 1 4 x + 2 . Solution: The given line has slope m = − 1 4 , and thus m ⊥ = + 4 1 = 4 . Substitute this slope and the given point into point-slope form. Answer: y = 4 x − 1   Geometrically, we see that the line y = 4 x − 1 , shown dashed below, passes through (−1, −5) and is perpendicular to the given line. It is not always the case that the given line is in slope-intercept form. Often you have to perform additional steps to determine the slope. The general steps for finding the equation of a line are outlined in the following example.   Example 5: Find the equation of the line passing through (8, −2) and perpendicular to 6 x + 3 y = 1 . Solution: Step 1: Find the slope m. First, find the slope of the given line. To do this, solve for y to change standard form to slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . In this form, you can see that the slope is m = − 2 = − 2 1 , and thus m ⊥ = − 1 − 2 = + 1 2 . Step 2: Substitute the slope you found and the given point into the point-slope form of an equation for a line. In this case, the slope is m ⊥ = 1 2 and the given point is (8, −2). Step 3: Solve for y. Answer: y = 1 2 x − 6   Example 6: Find the equation of the line passing through ( 7 2 ,   1 ) and parallel to 2 x + 14 y = 7 . Solution: Find the slope m by solving for y. The given line has the slope m = − 1 7 , and so m ∥ = − 1 7 . We use this and the point ( 7 2 ,   1 ) in point-slope form. Answer: y = − 1 7 x + 3 2   Try this! Find the equation of the line perpendicular to x − 3 y = 9 and passing through ( − 1 2 ,   2 ) . Answer: y = − 3 x + 1 2 Video Solution When finding an equation of a line perpendicular to a horizontal or vertical line, it is best to consider the geometric interpretation.   Example 7: Find the equation of the line passing through (−3, −2) and perpendicular to y = 4 . Solution: We recognize that y = 4 is a horizontal line and we want to find a perpendicular line passing through (−3, −2). If we draw the line perpendicular to the given horizontal line, the result is a vertical line. Equations of vertical lines look like x = k . Since it must pass through (−3, −2), we conclude that x = − 3 is the equation. All ordered pair solutions of a vertical line must share the same x-coordinate. Answer: x = − 3   We can rewrite the equation of any horizontal line, y = k , in slope-intercept form as follows: Written in this form, we see that the slope is m = 0 = 0 1 . If we try to find the slope of a perpendicular line by finding the opposite reciprocal, we run into a problem: m ⊥ = − 1 0 , which is undefined. This is why we took care to restrict the definition to two nonvertical lines. Remember that horizontal lines are perpendicular to vertical lines. Finding Equations of Parallel and Perpendicular Lines We have seen that the graph of a line is completely determined by two points or one point and its slope. Often you will be asked to find the equation of a line given some geometric relationship—for instance, whether the line is parallel or perpendicular to another line.   Example 3: Find the equation of the line passing through (6, −1) and parallel to y = 1 2 x + 2 . Solution: Here the given line has slope m = 1 2 , and the slope of a line parallel is m ∥ = 1 2 . Since you are given a point and the slope, use the point-slope form of a line to determine the equation. Answer: y = 1 2 x − 4   It is important to have a geometric understanding of this question. We were asked to find the equation of a line parallel to another line passing through a certain point. Through the point (6, −1) we found a parallel line, y = 1 2 x − 4 , shown dashed. Notice that the slope is the same as the given line, but the y-intercept is different. If we keep in mind the geometric interpretation, then it will be easier to remember the process needed to solve the problem.   Example 4: Find the equation of the line passing through (−1, −5) and perpendicular to y = − 1 4 x + 2 . Solution: The given line has slope m = − 1 4 , and thus m ⊥ = + 4 1 = 4 . Substitute this slope and the given point into point-slope form. Answer: y = 4 x − 1   Geometrically, we see that the line y = 4 x − 1 , shown dashed below, passes through (−1, −5) and is perpendicular to the given line. It is not always the case that the given line is in slope-intercept form. Often you have to perform additional steps to determine the slope. The general steps for finding the equation of a line are outlined in the following example.   Example 5: Find the equation of the line passing through (8, −2) and perpendicular to 6 x + 3 y = 1 . Solution: Step 1: Find the slope m. First, find the slope of the given line. To do this, solve for y to change standard form to slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . In this form, you can see that the slope is m = − 2 = − 2 1 , and thus m ⊥ = − 1 − 2 = + 1 2 . Step 2: Substitute the slope you found and the given point into the point-slope form of an equation for a line. In this case, the slope is m ⊥ = 1 2 and the given point is (8, −2). Step 3: Solve for y. Answer: y = 1 2 x − 6   Example 6: Find the equation of the line passing through ( 7 2 ,   1 ) and parallel to 2 x + 14 y = 7 . Solution: Find the slope m by solving for y. The given line has the slope m = − 1 7 , and so m ∥ = − 1 7 . We use this and the point ( 7 2 ,   1 ) in point-slope form. Answer: y = − 1 7 x + 3 2   Try this! Find the equation of the line perpendicular to x − 3 y = 9 and passing through ( − 1 2 ,   2 ) . Answer: y = − 3 x + 1 2 Video Solution When finding an equation of a line perpendicular to a horizontal or vertical line, it is best to consider the geometric interpretation.   Example 7: Find the equation of the line passing through (−3, −2) and perpendicular to y = 4 . Solution: We recognize that y = 4 is a horizontal line and we want to find a perpendicular line passing through (−3, −2). If we draw the line perpendicular to the given horizontal line, the result is a vertical line. Equations of vertical lines look like x = k . Since it must pass through (−3, −2), we conclude that x = − 3 is the equation. All ordered pair solutions of a vertical line must share the same x-coordinate. Answer: x = − 3   We can rewrite the equation of any horizontal line, y = k , in slope-intercept form as follows: Written in this form, we see that the slope is m = 0 = 0 1 . If we try to find the slope of a perpendicular line by finding the opposite reciprocal, we run into a problem: m ⊥ = − 1 0 , which is undefined. This is why we took care to restrict the definition to two nonvertical lines. Remember that horizontal lines are perpendicular to vertical lines.  || 
book2_chapter3_7	 || Relations, Functions, Domain, and Range Relationships between sets occur often in everyday life. For example, for each month in Cape Canaveral, we can associate an average amount of rainfall. In this case, the amount of precipitation depends on the month of the year, and the data can be written in tabular form or as a set of ordered pairs. Month Precipitation Ordered pairs January 2.4 in (January, 2.4) February 3.3 in (February, 3.3) March 3.1 in (March, 3.1) April 2.0 in (April, 2.0) May 3.8 in (May, 3.8) June 6.8 in (June, 6.8) July 8.1 in (July, 8.1) August 7.6 in (August, 7.6) September 7.3 in (September, 7.3) October 4.1 in (October, 4.1) November 3.3 in (November, 3.3) December 2.4 in (December, 2.4) We define a relation Any set of ordered pairs. as any set of ordered pairs. Usually we write the independent component of the relation in the first column and the dependent component in the second column. In the opening example, notice that it makes sense to relate the average amount of precipitation as dependent on the month of year. The set of all elements in the first column of a relation is called the domain The set of first components of a relation. The x-values define the domain in relations consisting of points (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. . The set of all elements that compose the second column is called the range The set of second components of a relation. The y-values define the range in relations consisting of points (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. . In this example, the domain consists of the set of all months of the year, and the range consists of the values that represent the average rainfall for each month. In the context of algebra, the relations of interest are sets of ordered pairs (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. In this case, the x-values define the domain and the y-values define the range. Of special interest are relations where every x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value; these relations are called functions Relations where every x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value. With the definition comes new notation: f ( x ) = y , which is read “f of x is equal to y.” .   Example 1: Determine the domain and range of the following relation and state whether or not it is a function: {(−1, 4), (0, 7), (2, 3), (3, 3), (4, −2)}. Solution: Here we separate the domain and range and depict the correspondence between the values with arrows. Answer: The domain is {−1, 0, 2, 3, 4}, and the range is {−2, 3, 4, 7}. The relation is a function because each x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value.   Example 2: Determine the domain and range of the following relation and state whether or not it is a function: {(−4, −3), (−2, 6), (0, 3), (3, 5), (3, 7)}. Solution: Answer: The domain is {−4, −2, 0, 3}, and the range is {−3, 3, 5, 6, 7}. This relation is not a function because the x-value 3 has two corresponding y-values.   In the previous example, the relation is not a function because it contains ordered pairs with the same x-value, (3, 5) and (3, 7). We can recognize functions as relations where no x-values are repeated. In algebra, equations such as y = 3 4 x − 2 define relations. This linear equation can be graphed as follows: The graph is a relation since it represents the infinite set of ordered pair solutions to y = 3 4 x − 2 . The domain is the set of all x-values, and in this case consists of all real numbers. The range is the set of all possible y-values, and in this case also consists of all real numbers. Furthermore, the graph is a function because for each x-value there is only one corresponding y-value. In fact, any nonvertical or nonhorizontal line is a function with domain and range consisting of all real numbers. Any graph is a set of ordered pairs and thus defines a relation. Consider the following graph of a circle: Here the graph represents a relation where many x-values in the domain correspond to two y-values. If we draw a vertical line, as illustrated, we can see that (3, 2) and (3, −2) are two ordered pairs with the same x-value. Therefore, the x-value 3 corresponds to two y-values; hence the graph does not represent a function. The illustration suggests that if any vertical line intersects a graph more than once, then the graph does not represent a function. This is called the vertical line test If a vertical line intersects a graph more than once, then the graph does not represent a function. .   Example 3: Given the following graph, determine the domain and range and state whether or not it is a function. Solution: The given shape is called a parabola and extends indefinitely to the left and right as indicated by the arrows. This suggests that if we choose any x-value, then we will be able to find a corresponding point on the graph; therefore, the domain consists of all real numbers. Furthermore, the graph shows that −1 is the minimum y-value, and any y-value greater than that is represented in the relation. Hence the range consists of all y-values greater than or equal to −1, or in interval notation, [ − 1 ,   ∞ ) . Lastly, any vertical line will intersect the graph only once; therefore, it is a function. Answer: The domain is all real numbers R = (−∞, ∞), and the range is [ − 1 ,   ∞ ) . The graph represents a function because it passes the vertical line test.   Try this! Given the graph, determine the domain and range and state whether or not it is a function: Answer: Domain: [ − 4 ,   ∞ ) ; range: ( − ∞ ,   ∞ ) ; function: no Video Solution  || Function Notation and Linear Functions With the definition of a function comes special notation. If we consider each x-value to be the input that produces exactly one output, then we can use the notation The notation f ( x ) reads “f of x” and should not be confused with multiplication. Most of our study of algebra involves functions, so the notation becomes very useful when performing common tasks. Functions can be named with different letters; some common names for functions are g(x), h(x), C(x), and R(x). First, consider nonvertical lines that we know can be expressed using slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . For any real numbers m and b, the equation defines a function, and we can replace y with the new notation f ( x ) as follows: Therefore, a linear function Any function that can be written in the form f(x) = mx + b. is any function that can be written in the form f ( x ) = m x + b . In particular, we can write the following: The notation also shows values to evaluate in the equation. If the value for x is given as 8, then we know that we can find the corresponding y-value by substituting 8 in for x and simplifying. Using function notation, this is denoted f ( 8 ) and can be interpreted as follows: Finally, simplify: We have f ( 8 ) = 4 . This notation tells us that when x = 8 (the input), the function results in 4 (the output).   Example 4: Given the linear function f ( x ) = − 5 x + 7 , find f ( − 2 ) . Solution: In this case, f ( − 2 ) indicates that we should evaluate when x = − 2 . Answer: f ( − 2 ) = 17   Example 5: Given the linear function f ( x ) = − 5 x + 7 , find x when f ( x ) = 10 . Solution: In this case, f ( x ) = 10 indicates that the function should be set equal to 10. Answer: Here x = − 3 5 , and we can write f ( − 3 5 ) = 10 .   Example 6: Given the graph of a linear function g ( x ) , a. Find g ( 2 ) . b. Find x when g ( x ) = 3 . Solution: a. The notation g ( 2 ) implies that x = 2. Use the graph to determine the corresponding y-value. Answer: g ( 2 ) = 1 b. The notation g ( x ) = 3 implies that the y-value is given as 3. Use the graph to determine the corresponding x-value. Answer: x = 4   Example 7: Graph the linear function f ( x ) = − 5 3 x + 6 and state the domain and range. Solution: From the function, we see that b = 6 and thus the y-intercept is (0, 6). Also, we can see that the slope is m = − 5 3 = − 5 3 = r i s e r u n . Starting from the y-intercept, mark a second point down 5 units and right 3 units. Given any coordinate on the x-axis, we can find a corresponding point on the graph; the domain consists of all real numbers. Also, for any coordinate on the y-axis, we can find a point on the graph; the range consists of all real numbers. Answer: Both the domain and range consist of all real numbers R.   Try this! Given the linear function g ( x ) = − x + 5 , a. Find g ( − 1 2 ) . b. Find x when g ( x ) = 18 . Answers: a. g ( − 1 2 ) = 11 2 b. x = − 13 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_7_1	Relations, Functions, Domain, and Range Relationships between sets occur often in everyday life. For example, for each month in Cape Canaveral, we can associate an average amount of rainfall. In this case, the amount of precipitation depends on the month of the year, and the data can be written in tabular form or as a set of ordered pairs. Month Precipitation Ordered pairs January 2.4 in (January, 2.4) February 3.3 in (February, 3.3) March 3.1 in (March, 3.1) April 2.0 in (April, 2.0) May 3.8 in (May, 3.8) June 6.8 in (June, 6.8) July 8.1 in (July, 8.1) August 7.6 in (August, 7.6) September 7.3 in (September, 7.3) October 4.1 in (October, 4.1) November 3.3 in (November, 3.3) December 2.4 in (December, 2.4) We define a relation Any set of ordered pairs. as any set of ordered pairs. Usually we write the independent component of the relation in the first column and the dependent component in the second column. In the opening example, notice that it makes sense to relate the average amount of precipitation as dependent on the month of year. The set of all elements in the first column of a relation is called the domain The set of first components of a relation. The x-values define the domain in relations consisting of points (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. . The set of all elements that compose the second column is called the range The set of second components of a relation. The y-values define the range in relations consisting of points (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. . In this example, the domain consists of the set of all months of the year, and the range consists of the values that represent the average rainfall for each month. In the context of algebra, the relations of interest are sets of ordered pairs (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. In this case, the x-values define the domain and the y-values define the range. Of special interest are relations where every x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value; these relations are called functions Relations where every x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value. With the definition comes new notation: f ( x ) = y , which is read “f of x is equal to y.” .   Example 1: Determine the domain and range of the following relation and state whether or not it is a function: {(−1, 4), (0, 7), (2, 3), (3, 3), (4, −2)}. Solution: Here we separate the domain and range and depict the correspondence between the values with arrows. Answer: The domain is {−1, 0, 2, 3, 4}, and the range is {−2, 3, 4, 7}. The relation is a function because each x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value.   Example 2: Determine the domain and range of the following relation and state whether or not it is a function: {(−4, −3), (−2, 6), (0, 3), (3, 5), (3, 7)}. Solution: Answer: The domain is {−4, −2, 0, 3}, and the range is {−3, 3, 5, 6, 7}. This relation is not a function because the x-value 3 has two corresponding y-values.   In the previous example, the relation is not a function because it contains ordered pairs with the same x-value, (3, 5) and (3, 7). We can recognize functions as relations where no x-values are repeated. In algebra, equations such as y = 3 4 x − 2 define relations. This linear equation can be graphed as follows: The graph is a relation since it represents the infinite set of ordered pair solutions to y = 3 4 x − 2 . The domain is the set of all x-values, and in this case consists of all real numbers. The range is the set of all possible y-values, and in this case also consists of all real numbers. Furthermore, the graph is a function because for each x-value there is only one corresponding y-value. In fact, any nonvertical or nonhorizontal line is a function with domain and range consisting of all real numbers. Any graph is a set of ordered pairs and thus defines a relation. Consider the following graph of a circle: Here the graph represents a relation where many x-values in the domain correspond to two y-values. If we draw a vertical line, as illustrated, we can see that (3, 2) and (3, −2) are two ordered pairs with the same x-value. Therefore, the x-value 3 corresponds to two y-values; hence the graph does not represent a function. The illustration suggests that if any vertical line intersects a graph more than once, then the graph does not represent a function. This is called the vertical line test If a vertical line intersects a graph more than once, then the graph does not represent a function. .   Example 3: Given the following graph, determine the domain and range and state whether or not it is a function. Solution: The given shape is called a parabola and extends indefinitely to the left and right as indicated by the arrows. This suggests that if we choose any x-value, then we will be able to find a corresponding point on the graph; therefore, the domain consists of all real numbers. Furthermore, the graph shows that −1 is the minimum y-value, and any y-value greater than that is represented in the relation. Hence the range consists of all y-values greater than or equal to −1, or in interval notation, [ − 1 ,   ∞ ) . Lastly, any vertical line will intersect the graph only once; therefore, it is a function. Answer: The domain is all real numbers R = (−∞, ∞), and the range is [ − 1 ,   ∞ ) . The graph represents a function because it passes the vertical line test.   Try this! Given the graph, determine the domain and range and state whether or not it is a function: Answer: Domain: [ − 4 ,   ∞ ) ; range: ( − ∞ ,   ∞ ) ; function: no Video Solution Relations, Functions, Domain, and Range Relationships between sets occur often in everyday life. For example, for each month in Cape Canaveral, we can associate an average amount of rainfall. In this case, the amount of precipitation depends on the month of the year, and the data can be written in tabular form or as a set of ordered pairs. Month Precipitation Ordered pairs January 2.4 in (January, 2.4) February 3.3 in (February, 3.3) March 3.1 in (March, 3.1) April 2.0 in (April, 2.0) May 3.8 in (May, 3.8) June 6.8 in (June, 6.8) July 8.1 in (July, 8.1) August 7.6 in (August, 7.6) September 7.3 in (September, 7.3) October 4.1 in (October, 4.1) November 3.3 in (November, 3.3) December 2.4 in (December, 2.4) We define a relation Any set of ordered pairs. as any set of ordered pairs. Usually we write the independent component of the relation in the first column and the dependent component in the second column. In the opening example, notice that it makes sense to relate the average amount of precipitation as dependent on the month of year. The set of all elements in the first column of a relation is called the domain The set of first components of a relation. The x-values define the domain in relations consisting of points (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. . The set of all elements that compose the second column is called the range The set of second components of a relation. The y-values define the range in relations consisting of points (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. . In this example, the domain consists of the set of all months of the year, and the range consists of the values that represent the average rainfall for each month. In the context of algebra, the relations of interest are sets of ordered pairs (x, y) in the rectangular coordinate plane. In this case, the x-values define the domain and the y-values define the range. Of special interest are relations where every x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value; these relations are called functions Relations where every x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value. With the definition comes new notation: f ( x ) = y , which is read “f of x is equal to y.” .   Example 1: Determine the domain and range of the following relation and state whether or not it is a function: {(−1, 4), (0, 7), (2, 3), (3, 3), (4, −2)}. Solution: Here we separate the domain and range and depict the correspondence between the values with arrows. Answer: The domain is {−1, 0, 2, 3, 4}, and the range is {−2, 3, 4, 7}. The relation is a function because each x-value corresponds to exactly one y-value.   Example 2: Determine the domain and range of the following relation and state whether or not it is a function: {(−4, −3), (−2, 6), (0, 3), (3, 5), (3, 7)}. Solution: Answer: The domain is {−4, −2, 0, 3}, and the range is {−3, 3, 5, 6, 7}. This relation is not a function because the x-value 3 has two corresponding y-values.   In the previous example, the relation is not a function because it contains ordered pairs with the same x-value, (3, 5) and (3, 7). We can recognize functions as relations where no x-values are repeated. In algebra, equations such as y = 3 4 x − 2 define relations. This linear equation can be graphed as follows: The graph is a relation since it represents the infinite set of ordered pair solutions to y = 3 4 x − 2 . The domain is the set of all x-values, and in this case consists of all real numbers. The range is the set of all possible y-values, and in this case also consists of all real numbers. Furthermore, the graph is a function because for each x-value there is only one corresponding y-value. In fact, any nonvertical or nonhorizontal line is a function with domain and range consisting of all real numbers. Any graph is a set of ordered pairs and thus defines a relation. Consider the following graph of a circle: Here the graph represents a relation where many x-values in the domain correspond to two y-values. If we draw a vertical line, as illustrated, we can see that (3, 2) and (3, −2) are two ordered pairs with the same x-value. Therefore, the x-value 3 corresponds to two y-values; hence the graph does not represent a function. The illustration suggests that if any vertical line intersects a graph more than once, then the graph does not represent a function. This is called the vertical line test If a vertical line intersects a graph more than once, then the graph does not represent a function. .   Example 3: Given the following graph, determine the domain and range and state whether or not it is a function. Solution: The given shape is called a parabola and extends indefinitely to the left and right as indicated by the arrows. This suggests that if we choose any x-value, then we will be able to find a corresponding point on the graph; therefore, the domain consists of all real numbers. Furthermore, the graph shows that −1 is the minimum y-value, and any y-value greater than that is represented in the relation. Hence the range consists of all y-values greater than or equal to −1, or in interval notation, [ − 1 ,   ∞ ) . Lastly, any vertical line will intersect the graph only once; therefore, it is a function. Answer: The domain is all real numbers R = (−∞, ∞), and the range is [ − 1 ,   ∞ ) . The graph represents a function because it passes the vertical line test.   Try this! Given the graph, determine the domain and range and state whether or not it is a function: Answer: Domain: [ − 4 ,   ∞ ) ; range: ( − ∞ ,   ∞ ) ; function: no Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_7_2	Function Notation and Linear Functions With the definition of a function comes special notation. If we consider each x-value to be the input that produces exactly one output, then we can use the notation The notation f ( x ) reads “f of x” and should not be confused with multiplication. Most of our study of algebra involves functions, so the notation becomes very useful when performing common tasks. Functions can be named with different letters; some common names for functions are g(x), h(x), C(x), and R(x). First, consider nonvertical lines that we know can be expressed using slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . For any real numbers m and b, the equation defines a function, and we can replace y with the new notation f ( x ) as follows: Therefore, a linear function Any function that can be written in the form f(x) = mx + b. is any function that can be written in the form f ( x ) = m x + b . In particular, we can write the following: The notation also shows values to evaluate in the equation. If the value for x is given as 8, then we know that we can find the corresponding y-value by substituting 8 in for x and simplifying. Using function notation, this is denoted f ( 8 ) and can be interpreted as follows: Finally, simplify: We have f ( 8 ) = 4 . This notation tells us that when x = 8 (the input), the function results in 4 (the output).   Example 4: Given the linear function f ( x ) = − 5 x + 7 , find f ( − 2 ) . Solution: In this case, f ( − 2 ) indicates that we should evaluate when x = − 2 . Answer: f ( − 2 ) = 17   Example 5: Given the linear function f ( x ) = − 5 x + 7 , find x when f ( x ) = 10 . Solution: In this case, f ( x ) = 10 indicates that the function should be set equal to 10. Answer: Here x = − 3 5 , and we can write f ( − 3 5 ) = 10 .   Example 6: Given the graph of a linear function g ( x ) , a. Find g ( 2 ) . b. Find x when g ( x ) = 3 . Solution: a. The notation g ( 2 ) implies that x = 2. Use the graph to determine the corresponding y-value. Answer: g ( 2 ) = 1 b. The notation g ( x ) = 3 implies that the y-value is given as 3. Use the graph to determine the corresponding x-value. Answer: x = 4   Example 7: Graph the linear function f ( x ) = − 5 3 x + 6 and state the domain and range. Solution: From the function, we see that b = 6 and thus the y-intercept is (0, 6). Also, we can see that the slope is m = − 5 3 = − 5 3 = r i s e r u n . Starting from the y-intercept, mark a second point down 5 units and right 3 units. Given any coordinate on the x-axis, we can find a corresponding point on the graph; the domain consists of all real numbers. Also, for any coordinate on the y-axis, we can find a point on the graph; the range consists of all real numbers. Answer: Both the domain and range consist of all real numbers R.   Try this! Given the linear function g ( x ) = − x + 5 , a. Find g ( − 1 2 ) . b. Find x when g ( x ) = 18 . Answers: a. g ( − 1 2 ) = 11 2 b. x = − 13 Video Solution Function Notation and Linear Functions With the definition of a function comes special notation. If we consider each x-value to be the input that produces exactly one output, then we can use the notation The notation f ( x ) reads “f of x” and should not be confused with multiplication. Most of our study of algebra involves functions, so the notation becomes very useful when performing common tasks. Functions can be named with different letters; some common names for functions are g(x), h(x), C(x), and R(x). First, consider nonvertical lines that we know can be expressed using slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . For any real numbers m and b, the equation defines a function, and we can replace y with the new notation f ( x ) as follows: Therefore, a linear function Any function that can be written in the form f(x) = mx + b. is any function that can be written in the form f ( x ) = m x + b . In particular, we can write the following: The notation also shows values to evaluate in the equation. If the value for x is given as 8, then we know that we can find the corresponding y-value by substituting 8 in for x and simplifying. Using function notation, this is denoted f ( 8 ) and can be interpreted as follows: Finally, simplify: We have f ( 8 ) = 4 . This notation tells us that when x = 8 (the input), the function results in 4 (the output).   Example 4: Given the linear function f ( x ) = − 5 x + 7 , find f ( − 2 ) . Solution: In this case, f ( − 2 ) indicates that we should evaluate when x = − 2 . Answer: f ( − 2 ) = 17   Example 5: Given the linear function f ( x ) = − 5 x + 7 , find x when f ( x ) = 10 . Solution: In this case, f ( x ) = 10 indicates that the function should be set equal to 10. Answer: Here x = − 3 5 , and we can write f ( − 3 5 ) = 10 .   Example 6: Given the graph of a linear function g ( x ) , a. Find g ( 2 ) . b. Find x when g ( x ) = 3 . Solution: a. The notation g ( 2 ) implies that x = 2. Use the graph to determine the corresponding y-value. Answer: g ( 2 ) = 1 b. The notation g ( x ) = 3 implies that the y-value is given as 3. Use the graph to determine the corresponding x-value. Answer: x = 4   Example 7: Graph the linear function f ( x ) = − 5 3 x + 6 and state the domain and range. Solution: From the function, we see that b = 6 and thus the y-intercept is (0, 6). Also, we can see that the slope is m = − 5 3 = − 5 3 = r i s e r u n . Starting from the y-intercept, mark a second point down 5 units and right 3 units. Given any coordinate on the x-axis, we can find a corresponding point on the graph; the domain consists of all real numbers. Also, for any coordinate on the y-axis, we can find a point on the graph; the range consists of all real numbers. Answer: Both the domain and range consist of all real numbers R.   Try this! Given the linear function g ( x ) = − x + 5 , a. Find g ( − 1 2 ) . b. Find x when g ( x ) = 18 . Answers: a. g ( − 1 2 ) = 11 2 b. x = − 13 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_8	 || Solutions to Linear Inequalities We know that a linear equation with two variables has infinitely many ordered pair solutions that form a line when graphed. A linear inequality with two variables An inequality relating linear expressions with two variables. The solution set is a region defining half of the plane. , on the other hand, has a solution set consisting of a region that defines half of the plane. For the inequality, the line defines one boundary of the region that is shaded. This indicates that any ordered pair that is in the shaded region, including the boundary line, will satisfy the inequality. To see that this is the case, choose a few test points A point not on the boundary of the linear inequality used as a means to determine in which half-plane the solutions lie. and substitute them into the inequality. Also, we can see that ordered pairs outside the shaded region do not solve the linear inequality. The graph of the solution set to a linear inequality is always a region. However, the boundary may not always be included in that set. In the previous example, the line was part of the solution set because of the “or equal to” part of the inclusive inequality ≤ . If we have a strict inequality < , we would then use a dashed line to indicate that those points are not included in the solution set. Consider the point (0, 3) on the boundary; this ordered pair satisfies the linear equation. It is the “or equal to” part of the inclusive inequality that makes it part of the solution set. So far, we have seen examples of inequalities that were “less than.” Now consider the following graphs with the same boundary: Given the graphs above, what might we expect if we use the origin (0, 0) as a test point?   Try this! Which of the ordered pairs (−2, −1), (0, 0), (−2, 8), (2, 1), and (4, 2) solve the inequality y > − 1 2 x + 2 ? Answer: (−2, 8) and (4, 2) Video Solution  || Graphing Solutions to Linear Inequalities Solutions to linear inequalities are a shaded half-plane, bounded by a solid line or a dashed line. This boundary is either included in the solution or not, depending on the given inequality. If we are given a strict inequality, we use a dashed line to indicate that the boundary is not included. If we are given an inclusive inequality, we use a solid line to indicate that it is included. The steps for graphing the solution set for an inequality with two variables are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Graph the solution set: y > − 3 x + 1 . Solution: Step 1: Graph the boundary line. In this case, graph a dashed line y = − 3 x + 1 because of the strict inequality. By inspection, we see that the slope is m = − 3 = − 3 1 = r i s e r u n and the y-intercept is (0, 1). Step 2: Test a point not on the boundary. A common test point is the origin (0, 0). The test point helps us determine which half of the plane to shade. Step 3: Shade the region containing the solutions. Since the test point (0, 0) was not a solution, it does not lie in the region containing all the ordered pair solutions. Therefore, shade the half of the plane that does not contain this test point. In this case, shade above the boundary line. Answer: Consider the problem of shading above or below the boundary line when the inequality is in slope-intercept form. If y > m x + b , then shade above the line. If y < m x + b , then shade below the line. Use this with caution; sometimes the boundary is given in standard form, in which case these rules do not apply.   Example 2: Graph the solution set: 2 x − 5 y ≥ − 10 . Solution: Here the boundary is defined by the line 2 x − 5 y = − 10 . Since the inequality is inclusive, we graph the boundary using a solid line. In this case, graph the boundary line using intercepts. Next, test a point; this helps decide which region to shade. Since the test point is in the solution set, shade the half of the plane that contains it. Answer: In this example, notice that the solution set consists of all the ordered pairs below the boundary line. This may be counterintuitive because of the original ≥ in the inequality. This illustrates that it is a best practice to actually test a point. Solve for y and you see that the shading is correct. In slope-intercept form, you can see that the region below the boundary line should be shaded. An alternate approach is to first express the boundary in slope-intercept form, graph it, and then shade the appropriate region.   Example 3: Graph the solution set: y < 2 . Solution: First, graph the boundary line y = 2 with a dashed line because of the strict inequality. Next, test a point. In this case, shade the region that contains the test point. Answer:   Try this! Graph the solution set: 5 x − y ≤ 10 . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_8_1	Solutions to Linear Inequalities We know that a linear equation with two variables has infinitely many ordered pair solutions that form a line when graphed. A linear inequality with two variables An inequality relating linear expressions with two variables. The solution set is a region defining half of the plane. , on the other hand, has a solution set consisting of a region that defines half of the plane. For the inequality, the line defines one boundary of the region that is shaded. This indicates that any ordered pair that is in the shaded region, including the boundary line, will satisfy the inequality. To see that this is the case, choose a few test points A point not on the boundary of the linear inequality used as a means to determine in which half-plane the solutions lie. and substitute them into the inequality. Also, we can see that ordered pairs outside the shaded region do not solve the linear inequality. The graph of the solution set to a linear inequality is always a region. However, the boundary may not always be included in that set. In the previous example, the line was part of the solution set because of the “or equal to” part of the inclusive inequality ≤ . If we have a strict inequality < , we would then use a dashed line to indicate that those points are not included in the solution set. Consider the point (0, 3) on the boundary; this ordered pair satisfies the linear equation. It is the “or equal to” part of the inclusive inequality that makes it part of the solution set. So far, we have seen examples of inequalities that were “less than.” Now consider the following graphs with the same boundary: Given the graphs above, what might we expect if we use the origin (0, 0) as a test point?   Try this! Which of the ordered pairs (−2, −1), (0, 0), (−2, 8), (2, 1), and (4, 2) solve the inequality y > − 1 2 x + 2 ? Answer: (−2, 8) and (4, 2) Video Solution Solutions to Linear Inequalities We know that a linear equation with two variables has infinitely many ordered pair solutions that form a line when graphed. A linear inequality with two variables An inequality relating linear expressions with two variables. The solution set is a region defining half of the plane. , on the other hand, has a solution set consisting of a region that defines half of the plane. For the inequality, the line defines one boundary of the region that is shaded. This indicates that any ordered pair that is in the shaded region, including the boundary line, will satisfy the inequality. To see that this is the case, choose a few test points A point not on the boundary of the linear inequality used as a means to determine in which half-plane the solutions lie. and substitute them into the inequality. Also, we can see that ordered pairs outside the shaded region do not solve the linear inequality. The graph of the solution set to a linear inequality is always a region. However, the boundary may not always be included in that set. In the previous example, the line was part of the solution set because of the “or equal to” part of the inclusive inequality ≤ . If we have a strict inequality < , we would then use a dashed line to indicate that those points are not included in the solution set. Consider the point (0, 3) on the boundary; this ordered pair satisfies the linear equation. It is the “or equal to” part of the inclusive inequality that makes it part of the solution set. So far, we have seen examples of inequalities that were “less than.” Now consider the following graphs with the same boundary: Given the graphs above, what might we expect if we use the origin (0, 0) as a test point?   Try this! Which of the ordered pairs (−2, −1), (0, 0), (−2, 8), (2, 1), and (4, 2) solve the inequality y > − 1 2 x + 2 ? Answer: (−2, 8) and (4, 2) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter3_8_2	Graphing Solutions to Linear Inequalities Solutions to linear inequalities are a shaded half-plane, bounded by a solid line or a dashed line. This boundary is either included in the solution or not, depending on the given inequality. If we are given a strict inequality, we use a dashed line to indicate that the boundary is not included. If we are given an inclusive inequality, we use a solid line to indicate that it is included. The steps for graphing the solution set for an inequality with two variables are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Graph the solution set: y > − 3 x + 1 . Solution: Step 1: Graph the boundary line. In this case, graph a dashed line y = − 3 x + 1 because of the strict inequality. By inspection, we see that the slope is m = − 3 = − 3 1 = r i s e r u n and the y-intercept is (0, 1). Step 2: Test a point not on the boundary. A common test point is the origin (0, 0). The test point helps us determine which half of the plane to shade. Step 3: Shade the region containing the solutions. Since the test point (0, 0) was not a solution, it does not lie in the region containing all the ordered pair solutions. Therefore, shade the half of the plane that does not contain this test point. In this case, shade above the boundary line. Answer: Consider the problem of shading above or below the boundary line when the inequality is in slope-intercept form. If y > m x + b , then shade above the line. If y < m x + b , then shade below the line. Use this with caution; sometimes the boundary is given in standard form, in which case these rules do not apply.   Example 2: Graph the solution set: 2 x − 5 y ≥ − 10 . Solution: Here the boundary is defined by the line 2 x − 5 y = − 10 . Since the inequality is inclusive, we graph the boundary using a solid line. In this case, graph the boundary line using intercepts. Next, test a point; this helps decide which region to shade. Since the test point is in the solution set, shade the half of the plane that contains it. Answer: In this example, notice that the solution set consists of all the ordered pairs below the boundary line. This may be counterintuitive because of the original ≥ in the inequality. This illustrates that it is a best practice to actually test a point. Solve for y and you see that the shading is correct. In slope-intercept form, you can see that the region below the boundary line should be shaded. An alternate approach is to first express the boundary in slope-intercept form, graph it, and then shade the appropriate region.   Example 3: Graph the solution set: y < 2 . Solution: First, graph the boundary line y = 2 with a dashed line because of the strict inequality. Next, test a point. In this case, shade the region that contains the test point. Answer:   Try this! Graph the solution set: 5 x − y ≤ 10 . Answer: Video Solution Graphing Solutions to Linear Inequalities Solutions to linear inequalities are a shaded half-plane, bounded by a solid line or a dashed line. This boundary is either included in the solution or not, depending on the given inequality. If we are given a strict inequality, we use a dashed line to indicate that the boundary is not included. If we are given an inclusive inequality, we use a solid line to indicate that it is included. The steps for graphing the solution set for an inequality with two variables are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Graph the solution set: y > − 3 x + 1 . Solution: Step 1: Graph the boundary line. In this case, graph a dashed line y = − 3 x + 1 because of the strict inequality. By inspection, we see that the slope is m = − 3 = − 3 1 = r i s e r u n and the y-intercept is (0, 1). Step 2: Test a point not on the boundary. A common test point is the origin (0, 0). The test point helps us determine which half of the plane to shade. Step 3: Shade the region containing the solutions. Since the test point (0, 0) was not a solution, it does not lie in the region containing all the ordered pair solutions. Therefore, shade the half of the plane that does not contain this test point. In this case, shade above the boundary line. Answer: Consider the problem of shading above or below the boundary line when the inequality is in slope-intercept form. If y > m x + b , then shade above the line. If y < m x + b , then shade below the line. Use this with caution; sometimes the boundary is given in standard form, in which case these rules do not apply.   Example 2: Graph the solution set: 2 x − 5 y ≥ − 10 . Solution: Here the boundary is defined by the line 2 x − 5 y = − 10 . Since the inequality is inclusive, we graph the boundary using a solid line. In this case, graph the boundary line using intercepts. Next, test a point; this helps decide which region to shade. Since the test point is in the solution set, shade the half of the plane that contains it. Answer: In this example, notice that the solution set consists of all the ordered pairs below the boundary line. This may be counterintuitive because of the original ≥ in the inequality. This illustrates that it is a best practice to actually test a point. Solve for y and you see that the shading is correct. In slope-intercept form, you can see that the region below the boundary line should be shaded. An alternate approach is to first express the boundary in slope-intercept form, graph it, and then shade the appropriate region.   Example 3: Graph the solution set: y < 2 . Solution: First, graph the boundary line y = 2 with a dashed line because of the strict inequality. Next, test a point. In this case, shade the region that contains the test point. Answer:   Try this! Graph the solution set: 5 x − y ≤ 10 . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter9	 ||  || Extracting Square Roots Recall that a quadratic equation is in standard form Any quadratic equation in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . if it is equal to 0: where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . A solution to such an equation is called a root A solution to a quadratic equation in standard form. . Quadratic equations can have two real solutions, one real solution, or no real solution. If the quadratic expression on the left factors, then we can solve it by factoring. A review of the steps used to solve by factoring follow: Step 1: Express the quadratic equation in standard form. Step 2: Factor the quadratic expression. Step 3: Apply the zero-product property and set each variable factor equal to 0. Step 4: Solve the resulting linear equations. For example, we can solve x 2 − 4 = 0 by factoring as follows: The two solutions are −2 and 2. The goal in this section is to develop an alternative method that can be used to easily solve equations where b = 0, giving the form The equation x 2 − 4 = 0 is in this form and can be solved by first isolating x 2 . If we take the square root of both sides of this equation, we obtain the following: Here we see that x = − 2 and x = 2 are solutions to the resulting equation. In general, this describes the square root property For any real number k, if x 2 = k , then x = ± k √ . ; for any real number k, The notation “±” is read “plus or minus” and is used as compact notation that indicates two solutions. Hence the statement x = ± k √ indicates that x = − k √ or x = k √ . Applying the square root property as a means of solving a quadratic equation is called extracting the roots Applying the square root property as a means of solving a quadratic equation. .   Example 1: Solve: x 2 − 25 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square. Next, apply the square root property. Answer: The solutions are −5 and 5. The check is left to the reader.   Certainly, the previous example could have been solved just as easily by factoring. However, it demonstrates a technique that can be used to solve equations in this form that do not factor.   Example 2: Solve: x 2 − 5 = 0 . Solution: Notice that the quadratic expression on the left does not factor. We can extract the roots if we first isolate the leading term, x 2 . Apply the square root property. For completeness, check that these two real solutions solve the original quadratic equation. Generally, the check is optional. Answer: The solutions are − 5 √ and 5 √ .   Example 3: Solve: 4 x 2 − 45 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating x 2 . Apply the square root property and then simplify. Answer: The solutions are − 3 5 √ 2 and 3 5 √ 2 .   Sometimes quadratic equations have no real solution.   Example 4: Solve: x 2 + 9 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating x 2 . After applying the square root property, we are left with the square root of a negative number. Therefore, there is no real solution to this equation. Answer: No real solution   Reverse this process to find equations with given solutions of the form ±k.   Example 5: Find an equation with solutions − 2 3 √ and 2 3 √ . Solution: Begin by squaring both sides of the following equation: Lastly, subtract 12 from both sides and present the equation in standard form. Answer: x 2 − 12 = 0   Try this! Solve: 9 x 2 − 8 = 0 . Answer: x = − 2 2 √ 3 or x = 2 2 √ 3 Video Solution Consider solving the following equation: To solve this equation by factoring, first square x + 2 and then put it in standard form, equal to zero, by subtracting 25 from both sides. Factor and then apply the zero-product property. The two solutions are −7 and 3. When an equation is in this form, we can obtain the solutions in fewer steps by extracting the roots.   Example 6: Solve: ( x + 2 ) 2 = 25 . Solution: Solve by extracting the roots. At this point, separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and simplify each individually. Answer: The solutions are −7 and 3.   In addition to fewer steps, this method allows us to solve equations that do not factor.   Example 7: Solve: ( 3 x + 3 ) 2 − 27 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square. Next, extract the roots and simplify. Solve for x. Answer: The solutions are − 1 − 3 √ and − 1 + 3 √ .   Example 8: Solve: 9 ( 2 x − 1 ) 2 − 8 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square factor. Apply the square root property and solve. Answer: The solutions are 3 − 2 2 √ 6 and 3 + 2 2 √ 6 .   Try this! Solve: 3 ( x − 5 ) 2 − 2 = 0 . Answer: 15 ± 6 √ 3 Video Solution   Example 9: The length of a rectangle is twice its width. If the diagonal measures 2 feet, then find the dimensions of the rectangle. Solution: The diagonal of any rectangle forms two right triangles. Thus the Pythagorean theorem applies. The sum of the squares of the legs of a right triangle is equal to the square of the hypotenuse: Solve. Here we obtain two solutions, w = − 2 5 √ and w = 2 5 √ . Since the problem asked for a length of a rectangle, we disregard the negative answer. Furthermore, we will rationalize the denominator and present our solutions without any radicals in the denominator. Back substitute to find the length. Answer: The length of the rectangle is 4 5 √ 5 feet and the width is 2 5 √ 5 feet.  ||  || Completing the Square In this section, we will devise a method for rewriting any quadratic equation of the form in the form This process is called completing the square The process of rewriting a quadratic equation in the form ( x − p ) 2 = q . . As we have seen, quadratic equations in this form can easily be solved by extracting roots. We begin by examining perfect square trinomials: The last term, 9, is the square of one-half of the coefficient of x. In general, this is true for any perfect square trinomial of the form x 2 + b x + c . In other words, any trinomial of the form x 2 + b x + c will be a perfect square trinomial if Note It is important to point out that the leading coefficient must be equal to 1 for this to be true.   Example 1: Complete the square: x 2 + 8 x +       ?     = ( x +     ?   ) 2 . Solution: In this example, the coefficient of the middle term b = 8, so find the value that completes the square as follows: The value that completes the square is 16. Answer: x 2 + 8 x + 16 = ( x + 4 ) 2   Example 2: Complete the square: x 2 + 3 x +       ?     = ( x +     ?   ) 2 . Solution: Here b = 3, so find the value that will complete the square as follows: The value 9/4 completes the square: Answer: x 2 + 3 x + 9 4 = ( x + 3 2 ) 2   We can use this technique to solve quadratic equations. The idea is to take any quadratic equation in standard form and complete the square so that we can solve it by extracting roots. The following are general steps for solving a quadratic equation with a leading coefficient of 1 in standard form by completing the square.   Example 3: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 14 x + 46 = 0 . Solution: Step 1: Add or subtract the constant term to obtain the equation in the form x 2 + b x       = c . In this example, subtract 46 to move it to the right side of the equation. Step 2: Use ( b 2 ) 2 to determine the value that completes the square. Here b = 14: Step 3: Add ( b 2 ) 2 to both sides of the equation and complete the square. Step 4: Solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 7 − 3 √ or − 7 + 3 √ . The check is optional.   Example 4: Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 18 x + 72 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 72 from both sides. Next, find the value that completes the square using b = −18. To complete the square, add 81 to both sides, complete the square, and then solve by extracting the roots. At this point, separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and solve each. Answer: The solutions are 6 and 12.   Note that in the previous example the solutions are integers. If this is the case, then the original equation will factor. If it factors, we can solve it by factoring. However, not all quadratic equations will factor.   Example 5: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 10 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 1 from both sides of the equation. Here b = 10, and we determine the value that completes the square as follows: To complete the square, add 25 to both sides of the equation. Factor and then solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 5 − 2 6 √ and − 5 + 2 6 √ .   Sometimes quadratic equations do not have real solutions.   Example 6: Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 2 x + 3 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 3 from both sides of the equation. Here b = −2, and we have Therefore, At this point we see that extracting the root leads to the square root of a negative number. Answer: No real solution   Try this! Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 2 x − 27 = 0 . Answer: x = 1 ± 2 7 √ Video Solution The coefficient of x is not always divisible by 2.   Example 7: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 3 x − 2 = 0 . Solution: Begin by adding 2 to both sides. Use b = 3 to find the value that completes the square: To complete the square, add 9/4 to both sides of the equation. Solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 3 ± 17 √ 2 .   So far, all of the examples have had a leading coefficient of 1. The formula ( b 2 ) 2 determines the value that completes the square only if the leading coefficient is 1. If this is not the case, then simply divide both sides by the leading coefficient.   Example 8: Solve by completing the square: 2 x 2 + 5 x − 1 = 0 . Solution: Notice that the leading coefficient is 2. Therefore, divide both sides by 2 before beginning the steps required to solve by completing the square. Begin by adding 1/2 to both sides of the equation. Here b = 5/2, and we can find the value that completes the square as follows: To complete the square, add 25/16 to both sides of the equation. Next, solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 5 ± 33 √ 4 .   Try this! Solve: 2 x 2 − 2 x − 3 = 0 . Answer: x = 1 ± 7 √ 2 Video Solution  ||  || The Quadratic Formula In this section, we will develop a formula that gives the solutions to any quadratic equation in standard form. To do this, we begin with a general quadratic equation in standard form and solve for x by completing the square. Here a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 : Determine the constant that completes the square: take the coefficient of x, divide it by 2, and then square it. Add this to both sides of the equation and factor. Solve by extracting roots. This derivation gives us a formula that solves any quadratic equation in standard form. Given a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then the solutions can be calculated using the quadratic formula The formula x = − b ± b 2 − 4 a c √ 2 a , which gives the solutions to any quadratic equation in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . : Consider the quadratic equation 2 x 2 − 7 x + 3 = 0 . It can be solved by factoring as follows: The solutions are 1/2 and 3. The following example shows that we can obtain the same results using the quadratic formula.   Example 1: Solve using the quadratic formula: 2 x 2 − 7 x + 3 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c as the coefficients of each term. Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and simplify each individually. Answer: The solutions are 1/2 and 3.   Of course, if the quadratic factors, then it is a best practice to solve it by factoring. However, not all quadratic polynomials factor; nevertheless, the quadratic formula provides us with a means to solve such equations.   Example 2: Solve using the quadratic formula: 5 x 2 + 2 x − 1 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c. Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are − 1 ± 6 √ 5 .   Often terms are missing. When this is the case, use 0 as the coefficient.   Example 3: Solve using the quadratic formula: x 2 − 18 = 0 . Solution: Think of this equation with the following coefficients: Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are ± 3 2 √ .   Since the coefficient of x was 0, we could have solved the equation by extracting the roots. As an exercise, solve the previous example using this method and verify that the results are the same.   Example 4: Solve using the quadratic formula: 9 x 2 − 12 x + 4 = 0 . Solution: In this case, Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. In this example, notice that the radicand of the square root is 0. This results in only one solution to this quadratic equation. Normally, we expect two solutions. When we find only one solution, the solution is called a double root. If we solve this equation by factoring, then the solution appears twice. Answer: 2/3, double root   Example 5: Solve using the quadratic formula: x 2 + x + 1 = 0 . Solution: In this case, Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. The solution involves the square root of a negative number; hence the solutions are not real. This quadratic equation has two nonreal solutions and will be discussed in further detail as we continue in our study of algebra. For now, simply state that the equation does not have real solutions. Answer: No real solutions   Try this! Solve: x 2 − 2 x − 2 = 0 . Answer: 1 ± 3 √ Video Solution It is important to place the quadratic equation in standard form before using the quadratic formula.   Example 6: Solve using the quadratic formula: ( 2 x + 1 ) ( 2 x − 1 ) = 24 x + 8 . Solution: Begin by using the distributive property to expand the left side and combining like terms to obtain an equation in standard form, equal to 0. Once the equation is in standard form, identify a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Answer: The solutions are 6 ± 3 5 √ 2 .   Try this! Solve: 3 x ( x − 2 ) = 1 . Answer: 3 ± 2 3 √ 3 Video Solution  ||  || Discriminant If given a quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then the solutions can be calculated using the quadratic formula: The solutions are rational, irrational, or not real. We can determine the type and number of solutions by studying the discriminant The expression inside the radical of the quadratic formula, b 2 − 4 a c . , the expression inside the radical, b 2 − 4 a c . If the value of this expression is negative, then the equation has no real solutions. If the discriminant is positive, then we have two real solutions. And if the discriminant is 0, then we have one real solution.   Example 1: Determine the type and number of solutions: x 2 − 10 x + 30 = 0 . Solution: We begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is negative, we conclude that there are no real solutions. Answer: No real solution   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a negative radicand stops the process of simplification and shows that there is no real solution. Note We will study quadratic equations with no real solutions as we progress in our study of algebra.   Example 2: Determine the type and number of solutions: 7 x 2 − 10 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here Substitute these values into the discriminant: Since the discriminant is positive, we can conclude that there are two real solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a positive radicand in the quadratic formula leads to two real solutions. The two real solutions are 5 − 3 2 √ 7 and 5 + 3 2 √ 7 . Note that these solutions are irrational; we can approximate the values on a calculator.   Example 3: Determine the type and number of solutions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 = 0 . Solution: In this example, Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is positive, we conclude that there are two real solutions. Furthermore, since the discriminant is a perfect square, we obtain two rational solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   We could solve the previous quadratic equation using the quadratic formula as follows: Note that if the discriminant is a perfect square, then we could have factored the original equation. Given the special condition where the discriminant is 0, we obtain only one solution, a double root.   Example 4: Determine the type and number of solutions: 9 x 2 − 6 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here a = 9 , b = − 6 , and c = 1 , and we have Since the discriminant is 0, we conclude that there is only one real solution, a double root. Answer: One real solution   Since 0 is a perfect square, we can solve the equation above by factoring. Here 1/3 is a solution that occurs twice; it is a double root. In summary, if given any quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then we have the following: Positive discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c > 0 Two real solutions Zero discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c = 0 One real solution Negative discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c < 0 No real solution As we will see, knowing the number and type of solutions ahead of time helps us determine which method is best for solving a quadratic equation.   Try this! Determine the number and type of solutions: 3 x 2 − 5 x + 4 = 0 . Answer: No real solution Video Solution  || General Guidelines for Solving Quadratic Equations Use the coefficients of a quadratic equation to help decide which method is most appropriate for solving it. While the quadratic formula always works, it is sometimes not the most efficient method. Given any quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , general guidelines for determining the method for solving it follow: If c = 0, then factor out the GCF and solve by factoring. If b = 0, then solve by extracting the roots. If a, b, and c are all nonzero, then determine the value for the discriminant, b 2 − 4 a c : If the discriminant is a perfect square, then solve by factoring. If the discriminant is not a perfect square, then solve using the quadratic formula. If the discriminant is positive, we obtain two real solutions. If the discriminant is negative, then there is no real solution.   Example 5: Solve: 15 x 2 − 5 x = 0 . Solution: In this case, c = 0 and we can solve by factoring out the GCF. Answer: The solutions are 0 and 1/3.   Example 6: Solve: 3 x 2 − 5 = 0 . Solution: In this case, b = 0 and we can solve by extracting the roots. Answer: The solutions are ± 15 √ 3 .   Example 7: Solve: 9 x 2 − 6 x − 7 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c as the coefficients of each term. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and then simplify. Since the discriminant is positive and not a perfect square, use the quadratic formula and expect two real solutions. Answer: The solutions are 1 ± 2 2 √ 3 .   Example 8: Solve: 4 x ( x − 2 ) = − 7 . Solution: Begin by rewriting the quadratic equation in standard form. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and then simplify. Since the discriminant is negative, the solutions are not real numbers. Answer: No real solution   Example 9: Solve: ( 3 x + 5 ) ( 3 x + 7 ) = 6 x + 10 . Solution: Begin by rewriting the quadratic equation in standard form. Substitute a = 9, b = 30, and c = 25 into the discriminant. Since the discriminant is 0, solve by factoring and expect one real solution, a double root. Answer: The solution is −5/3.   Try this! Solve: 5 x 2 + 2 x − 7 = 2 x − 3 . Answer: ± 2 5 √ 5 Video Solution  || Applications Involving Quadratic Equations In this section, the algebraic setups usually consist of a quadratic equation where the solutions may not be integers.   Example 10: The height of a triangle is 2 inches less than twice the length of its base. If the total area of the triangle is 11 square inches, then find the lengths of the base and height. Round answers to the nearest hundredth. Solution: Use the formula A = 1 2 b h and the fact that the area is 11 square inches to set up an algebraic equation. To rewrite this quadratic equation in standard form, first distribute 1 2 x . Use the coefficients, a = 1, b = −1, and c = −11, to determine the type of solutions. Since the discriminant is positive, expect two real solutions. In this problem, disregard the negative solution and consider only the positive solution. Back substitute to find the height. Answer: The base measures 1 + 3 5 √ 2 ≈ 3.85 inches and the height is − 1 + 3 5 √ ≈ 5.71 inches.   Example 11: The sum of the squares of two consecutive positive integers is 481. Find the integers. Solution: The algebraic setup follows: Rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form. When the coefficients are large, sometimes it is less work to use the quadratic formula instead of trying to factor it. In this case, a = 1 , b = 1 , and c = − 240 . Substitute into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Since the problem calls for positive integers, disregard the negative solution and choose n = 15. Answer: The positive integers are 15 and 16.  ||  || The Graph of a Quadratic Equation We know that any linear equation with two variables can be written in the form y = m x + b and that its graph is a line. In this section, we will see that any quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c has a curved graph called a parabola The graph of any quadratic equation y = a x 2 + b x + c , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . . Two points determine any line. However, since a parabola is curved, we should find more than two points. In this text, we will determine at least five points as a means to produce an acceptable sketch. To begin, we graph our first parabola by plotting points. Given a quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c , x is the independent variable and y is the dependent variable. Choose some values for x and then determine the corresponding y-values. Then plot the points and sketch the graph.   Example 1: Graph by plotting points: y = x 2 − 2 x − 3 . Solution: In this example, choose the x-values {−2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4} and calculate the corresponding y-values. Plot these points and determine the shape of the graph. Answer: When graphing, we want to include certain special points in the graph. The y-intercept is the point where the graph intersects the y-axis. The x-intercepts are the points where the graph intersects the x-axis. The vertex The point that defines the minimum or maximum of a parabola. is the point that defines the minimum or maximum of the graph. Lastly, the line of symmetry The vertical line through the vertex, x = − b 2 a , about which the parabola is symmetric. (also called the axis of symmetry A term used when referencing the line of symmetry. ) is the vertical line through the vertex, about which the parabola is symmetric. For any parabola, we will find the vertex and y-intercept. In addition, if the x-intercepts exist, then we will want to determine those as well. Guessing at the x-values of these special points is not practical; therefore, we will develop techniques that will facilitate finding them. Many of these techniques will be used extensively as we progress in our study of algebra. Given a quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c , find the y-intercept by setting x = 0 and solving. In general, y = a ( 0 ) 2 + b ( 0 ) + c = c , and we have Next, recall that the x-intercepts, if they exist, can be found by setting y = 0 . Doing this, we have 0 = a 2 + b x + c , which has general solutions given by the quadratic formula, x = − b ± b 2 − 4 a c √ 2 a . Therefore, the x-intercepts have this general form: Using the fact that a parabola is symmetric, we can determine the vertical line of symmetry using the x-intercepts. To do this, we find the x-value midway between the x-intercepts by taking an average as follows: Therefore, the line of symmetry is the vertical line: We can use the line of symmetry to find the x-value of the vertex. The steps for graphing a parabola are outlined in the following example.   Example 2: Graph: y = − x 2 − 2 x + 3 . Solution: Step 1: Determine the y-intercept. To do this, set x = 0 and solve for y. The y-intercept is (0, 3). Step 2: Determine the x-intercepts. To do this, set y = 0 and solve for x. Here when y = 0, we obtain two solutions. There are two x-intercepts, (−3, 0) and (1, 0). Step 3: Determine the vertex. One way to do this is to use the equation for the line of symmetry, x = − b 2 a , to find the x-value of the vertex. In this example, a = −1 and b = −2: Substitute −1 into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (−1, 4). Step 4: Determine extra points so that we have at least five points to plot. In this example, one other point will suffice. Choose x = −2 and find the corresponding y-value. Our fifth point is (−2, 3). Step 5: Plot the points and sketch the graph. To recap, the points that we have found are y-intercept: (0, 3) x-intercept: (−3, 0) and (1, 0) Vertex: (−1, 4) Extra point: (−2, 3) Answer: The parabola opens downward. In general, use the leading coefficient to determine whether the parabola opens upward or downward. If the leading coefficient is negative, as in the previous example, then the parabola opens downward. If the leading coefficient is positive, then the parabola opens upward. All quadratic equations of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c have parabolic graphs with y-intercept (0, c). However, not all parabolas have x intercepts.   Example 3: Graph: y = 2 x 2 + 4 x + 5 . Solution: Because the leading coefficient 2 is positive, note that the parabola opens upward. Here c = 5 and the y-intercept is (0, 5). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. In this case, a = 2, b = 4, and c = 5. Use the discriminant to determine the number and type of solutions. Since the discriminant is negative, we conclude that there are no real solutions. Because there are no real solutions, there are no x-intercepts. Next, we determine the x-value of the vertex. Given that the x-value of the vertex is −1, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (−1, 3). So far, we have only two points. To determine three more, choose some x-values on either side of the line of symmetry, x = −1. Here we choose x-values −3, −2, and 1. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, 5) x-intercepts: None Vertex: (−1, 3) Extra points: (−3, 11), (−2, 5), (1, 11) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Example 4: Graph: y = − 2 x 2 + 12 x − 18 . Solution: Note that a = −2: the parabola opens downward. Since c = −18, the y-intercept is (0, −18). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. Solve by factoring. Here x = 3 is a double root, so there is only one x-intercept, (3, 0). From the original equation, a = −2, b = 12, and c = −18. The x-value of the vertex can be calculated as follows: Given that the x-value of the vertex is 3, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. Therefore, the vertex is (3, 0), which happens to be the same point as the x-intercept. So far, we have only two points. To determine three more, choose some x-values on either side of the line of symmetry, x = 3 in this case. Choose x-values 1, 5, and 6. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, −18) x-intercept: (3, 0) Vertex: (3, 0) Extra points: (1, −8), (5, −8), (6, −18) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Example 5: Graph: y = x 2 − 2 x − 1 . Solution: Since a = 1, the parabola opens upward. Furthermore, c = −1, so the y-intercept is (0, −1). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. In this case, solve using the quadratic formula with a = 1, b = −2, and c = −1. Here we obtain two real solutions for x, and thus there are two x-intercepts: Approximate values using a calculator: Use the approximate answers to place the ordered pair on the graph. However, we will present the exact x-intercepts on the graph. Next, find the vertex. Given that the x-value of the vertex is 1, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (1, −2). We need one more point. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, −1) x-intercepts: ( 1 − 2 √ , 0) and ( 1 + 2 √ , 0) Vertex: (1, −2) Extra point: (2, −1) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Try this! Graph: y = 9 x 2 − 5 . Answer: Video Solution  || Finding the Maximum and Minimum It is often useful to find the maximum and/or minimum values of functions that model real-life applications. To find these important values given a quadratic function, we use the vertex. If the leading coefficient a is positive, then the parabola opens upward and there will be a minimum y-value. If the leading coefficient a is negative, then the parabola opens downward and there will be a maximum y-value.   Example 6: Determine the maximum or minimum: y = − 4 x 2 + 24 x − 35 . Solution: Since a = −4, we know that the parabola opens downward and there will be a maximum y-value. To find it, we first find the x-value of the vertex. The x-value of the vertex is 3. Substitute this value into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (3, 1). Therefore, the maximum y-value is 1, which occurs when x = 3, as illustrated below: Note The graph is not required to answer this question. Answer: The maximum is 1.   Example 7: Determine the maximum or minimum: y = 4 x 2 − 32 x + 62 . Solution: Since a = +4, the parabola opens upward and there is a minimum y-value. Begin by finding the x-value of the vertex. Substitute x = 4 into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (4, −2). Therefore, the minimum y-value of −2 occurs when x = 4, as illustrated below: Answer: The minimum is −2.   Try this! Determine the maximum or minimum: y = ( x − 3 ) 2 − 9 . Answer: The minimum is −9. Video Solution A parabola, opening upward or downward (as opposed to sideways), defines a function and extends indefinitely to the right and left as indicated by the arrows. Therefore, the domain (the set of x-values) consists of all real numbers. However, the range (the set of y-values) is bounded by the y-value of the vertex.   Example 8: Determine the domain and range: y = x 2 − 4 x + 3 . Solution: First, note that since a = 1 is positive, the parabola opens upward. Hence there will be a minimum y-value. To find that value, find the x-value of the vertex: Then substitute into the equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (2, −1). The range consists of the set of y-values greater than or equal to the minimum y-value −1. Answer: Domain: R = (−∞, ∞); range: [−1, ∞)   Example 9: The height in feet of a projectile is given by the function h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 72 t , where t represents the time in seconds after launch. What is the maximum height reached by the projectile? Solution: Here a = − 16 , and the parabola opens downward. Therefore, the y-value of the vertex determines the maximum height. Begin by finding the x-value of the vertex: The maximum height will occur in 9/4 = 2¼ seconds. Substitute this time into the function to determine the height attained. Answer: The maximum height of the projectile is 81 feet.  || Finding the Vertex by Completing the Square In this section, we demonstrate an alternate approach for finding the vertex. Any quadratic equation y = a x 2 + b x + c can be rewritten in the form In this form, the vertex is (h, k).   Example 10: Determine the vertex: y = − 4 ( x − 3 ) 2 + 1 . Solution: When the equation is in this form, we can read the vertex directly from the equation. Here h = 3 and k = 1. Answer: The vertex is (3, 1).   Example 11: Determine the vertex: y = 2 ( x + 3 ) 2 − 2 . Solution: Rewrite the equation as follows before determining h and k. Here h = −3 and k = −2. Answer: The vertex is (−3, −2).   Often the equation is not given in this form. To obtain this form, complete the square.   Example 12: Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = x 2 + 4 x + 9 . Solution: Begin by making room for the constant term that completes the square. The idea is to add and subtract the value that completes the square, ( b 2 ) 2 , and then factor. In this case, add and subtract ( 4 2 ) 2 = ( 2 ) 2 = 4 . Adding and subtracting the same value within an expression does not change it. Doing so is equivalent to adding 0. Once the equation is in this form, we can easily determine the vertex. Here h = −2 and k = 5. Answer: The vertex is (−2, 5).   If there is a leading coefficient other than 1, then we must first factor out the leading coefficient from the first two terms of the trinomial.   Example 13: Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = 2 x 2 − 4 x + 8 . Solution: Since a = 2, factor this out of the first two terms in order to complete the square. Leave room inside the parentheses to add a constant term. Now use −2 to determine the value that completes the square. In this case, ( − 2 2 ) 2 = ( − 1 ) 2 = 1 . Add and subtract 1 and factor as follows: In this form, we can easily determine the vertex. Here h = 1 and k = 6. Answer: The vertex is (1, 6).   Try this! Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = − 2 x 2 − 12 x + 3 . Answer: y = − 2 ( x + 3 ) 2 + 21 ; vertex: (−3, 21) Video Solution  ||  || Introduction to Complex Numbers Up to this point, the square root of a negative number has been left undefined. For example, we know that − 9 − − − √ is not a real a number. There is no real number that when squared results in a negative number. We begin the resolution of this issue by defining the imaginary unit Defined as i = − 1 − − − √ and i 2 = − 1 . , i, as the square root of −1. To express a square root of a negative number in terms of the imaginary unit i, we use the following property, where a represents any nonnegative real number: With this we can write If − 9 − − − √ = 3 i , then we would expect that 3i squared equals −9: Therefore, the square root of any negative real number can be written in terms of the imaginary unit. Such numbers are often called imaginary numbers The square roots of any negative real numbers. .   Example 1: Rewrite in terms of the imaginary unit i. a. − 4 − − − √ b. − 5 − − − √ c. − 8 − − − √ Solution: a. − 4 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 4 − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 4 √ = i ⋅ 2 = 2 i b. − 5 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 5 − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 5 √ = i 5 √ c. − 8 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 2 − − − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 4 √ ⋅ 2 √ = i ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 √ = 2 i 2 √ Notation Note When an imaginary number involves a radical, place i in front of the radical. Consider the following: 2 i 2 √ = 2 2 √ i Since multiplication is commutative, these numbers are equivalent. However, in the form 2 2 √ i , the imaginary unit i is often misinterpreted to be part of the radicand. To avoid this confusion, it is a best practice to place the i in front of the radical and use 2 i 2 √ . A complex number Numbers of the form a + b i , where a and b are real numbers. is any number of the form where a and b are real numbers. Here a is called the real part The real number a of a complex number a + b i . and b is called the imaginary part The real number b of a complex number a + b i . . For example, 3 − 4 i is a complex number with a real part, 3, and an imaginary part, −4. It is important to note that any real number is also a complex number. For example, the real number 5 is also a complex number because it can be written as 5 + 0 i with a real part of 5 and an imaginary part of 0. Hence the set of real numbers, denoted R, is a subset of the set of complex numbers, denoted C. Adding and subtracting complex numbers is similar to adding and subtracting like terms. Add or subtract the real parts and then the imaginary parts.   Example 2: Add: ( 3 − 4 i ) + ( 2 + 5 i ) . Solution: Add the real parts and then add the imaginary parts. Answer:   To subtract complex numbers, subtract the real parts and subtract the imaginary parts. This is consistent with the use of the distributive property.   Example 3: Subtract: . Solution: Distribute the negative one and then combine like terms. Answer:   The distributive property also applies when multiplying complex numbers. Make use of the fact that to resolve the result into standard form: .   Example 4: Multiply: . Solution: Begin by applying the distributive property. Answer:   Example 5: Multiply: . Solution: Answer:   Given a complex number , its complex conjugate Two complex numbers whose real parts are the same and imaginary parts are opposite. If given , then its complex conjugate is . is . We next explore the product of complex conjugates.   Example 6: Multiply: . Solution: Answer: 25   In general, the product of complex conjugates The real number that results from multiplying complex conjugates: follows: Note that the result does not involve the imaginary unit; hence the result is real. This leads us to the very useful property: To divide complex numbers, we apply the technique used to rationalize the denominator. Multiply the numerator and denominator (dividend and divisor) by the conjugate of the denominator. The result can then be resolved into standard form, .   Example 7: Divide: . Solution: In this example, the conjugate of the denominator is . Multiply by 1 in the form . To express this complex number in standard form, write each term over the common denominator 5. Answer:   Example 8: Divide: . Solution: Answer:   Try this! Divide: . Answer: Video Solution  || Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions Now that complex numbers are defined, we can complete our study of solutions to quadratic equations. Often solutions to quadratic equations are not real.   Example 9: Solve using the quadratic formula: Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Check these solutions by substituting them into the original equation. Answer: The solutions are and .   The equation may not be given in standard form. The general steps for solving using the quadratic formula are outlined in the following example.   Example 10: Solve: . Solution: Step 1: Write the quadratic equation in standard form. Step 2: Identify a, b, and c for use in the quadratic formula. Here Step 3: Substitute the appropriate values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Answer: The solution is . The check is optional.   Example 11: Solve: . Solution: Begin by rewriting the equation in standard form. Here , , and . Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are and . Notation Note Consider the following: Both numbers are equivalent and is in standard form, where the real part is −1 and the imaginary part is . However, this number is often expressed as , even though this expression is not in standard form. Again, this is done to avoid the possibility of misinterpreting the imaginary unit as part of the radicand.   Try this! Solve: . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter9_1	 || Extracting Square Roots Recall that a quadratic equation is in standard form Any quadratic equation in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . if it is equal to 0: where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . A solution to such an equation is called a root A solution to a quadratic equation in standard form. . Quadratic equations can have two real solutions, one real solution, or no real solution. If the quadratic expression on the left factors, then we can solve it by factoring. A review of the steps used to solve by factoring follow: Step 1: Express the quadratic equation in standard form. Step 2: Factor the quadratic expression. Step 3: Apply the zero-product property and set each variable factor equal to 0. Step 4: Solve the resulting linear equations. For example, we can solve x 2 − 4 = 0 by factoring as follows: The two solutions are −2 and 2. The goal in this section is to develop an alternative method that can be used to easily solve equations where b = 0, giving the form The equation x 2 − 4 = 0 is in this form and can be solved by first isolating x 2 . If we take the square root of both sides of this equation, we obtain the following: Here we see that x = − 2 and x = 2 are solutions to the resulting equation. In general, this describes the square root property For any real number k, if x 2 = k , then x = ± k √ . ; for any real number k, The notation “±” is read “plus or minus” and is used as compact notation that indicates two solutions. Hence the statement x = ± k √ indicates that x = − k √ or x = k √ . Applying the square root property as a means of solving a quadratic equation is called extracting the roots Applying the square root property as a means of solving a quadratic equation. .   Example 1: Solve: x 2 − 25 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square. Next, apply the square root property. Answer: The solutions are −5 and 5. The check is left to the reader.   Certainly, the previous example could have been solved just as easily by factoring. However, it demonstrates a technique that can be used to solve equations in this form that do not factor.   Example 2: Solve: x 2 − 5 = 0 . Solution: Notice that the quadratic expression on the left does not factor. We can extract the roots if we first isolate the leading term, x 2 . Apply the square root property. For completeness, check that these two real solutions solve the original quadratic equation. Generally, the check is optional. Answer: The solutions are − 5 √ and 5 √ .   Example 3: Solve: 4 x 2 − 45 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating x 2 . Apply the square root property and then simplify. Answer: The solutions are − 3 5 √ 2 and 3 5 √ 2 .   Sometimes quadratic equations have no real solution.   Example 4: Solve: x 2 + 9 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating x 2 . After applying the square root property, we are left with the square root of a negative number. Therefore, there is no real solution to this equation. Answer: No real solution   Reverse this process to find equations with given solutions of the form ±k.   Example 5: Find an equation with solutions − 2 3 √ and 2 3 √ . Solution: Begin by squaring both sides of the following equation: Lastly, subtract 12 from both sides and present the equation in standard form. Answer: x 2 − 12 = 0   Try this! Solve: 9 x 2 − 8 = 0 . Answer: x = − 2 2 √ 3 or x = 2 2 √ 3 Video Solution Consider solving the following equation: To solve this equation by factoring, first square x + 2 and then put it in standard form, equal to zero, by subtracting 25 from both sides. Factor and then apply the zero-product property. The two solutions are −7 and 3. When an equation is in this form, we can obtain the solutions in fewer steps by extracting the roots.   Example 6: Solve: ( x + 2 ) 2 = 25 . Solution: Solve by extracting the roots. At this point, separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and simplify each individually. Answer: The solutions are −7 and 3.   In addition to fewer steps, this method allows us to solve equations that do not factor.   Example 7: Solve: ( 3 x + 3 ) 2 − 27 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square. Next, extract the roots and simplify. Solve for x. Answer: The solutions are − 1 − 3 √ and − 1 + 3 √ .   Example 8: Solve: 9 ( 2 x − 1 ) 2 − 8 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square factor. Apply the square root property and solve. Answer: The solutions are 3 − 2 2 √ 6 and 3 + 2 2 √ 6 .   Try this! Solve: 3 ( x − 5 ) 2 − 2 = 0 . Answer: 15 ± 6 √ 3 Video Solution   Example 9: The length of a rectangle is twice its width. If the diagonal measures 2 feet, then find the dimensions of the rectangle. Solution: The diagonal of any rectangle forms two right triangles. Thus the Pythagorean theorem applies. The sum of the squares of the legs of a right triangle is equal to the square of the hypotenuse: Solve. Here we obtain two solutions, w = − 2 5 √ and w = 2 5 √ . Since the problem asked for a length of a rectangle, we disregard the negative answer. Furthermore, we will rationalize the denominator and present our solutions without any radicals in the denominator. Back substitute to find the length. Answer: The length of the rectangle is 4 5 √ 5 feet and the width is 2 5 √ 5 feet.  || 
book2_chapter9_1_1	Extracting Square Roots Recall that a quadratic equation is in standard form Any quadratic equation in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . if it is equal to 0: where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . A solution to such an equation is called a root A solution to a quadratic equation in standard form. . Quadratic equations can have two real solutions, one real solution, or no real solution. If the quadratic expression on the left factors, then we can solve it by factoring. A review of the steps used to solve by factoring follow: Step 1: Express the quadratic equation in standard form. Step 2: Factor the quadratic expression. Step 3: Apply the zero-product property and set each variable factor equal to 0. Step 4: Solve the resulting linear equations. For example, we can solve x 2 − 4 = 0 by factoring as follows: The two solutions are −2 and 2. The goal in this section is to develop an alternative method that can be used to easily solve equations where b = 0, giving the form The equation x 2 − 4 = 0 is in this form and can be solved by first isolating x 2 . If we take the square root of both sides of this equation, we obtain the following: Here we see that x = − 2 and x = 2 are solutions to the resulting equation. In general, this describes the square root property For any real number k, if x 2 = k , then x = ± k √ . ; for any real number k, The notation “±” is read “plus or minus” and is used as compact notation that indicates two solutions. Hence the statement x = ± k √ indicates that x = − k √ or x = k √ . Applying the square root property as a means of solving a quadratic equation is called extracting the roots Applying the square root property as a means of solving a quadratic equation. .   Example 1: Solve: x 2 − 25 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square. Next, apply the square root property. Answer: The solutions are −5 and 5. The check is left to the reader.   Certainly, the previous example could have been solved just as easily by factoring. However, it demonstrates a technique that can be used to solve equations in this form that do not factor.   Example 2: Solve: x 2 − 5 = 0 . Solution: Notice that the quadratic expression on the left does not factor. We can extract the roots if we first isolate the leading term, x 2 . Apply the square root property. For completeness, check that these two real solutions solve the original quadratic equation. Generally, the check is optional. Answer: The solutions are − 5 √ and 5 √ .   Example 3: Solve: 4 x 2 − 45 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating x 2 . Apply the square root property and then simplify. Answer: The solutions are − 3 5 √ 2 and 3 5 √ 2 .   Sometimes quadratic equations have no real solution.   Example 4: Solve: x 2 + 9 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating x 2 . After applying the square root property, we are left with the square root of a negative number. Therefore, there is no real solution to this equation. Answer: No real solution   Reverse this process to find equations with given solutions of the form ±k.   Example 5: Find an equation with solutions − 2 3 √ and 2 3 √ . Solution: Begin by squaring both sides of the following equation: Lastly, subtract 12 from both sides and present the equation in standard form. Answer: x 2 − 12 = 0   Try this! Solve: 9 x 2 − 8 = 0 . Answer: x = − 2 2 √ 3 or x = 2 2 √ 3 Video Solution Consider solving the following equation: To solve this equation by factoring, first square x + 2 and then put it in standard form, equal to zero, by subtracting 25 from both sides. Factor and then apply the zero-product property. The two solutions are −7 and 3. When an equation is in this form, we can obtain the solutions in fewer steps by extracting the roots.   Example 6: Solve: ( x + 2 ) 2 = 25 . Solution: Solve by extracting the roots. At this point, separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and simplify each individually. Answer: The solutions are −7 and 3.   In addition to fewer steps, this method allows us to solve equations that do not factor.   Example 7: Solve: ( 3 x + 3 ) 2 − 27 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square. Next, extract the roots and simplify. Solve for x. Answer: The solutions are − 1 − 3 √ and − 1 + 3 √ .   Example 8: Solve: 9 ( 2 x − 1 ) 2 − 8 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square factor. Apply the square root property and solve. Answer: The solutions are 3 − 2 2 √ 6 and 3 + 2 2 √ 6 .   Try this! Solve: 3 ( x − 5 ) 2 − 2 = 0 . Answer: 15 ± 6 √ 3 Video Solution   Example 9: The length of a rectangle is twice its width. If the diagonal measures 2 feet, then find the dimensions of the rectangle. Solution: The diagonal of any rectangle forms two right triangles. Thus the Pythagorean theorem applies. The sum of the squares of the legs of a right triangle is equal to the square of the hypotenuse: Solve. Here we obtain two solutions, w = − 2 5 √ and w = 2 5 √ . Since the problem asked for a length of a rectangle, we disregard the negative answer. Furthermore, we will rationalize the denominator and present our solutions without any radicals in the denominator. Back substitute to find the length. Answer: The length of the rectangle is 4 5 √ 5 feet and the width is 2 5 √ 5 feet. Extracting Square Roots Recall that a quadratic equation is in standard form Any quadratic equation in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . if it is equal to 0: where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . A solution to such an equation is called a root A solution to a quadratic equation in standard form. . Quadratic equations can have two real solutions, one real solution, or no real solution. If the quadratic expression on the left factors, then we can solve it by factoring. A review of the steps used to solve by factoring follow: Step 1: Express the quadratic equation in standard form. Step 2: Factor the quadratic expression. Step 3: Apply the zero-product property and set each variable factor equal to 0. Step 4: Solve the resulting linear equations. For example, we can solve x 2 − 4 = 0 by factoring as follows: The two solutions are −2 and 2. The goal in this section is to develop an alternative method that can be used to easily solve equations where b = 0, giving the form The equation x 2 − 4 = 0 is in this form and can be solved by first isolating x 2 . If we take the square root of both sides of this equation, we obtain the following: Here we see that x = − 2 and x = 2 are solutions to the resulting equation. In general, this describes the square root property For any real number k, if x 2 = k , then x = ± k √ . ; for any real number k, The notation “±” is read “plus or minus” and is used as compact notation that indicates two solutions. Hence the statement x = ± k √ indicates that x = − k √ or x = k √ . Applying the square root property as a means of solving a quadratic equation is called extracting the roots Applying the square root property as a means of solving a quadratic equation. .   Example 1: Solve: x 2 − 25 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square. Next, apply the square root property. Answer: The solutions are −5 and 5. The check is left to the reader.   Certainly, the previous example could have been solved just as easily by factoring. However, it demonstrates a technique that can be used to solve equations in this form that do not factor.   Example 2: Solve: x 2 − 5 = 0 . Solution: Notice that the quadratic expression on the left does not factor. We can extract the roots if we first isolate the leading term, x 2 . Apply the square root property. For completeness, check that these two real solutions solve the original quadratic equation. Generally, the check is optional. Answer: The solutions are − 5 √ and 5 √ .   Example 3: Solve: 4 x 2 − 45 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating x 2 . Apply the square root property and then simplify. Answer: The solutions are − 3 5 √ 2 and 3 5 √ 2 .   Sometimes quadratic equations have no real solution.   Example 4: Solve: x 2 + 9 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating x 2 . After applying the square root property, we are left with the square root of a negative number. Therefore, there is no real solution to this equation. Answer: No real solution   Reverse this process to find equations with given solutions of the form ±k.   Example 5: Find an equation with solutions − 2 3 √ and 2 3 √ . Solution: Begin by squaring both sides of the following equation: Lastly, subtract 12 from both sides and present the equation in standard form. Answer: x 2 − 12 = 0   Try this! Solve: 9 x 2 − 8 = 0 . Answer: x = − 2 2 √ 3 or x = 2 2 √ 3 Video Solution Consider solving the following equation: To solve this equation by factoring, first square x + 2 and then put it in standard form, equal to zero, by subtracting 25 from both sides. Factor and then apply the zero-product property. The two solutions are −7 and 3. When an equation is in this form, we can obtain the solutions in fewer steps by extracting the roots.   Example 6: Solve: ( x + 2 ) 2 = 25 . Solution: Solve by extracting the roots. At this point, separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and simplify each individually. Answer: The solutions are −7 and 3.   In addition to fewer steps, this method allows us to solve equations that do not factor.   Example 7: Solve: ( 3 x + 3 ) 2 − 27 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square. Next, extract the roots and simplify. Solve for x. Answer: The solutions are − 1 − 3 √ and − 1 + 3 √ .   Example 8: Solve: 9 ( 2 x − 1 ) 2 − 8 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the square factor. Apply the square root property and solve. Answer: The solutions are 3 − 2 2 √ 6 and 3 + 2 2 √ 6 .   Try this! Solve: 3 ( x − 5 ) 2 − 2 = 0 . Answer: 15 ± 6 √ 3 Video Solution   Example 9: The length of a rectangle is twice its width. If the diagonal measures 2 feet, then find the dimensions of the rectangle. Solution: The diagonal of any rectangle forms two right triangles. Thus the Pythagorean theorem applies. The sum of the squares of the legs of a right triangle is equal to the square of the hypotenuse: Solve. Here we obtain two solutions, w = − 2 5 √ and w = 2 5 √ . Since the problem asked for a length of a rectangle, we disregard the negative answer. Furthermore, we will rationalize the denominator and present our solutions without any radicals in the denominator. Back substitute to find the length. Answer: The length of the rectangle is 4 5 √ 5 feet and the width is 2 5 √ 5 feet.  || 
book2_chapter9_2	 || Completing the Square In this section, we will devise a method for rewriting any quadratic equation of the form in the form This process is called completing the square The process of rewriting a quadratic equation in the form ( x − p ) 2 = q . . As we have seen, quadratic equations in this form can easily be solved by extracting roots. We begin by examining perfect square trinomials: The last term, 9, is the square of one-half of the coefficient of x. In general, this is true for any perfect square trinomial of the form x 2 + b x + c . In other words, any trinomial of the form x 2 + b x + c will be a perfect square trinomial if Note It is important to point out that the leading coefficient must be equal to 1 for this to be true.   Example 1: Complete the square: x 2 + 8 x +       ?     = ( x +     ?   ) 2 . Solution: In this example, the coefficient of the middle term b = 8, so find the value that completes the square as follows: The value that completes the square is 16. Answer: x 2 + 8 x + 16 = ( x + 4 ) 2   Example 2: Complete the square: x 2 + 3 x +       ?     = ( x +     ?   ) 2 . Solution: Here b = 3, so find the value that will complete the square as follows: The value 9/4 completes the square: Answer: x 2 + 3 x + 9 4 = ( x + 3 2 ) 2   We can use this technique to solve quadratic equations. The idea is to take any quadratic equation in standard form and complete the square so that we can solve it by extracting roots. The following are general steps for solving a quadratic equation with a leading coefficient of 1 in standard form by completing the square.   Example 3: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 14 x + 46 = 0 . Solution: Step 1: Add or subtract the constant term to obtain the equation in the form x 2 + b x       = c . In this example, subtract 46 to move it to the right side of the equation. Step 2: Use ( b 2 ) 2 to determine the value that completes the square. Here b = 14: Step 3: Add ( b 2 ) 2 to both sides of the equation and complete the square. Step 4: Solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 7 − 3 √ or − 7 + 3 √ . The check is optional.   Example 4: Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 18 x + 72 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 72 from both sides. Next, find the value that completes the square using b = −18. To complete the square, add 81 to both sides, complete the square, and then solve by extracting the roots. At this point, separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and solve each. Answer: The solutions are 6 and 12.   Note that in the previous example the solutions are integers. If this is the case, then the original equation will factor. If it factors, we can solve it by factoring. However, not all quadratic equations will factor.   Example 5: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 10 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 1 from both sides of the equation. Here b = 10, and we determine the value that completes the square as follows: To complete the square, add 25 to both sides of the equation. Factor and then solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 5 − 2 6 √ and − 5 + 2 6 √ .   Sometimes quadratic equations do not have real solutions.   Example 6: Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 2 x + 3 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 3 from both sides of the equation. Here b = −2, and we have Therefore, At this point we see that extracting the root leads to the square root of a negative number. Answer: No real solution   Try this! Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 2 x − 27 = 0 . Answer: x = 1 ± 2 7 √ Video Solution The coefficient of x is not always divisible by 2.   Example 7: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 3 x − 2 = 0 . Solution: Begin by adding 2 to both sides. Use b = 3 to find the value that completes the square: To complete the square, add 9/4 to both sides of the equation. Solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 3 ± 17 √ 2 .   So far, all of the examples have had a leading coefficient of 1. The formula ( b 2 ) 2 determines the value that completes the square only if the leading coefficient is 1. If this is not the case, then simply divide both sides by the leading coefficient.   Example 8: Solve by completing the square: 2 x 2 + 5 x − 1 = 0 . Solution: Notice that the leading coefficient is 2. Therefore, divide both sides by 2 before beginning the steps required to solve by completing the square. Begin by adding 1/2 to both sides of the equation. Here b = 5/2, and we can find the value that completes the square as follows: To complete the square, add 25/16 to both sides of the equation. Next, solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 5 ± 33 √ 4 .   Try this! Solve: 2 x 2 − 2 x − 3 = 0 . Answer: x = 1 ± 7 √ 2 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter9_2_1	Completing the Square In this section, we will devise a method for rewriting any quadratic equation of the form in the form This process is called completing the square The process of rewriting a quadratic equation in the form ( x − p ) 2 = q . . As we have seen, quadratic equations in this form can easily be solved by extracting roots. We begin by examining perfect square trinomials: The last term, 9, is the square of one-half of the coefficient of x. In general, this is true for any perfect square trinomial of the form x 2 + b x + c . In other words, any trinomial of the form x 2 + b x + c will be a perfect square trinomial if Note It is important to point out that the leading coefficient must be equal to 1 for this to be true.   Example 1: Complete the square: x 2 + 8 x +       ?     = ( x +     ?   ) 2 . Solution: In this example, the coefficient of the middle term b = 8, so find the value that completes the square as follows: The value that completes the square is 16. Answer: x 2 + 8 x + 16 = ( x + 4 ) 2   Example 2: Complete the square: x 2 + 3 x +       ?     = ( x +     ?   ) 2 . Solution: Here b = 3, so find the value that will complete the square as follows: The value 9/4 completes the square: Answer: x 2 + 3 x + 9 4 = ( x + 3 2 ) 2   We can use this technique to solve quadratic equations. The idea is to take any quadratic equation in standard form and complete the square so that we can solve it by extracting roots. The following are general steps for solving a quadratic equation with a leading coefficient of 1 in standard form by completing the square.   Example 3: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 14 x + 46 = 0 . Solution: Step 1: Add or subtract the constant term to obtain the equation in the form x 2 + b x       = c . In this example, subtract 46 to move it to the right side of the equation. Step 2: Use ( b 2 ) 2 to determine the value that completes the square. Here b = 14: Step 3: Add ( b 2 ) 2 to both sides of the equation and complete the square. Step 4: Solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 7 − 3 √ or − 7 + 3 √ . The check is optional.   Example 4: Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 18 x + 72 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 72 from both sides. Next, find the value that completes the square using b = −18. To complete the square, add 81 to both sides, complete the square, and then solve by extracting the roots. At this point, separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and solve each. Answer: The solutions are 6 and 12.   Note that in the previous example the solutions are integers. If this is the case, then the original equation will factor. If it factors, we can solve it by factoring. However, not all quadratic equations will factor.   Example 5: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 10 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 1 from both sides of the equation. Here b = 10, and we determine the value that completes the square as follows: To complete the square, add 25 to both sides of the equation. Factor and then solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 5 − 2 6 √ and − 5 + 2 6 √ .   Sometimes quadratic equations do not have real solutions.   Example 6: Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 2 x + 3 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 3 from both sides of the equation. Here b = −2, and we have Therefore, At this point we see that extracting the root leads to the square root of a negative number. Answer: No real solution   Try this! Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 2 x − 27 = 0 . Answer: x = 1 ± 2 7 √ Video Solution The coefficient of x is not always divisible by 2.   Example 7: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 3 x − 2 = 0 . Solution: Begin by adding 2 to both sides. Use b = 3 to find the value that completes the square: To complete the square, add 9/4 to both sides of the equation. Solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 3 ± 17 √ 2 .   So far, all of the examples have had a leading coefficient of 1. The formula ( b 2 ) 2 determines the value that completes the square only if the leading coefficient is 1. If this is not the case, then simply divide both sides by the leading coefficient.   Example 8: Solve by completing the square: 2 x 2 + 5 x − 1 = 0 . Solution: Notice that the leading coefficient is 2. Therefore, divide both sides by 2 before beginning the steps required to solve by completing the square. Begin by adding 1/2 to both sides of the equation. Here b = 5/2, and we can find the value that completes the square as follows: To complete the square, add 25/16 to both sides of the equation. Next, solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 5 ± 33 √ 4 .   Try this! Solve: 2 x 2 − 2 x − 3 = 0 . Answer: x = 1 ± 7 √ 2 Video Solution Completing the Square In this section, we will devise a method for rewriting any quadratic equation of the form in the form This process is called completing the square The process of rewriting a quadratic equation in the form ( x − p ) 2 = q . . As we have seen, quadratic equations in this form can easily be solved by extracting roots. We begin by examining perfect square trinomials: The last term, 9, is the square of one-half of the coefficient of x. In general, this is true for any perfect square trinomial of the form x 2 + b x + c . In other words, any trinomial of the form x 2 + b x + c will be a perfect square trinomial if Note It is important to point out that the leading coefficient must be equal to 1 for this to be true.   Example 1: Complete the square: x 2 + 8 x +       ?     = ( x +     ?   ) 2 . Solution: In this example, the coefficient of the middle term b = 8, so find the value that completes the square as follows: The value that completes the square is 16. Answer: x 2 + 8 x + 16 = ( x + 4 ) 2   Example 2: Complete the square: x 2 + 3 x +       ?     = ( x +     ?   ) 2 . Solution: Here b = 3, so find the value that will complete the square as follows: The value 9/4 completes the square: Answer: x 2 + 3 x + 9 4 = ( x + 3 2 ) 2   We can use this technique to solve quadratic equations. The idea is to take any quadratic equation in standard form and complete the square so that we can solve it by extracting roots. The following are general steps for solving a quadratic equation with a leading coefficient of 1 in standard form by completing the square.   Example 3: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 14 x + 46 = 0 . Solution: Step 1: Add or subtract the constant term to obtain the equation in the form x 2 + b x       = c . In this example, subtract 46 to move it to the right side of the equation. Step 2: Use ( b 2 ) 2 to determine the value that completes the square. Here b = 14: Step 3: Add ( b 2 ) 2 to both sides of the equation and complete the square. Step 4: Solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 7 − 3 √ or − 7 + 3 √ . The check is optional.   Example 4: Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 18 x + 72 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 72 from both sides. Next, find the value that completes the square using b = −18. To complete the square, add 81 to both sides, complete the square, and then solve by extracting the roots. At this point, separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and solve each. Answer: The solutions are 6 and 12.   Note that in the previous example the solutions are integers. If this is the case, then the original equation will factor. If it factors, we can solve it by factoring. However, not all quadratic equations will factor.   Example 5: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 10 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 1 from both sides of the equation. Here b = 10, and we determine the value that completes the square as follows: To complete the square, add 25 to both sides of the equation. Factor and then solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 5 − 2 6 √ and − 5 + 2 6 √ .   Sometimes quadratic equations do not have real solutions.   Example 6: Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 2 x + 3 = 0 . Solution: Begin by subtracting 3 from both sides of the equation. Here b = −2, and we have Therefore, At this point we see that extracting the root leads to the square root of a negative number. Answer: No real solution   Try this! Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 2 x − 27 = 0 . Answer: x = 1 ± 2 7 √ Video Solution The coefficient of x is not always divisible by 2.   Example 7: Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 3 x − 2 = 0 . Solution: Begin by adding 2 to both sides. Use b = 3 to find the value that completes the square: To complete the square, add 9/4 to both sides of the equation. Solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 3 ± 17 √ 2 .   So far, all of the examples have had a leading coefficient of 1. The formula ( b 2 ) 2 determines the value that completes the square only if the leading coefficient is 1. If this is not the case, then simply divide both sides by the leading coefficient.   Example 8: Solve by completing the square: 2 x 2 + 5 x − 1 = 0 . Solution: Notice that the leading coefficient is 2. Therefore, divide both sides by 2 before beginning the steps required to solve by completing the square. Begin by adding 1/2 to both sides of the equation. Here b = 5/2, and we can find the value that completes the square as follows: To complete the square, add 25/16 to both sides of the equation. Next, solve by extracting roots. Answer: The solutions are − 5 ± 33 √ 4 .   Try this! Solve: 2 x 2 − 2 x − 3 = 0 . Answer: x = 1 ± 7 √ 2 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter9_3	 || The Quadratic Formula In this section, we will develop a formula that gives the solutions to any quadratic equation in standard form. To do this, we begin with a general quadratic equation in standard form and solve for x by completing the square. Here a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 : Determine the constant that completes the square: take the coefficient of x, divide it by 2, and then square it. Add this to both sides of the equation and factor. Solve by extracting roots. This derivation gives us a formula that solves any quadratic equation in standard form. Given a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then the solutions can be calculated using the quadratic formula The formula x = − b ± b 2 − 4 a c √ 2 a , which gives the solutions to any quadratic equation in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . : Consider the quadratic equation 2 x 2 − 7 x + 3 = 0 . It can be solved by factoring as follows: The solutions are 1/2 and 3. The following example shows that we can obtain the same results using the quadratic formula.   Example 1: Solve using the quadratic formula: 2 x 2 − 7 x + 3 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c as the coefficients of each term. Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and simplify each individually. Answer: The solutions are 1/2 and 3.   Of course, if the quadratic factors, then it is a best practice to solve it by factoring. However, not all quadratic polynomials factor; nevertheless, the quadratic formula provides us with a means to solve such equations.   Example 2: Solve using the quadratic formula: 5 x 2 + 2 x − 1 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c. Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are − 1 ± 6 √ 5 .   Often terms are missing. When this is the case, use 0 as the coefficient.   Example 3: Solve using the quadratic formula: x 2 − 18 = 0 . Solution: Think of this equation with the following coefficients: Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are ± 3 2 √ .   Since the coefficient of x was 0, we could have solved the equation by extracting the roots. As an exercise, solve the previous example using this method and verify that the results are the same.   Example 4: Solve using the quadratic formula: 9 x 2 − 12 x + 4 = 0 . Solution: In this case, Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. In this example, notice that the radicand of the square root is 0. This results in only one solution to this quadratic equation. Normally, we expect two solutions. When we find only one solution, the solution is called a double root. If we solve this equation by factoring, then the solution appears twice. Answer: 2/3, double root   Example 5: Solve using the quadratic formula: x 2 + x + 1 = 0 . Solution: In this case, Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. The solution involves the square root of a negative number; hence the solutions are not real. This quadratic equation has two nonreal solutions and will be discussed in further detail as we continue in our study of algebra. For now, simply state that the equation does not have real solutions. Answer: No real solutions   Try this! Solve: x 2 − 2 x − 2 = 0 . Answer: 1 ± 3 √ Video Solution It is important to place the quadratic equation in standard form before using the quadratic formula.   Example 6: Solve using the quadratic formula: ( 2 x + 1 ) ( 2 x − 1 ) = 24 x + 8 . Solution: Begin by using the distributive property to expand the left side and combining like terms to obtain an equation in standard form, equal to 0. Once the equation is in standard form, identify a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Answer: The solutions are 6 ± 3 5 √ 2 .   Try this! Solve: 3 x ( x − 2 ) = 1 . Answer: 3 ± 2 3 √ 3 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter9_3_1	The Quadratic Formula In this section, we will develop a formula that gives the solutions to any quadratic equation in standard form. To do this, we begin with a general quadratic equation in standard form and solve for x by completing the square. Here a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 : Determine the constant that completes the square: take the coefficient of x, divide it by 2, and then square it. Add this to both sides of the equation and factor. Solve by extracting roots. This derivation gives us a formula that solves any quadratic equation in standard form. Given a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then the solutions can be calculated using the quadratic formula The formula x = − b ± b 2 − 4 a c √ 2 a , which gives the solutions to any quadratic equation in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . : Consider the quadratic equation 2 x 2 − 7 x + 3 = 0 . It can be solved by factoring as follows: The solutions are 1/2 and 3. The following example shows that we can obtain the same results using the quadratic formula.   Example 1: Solve using the quadratic formula: 2 x 2 − 7 x + 3 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c as the coefficients of each term. Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and simplify each individually. Answer: The solutions are 1/2 and 3.   Of course, if the quadratic factors, then it is a best practice to solve it by factoring. However, not all quadratic polynomials factor; nevertheless, the quadratic formula provides us with a means to solve such equations.   Example 2: Solve using the quadratic formula: 5 x 2 + 2 x − 1 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c. Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are − 1 ± 6 √ 5 .   Often terms are missing. When this is the case, use 0 as the coefficient.   Example 3: Solve using the quadratic formula: x 2 − 18 = 0 . Solution: Think of this equation with the following coefficients: Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are ± 3 2 √ .   Since the coefficient of x was 0, we could have solved the equation by extracting the roots. As an exercise, solve the previous example using this method and verify that the results are the same.   Example 4: Solve using the quadratic formula: 9 x 2 − 12 x + 4 = 0 . Solution: In this case, Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. In this example, notice that the radicand of the square root is 0. This results in only one solution to this quadratic equation. Normally, we expect two solutions. When we find only one solution, the solution is called a double root. If we solve this equation by factoring, then the solution appears twice. Answer: 2/3, double root   Example 5: Solve using the quadratic formula: x 2 + x + 1 = 0 . Solution: In this case, Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. The solution involves the square root of a negative number; hence the solutions are not real. This quadratic equation has two nonreal solutions and will be discussed in further detail as we continue in our study of algebra. For now, simply state that the equation does not have real solutions. Answer: No real solutions   Try this! Solve: x 2 − 2 x − 2 = 0 . Answer: 1 ± 3 √ Video Solution It is important to place the quadratic equation in standard form before using the quadratic formula.   Example 6: Solve using the quadratic formula: ( 2 x + 1 ) ( 2 x − 1 ) = 24 x + 8 . Solution: Begin by using the distributive property to expand the left side and combining like terms to obtain an equation in standard form, equal to 0. Once the equation is in standard form, identify a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Answer: The solutions are 6 ± 3 5 √ 2 .   Try this! Solve: 3 x ( x − 2 ) = 1 . Answer: 3 ± 2 3 √ 3 Video Solution The Quadratic Formula In this section, we will develop a formula that gives the solutions to any quadratic equation in standard form. To do this, we begin with a general quadratic equation in standard form and solve for x by completing the square. Here a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 : Determine the constant that completes the square: take the coefficient of x, divide it by 2, and then square it. Add this to both sides of the equation and factor. Solve by extracting roots. This derivation gives us a formula that solves any quadratic equation in standard form. Given a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then the solutions can be calculated using the quadratic formula The formula x = − b ± b 2 − 4 a c √ 2 a , which gives the solutions to any quadratic equation in the form a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . : Consider the quadratic equation 2 x 2 − 7 x + 3 = 0 . It can be solved by factoring as follows: The solutions are 1/2 and 3. The following example shows that we can obtain the same results using the quadratic formula.   Example 1: Solve using the quadratic formula: 2 x 2 − 7 x + 3 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c as the coefficients of each term. Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Separate the “plus or minus” into two equations and simplify each individually. Answer: The solutions are 1/2 and 3.   Of course, if the quadratic factors, then it is a best practice to solve it by factoring. However, not all quadratic polynomials factor; nevertheless, the quadratic formula provides us with a means to solve such equations.   Example 2: Solve using the quadratic formula: 5 x 2 + 2 x − 1 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c. Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are − 1 ± 6 √ 5 .   Often terms are missing. When this is the case, use 0 as the coefficient.   Example 3: Solve using the quadratic formula: x 2 − 18 = 0 . Solution: Think of this equation with the following coefficients: Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are ± 3 2 √ .   Since the coefficient of x was 0, we could have solved the equation by extracting the roots. As an exercise, solve the previous example using this method and verify that the results are the same.   Example 4: Solve using the quadratic formula: 9 x 2 − 12 x + 4 = 0 . Solution: In this case, Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. In this example, notice that the radicand of the square root is 0. This results in only one solution to this quadratic equation. Normally, we expect two solutions. When we find only one solution, the solution is called a double root. If we solve this equation by factoring, then the solution appears twice. Answer: 2/3, double root   Example 5: Solve using the quadratic formula: x 2 + x + 1 = 0 . Solution: In this case, Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. The solution involves the square root of a negative number; hence the solutions are not real. This quadratic equation has two nonreal solutions and will be discussed in further detail as we continue in our study of algebra. For now, simply state that the equation does not have real solutions. Answer: No real solutions   Try this! Solve: x 2 − 2 x − 2 = 0 . Answer: 1 ± 3 √ Video Solution It is important to place the quadratic equation in standard form before using the quadratic formula.   Example 6: Solve using the quadratic formula: ( 2 x + 1 ) ( 2 x − 1 ) = 24 x + 8 . Solution: Begin by using the distributive property to expand the left side and combining like terms to obtain an equation in standard form, equal to 0. Once the equation is in standard form, identify a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Answer: The solutions are 6 ± 3 5 √ 2 .   Try this! Solve: 3 x ( x − 2 ) = 1 . Answer: 3 ± 2 3 √ 3 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter9_4	 || Discriminant If given a quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then the solutions can be calculated using the quadratic formula: The solutions are rational, irrational, or not real. We can determine the type and number of solutions by studying the discriminant The expression inside the radical of the quadratic formula, b 2 − 4 a c . , the expression inside the radical, b 2 − 4 a c . If the value of this expression is negative, then the equation has no real solutions. If the discriminant is positive, then we have two real solutions. And if the discriminant is 0, then we have one real solution.   Example 1: Determine the type and number of solutions: x 2 − 10 x + 30 = 0 . Solution: We begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is negative, we conclude that there are no real solutions. Answer: No real solution   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a negative radicand stops the process of simplification and shows that there is no real solution. Note We will study quadratic equations with no real solutions as we progress in our study of algebra.   Example 2: Determine the type and number of solutions: 7 x 2 − 10 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here Substitute these values into the discriminant: Since the discriminant is positive, we can conclude that there are two real solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a positive radicand in the quadratic formula leads to two real solutions. The two real solutions are 5 − 3 2 √ 7 and 5 + 3 2 √ 7 . Note that these solutions are irrational; we can approximate the values on a calculator.   Example 3: Determine the type and number of solutions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 = 0 . Solution: In this example, Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is positive, we conclude that there are two real solutions. Furthermore, since the discriminant is a perfect square, we obtain two rational solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   We could solve the previous quadratic equation using the quadratic formula as follows: Note that if the discriminant is a perfect square, then we could have factored the original equation. Given the special condition where the discriminant is 0, we obtain only one solution, a double root.   Example 4: Determine the type and number of solutions: 9 x 2 − 6 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here a = 9 , b = − 6 , and c = 1 , and we have Since the discriminant is 0, we conclude that there is only one real solution, a double root. Answer: One real solution   Since 0 is a perfect square, we can solve the equation above by factoring. Here 1/3 is a solution that occurs twice; it is a double root. In summary, if given any quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then we have the following: Positive discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c > 0 Two real solutions Zero discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c = 0 One real solution Negative discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c < 0 No real solution As we will see, knowing the number and type of solutions ahead of time helps us determine which method is best for solving a quadratic equation.   Try this! Determine the number and type of solutions: 3 x 2 − 5 x + 4 = 0 . Answer: No real solution Video Solution  || General Guidelines for Solving Quadratic Equations Use the coefficients of a quadratic equation to help decide which method is most appropriate for solving it. While the quadratic formula always works, it is sometimes not the most efficient method. Given any quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , general guidelines for determining the method for solving it follow: If c = 0, then factor out the GCF and solve by factoring. If b = 0, then solve by extracting the roots. If a, b, and c are all nonzero, then determine the value for the discriminant, b 2 − 4 a c : If the discriminant is a perfect square, then solve by factoring. If the discriminant is not a perfect square, then solve using the quadratic formula. If the discriminant is positive, we obtain two real solutions. If the discriminant is negative, then there is no real solution.   Example 5: Solve: 15 x 2 − 5 x = 0 . Solution: In this case, c = 0 and we can solve by factoring out the GCF. Answer: The solutions are 0 and 1/3.   Example 6: Solve: 3 x 2 − 5 = 0 . Solution: In this case, b = 0 and we can solve by extracting the roots. Answer: The solutions are ± 15 √ 3 .   Example 7: Solve: 9 x 2 − 6 x − 7 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c as the coefficients of each term. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and then simplify. Since the discriminant is positive and not a perfect square, use the quadratic formula and expect two real solutions. Answer: The solutions are 1 ± 2 2 √ 3 .   Example 8: Solve: 4 x ( x − 2 ) = − 7 . Solution: Begin by rewriting the quadratic equation in standard form. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and then simplify. Since the discriminant is negative, the solutions are not real numbers. Answer: No real solution   Example 9: Solve: ( 3 x + 5 ) ( 3 x + 7 ) = 6 x + 10 . Solution: Begin by rewriting the quadratic equation in standard form. Substitute a = 9, b = 30, and c = 25 into the discriminant. Since the discriminant is 0, solve by factoring and expect one real solution, a double root. Answer: The solution is −5/3.   Try this! Solve: 5 x 2 + 2 x − 7 = 2 x − 3 . Answer: ± 2 5 √ 5 Video Solution  || Applications Involving Quadratic Equations In this section, the algebraic setups usually consist of a quadratic equation where the solutions may not be integers.   Example 10: The height of a triangle is 2 inches less than twice the length of its base. If the total area of the triangle is 11 square inches, then find the lengths of the base and height. Round answers to the nearest hundredth. Solution: Use the formula A = 1 2 b h and the fact that the area is 11 square inches to set up an algebraic equation. To rewrite this quadratic equation in standard form, first distribute 1 2 x . Use the coefficients, a = 1, b = −1, and c = −11, to determine the type of solutions. Since the discriminant is positive, expect two real solutions. In this problem, disregard the negative solution and consider only the positive solution. Back substitute to find the height. Answer: The base measures 1 + 3 5 √ 2 ≈ 3.85 inches and the height is − 1 + 3 5 √ ≈ 5.71 inches.   Example 11: The sum of the squares of two consecutive positive integers is 481. Find the integers. Solution: The algebraic setup follows: Rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form. When the coefficients are large, sometimes it is less work to use the quadratic formula instead of trying to factor it. In this case, a = 1 , b = 1 , and c = − 240 . Substitute into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Since the problem calls for positive integers, disregard the negative solution and choose n = 15. Answer: The positive integers are 15 and 16.  || 
book2_chapter9_4_1	Discriminant If given a quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then the solutions can be calculated using the quadratic formula: The solutions are rational, irrational, or not real. We can determine the type and number of solutions by studying the discriminant The expression inside the radical of the quadratic formula, b 2 − 4 a c . , the expression inside the radical, b 2 − 4 a c . If the value of this expression is negative, then the equation has no real solutions. If the discriminant is positive, then we have two real solutions. And if the discriminant is 0, then we have one real solution.   Example 1: Determine the type and number of solutions: x 2 − 10 x + 30 = 0 . Solution: We begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is negative, we conclude that there are no real solutions. Answer: No real solution   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a negative radicand stops the process of simplification and shows that there is no real solution. Note We will study quadratic equations with no real solutions as we progress in our study of algebra.   Example 2: Determine the type and number of solutions: 7 x 2 − 10 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here Substitute these values into the discriminant: Since the discriminant is positive, we can conclude that there are two real solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a positive radicand in the quadratic formula leads to two real solutions. The two real solutions are 5 − 3 2 √ 7 and 5 + 3 2 √ 7 . Note that these solutions are irrational; we can approximate the values on a calculator.   Example 3: Determine the type and number of solutions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 = 0 . Solution: In this example, Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is positive, we conclude that there are two real solutions. Furthermore, since the discriminant is a perfect square, we obtain two rational solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   We could solve the previous quadratic equation using the quadratic formula as follows: Note that if the discriminant is a perfect square, then we could have factored the original equation. Given the special condition where the discriminant is 0, we obtain only one solution, a double root.   Example 4: Determine the type and number of solutions: 9 x 2 − 6 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here a = 9 , b = − 6 , and c = 1 , and we have Since the discriminant is 0, we conclude that there is only one real solution, a double root. Answer: One real solution   Since 0 is a perfect square, we can solve the equation above by factoring. Here 1/3 is a solution that occurs twice; it is a double root. In summary, if given any quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then we have the following: Positive discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c > 0 Two real solutions Zero discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c = 0 One real solution Negative discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c < 0 No real solution As we will see, knowing the number and type of solutions ahead of time helps us determine which method is best for solving a quadratic equation.   Try this! Determine the number and type of solutions: 3 x 2 − 5 x + 4 = 0 . Answer: No real solution Video Solution Discriminant If given a quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then the solutions can be calculated using the quadratic formula: The solutions are rational, irrational, or not real. We can determine the type and number of solutions by studying the discriminant The expression inside the radical of the quadratic formula, b 2 − 4 a c . , the expression inside the radical, b 2 − 4 a c . If the value of this expression is negative, then the equation has no real solutions. If the discriminant is positive, then we have two real solutions. And if the discriminant is 0, then we have one real solution.   Example 1: Determine the type and number of solutions: x 2 − 10 x + 30 = 0 . Solution: We begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is negative, we conclude that there are no real solutions. Answer: No real solution   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a negative radicand stops the process of simplification and shows that there is no real solution. Note We will study quadratic equations with no real solutions as we progress in our study of algebra.   Example 2: Determine the type and number of solutions: 7 x 2 − 10 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here Substitute these values into the discriminant: Since the discriminant is positive, we can conclude that there are two real solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   If we use the quadratic formula in the previous example, we find that a positive radicand in the quadratic formula leads to two real solutions. The two real solutions are 5 − 3 2 √ 7 and 5 + 3 2 √ 7 . Note that these solutions are irrational; we can approximate the values on a calculator.   Example 3: Determine the type and number of solutions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 = 0 . Solution: In this example, Substitute these values into the discriminant and simplify. Since the discriminant is positive, we conclude that there are two real solutions. Furthermore, since the discriminant is a perfect square, we obtain two rational solutions. Answer: Two real solutions   We could solve the previous quadratic equation using the quadratic formula as follows: Note that if the discriminant is a perfect square, then we could have factored the original equation. Given the special condition where the discriminant is 0, we obtain only one solution, a double root.   Example 4: Determine the type and number of solutions: 9 x 2 − 6 x + 1 = 0 . Solution: Here a = 9 , b = − 6 , and c = 1 , and we have Since the discriminant is 0, we conclude that there is only one real solution, a double root. Answer: One real solution   Since 0 is a perfect square, we can solve the equation above by factoring. Here 1/3 is a solution that occurs twice; it is a double root. In summary, if given any quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 , then we have the following: Positive discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c > 0 Two real solutions Zero discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c = 0 One real solution Negative discriminant: b 2 − 4 a c < 0 No real solution As we will see, knowing the number and type of solutions ahead of time helps us determine which method is best for solving a quadratic equation.   Try this! Determine the number and type of solutions: 3 x 2 − 5 x + 4 = 0 . Answer: No real solution Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter9_4_2	General Guidelines for Solving Quadratic Equations Use the coefficients of a quadratic equation to help decide which method is most appropriate for solving it. While the quadratic formula always works, it is sometimes not the most efficient method. Given any quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , general guidelines for determining the method for solving it follow: If c = 0, then factor out the GCF and solve by factoring. If b = 0, then solve by extracting the roots. If a, b, and c are all nonzero, then determine the value for the discriminant, b 2 − 4 a c : If the discriminant is a perfect square, then solve by factoring. If the discriminant is not a perfect square, then solve using the quadratic formula. If the discriminant is positive, we obtain two real solutions. If the discriminant is negative, then there is no real solution.   Example 5: Solve: 15 x 2 − 5 x = 0 . Solution: In this case, c = 0 and we can solve by factoring out the GCF. Answer: The solutions are 0 and 1/3.   Example 6: Solve: 3 x 2 − 5 = 0 . Solution: In this case, b = 0 and we can solve by extracting the roots. Answer: The solutions are ± 15 √ 3 .   Example 7: Solve: 9 x 2 − 6 x − 7 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c as the coefficients of each term. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and then simplify. Since the discriminant is positive and not a perfect square, use the quadratic formula and expect two real solutions. Answer: The solutions are 1 ± 2 2 √ 3 .   Example 8: Solve: 4 x ( x − 2 ) = − 7 . Solution: Begin by rewriting the quadratic equation in standard form. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and then simplify. Since the discriminant is negative, the solutions are not real numbers. Answer: No real solution   Example 9: Solve: ( 3 x + 5 ) ( 3 x + 7 ) = 6 x + 10 . Solution: Begin by rewriting the quadratic equation in standard form. Substitute a = 9, b = 30, and c = 25 into the discriminant. Since the discriminant is 0, solve by factoring and expect one real solution, a double root. Answer: The solution is −5/3.   Try this! Solve: 5 x 2 + 2 x − 7 = 2 x − 3 . Answer: ± 2 5 √ 5 Video Solution General Guidelines for Solving Quadratic Equations Use the coefficients of a quadratic equation to help decide which method is most appropriate for solving it. While the quadratic formula always works, it is sometimes not the most efficient method. Given any quadratic equation in standard form, a x 2 + b x + c = 0 , general guidelines for determining the method for solving it follow: If c = 0, then factor out the GCF and solve by factoring. If b = 0, then solve by extracting the roots. If a, b, and c are all nonzero, then determine the value for the discriminant, b 2 − 4 a c : If the discriminant is a perfect square, then solve by factoring. If the discriminant is not a perfect square, then solve using the quadratic formula. If the discriminant is positive, we obtain two real solutions. If the discriminant is negative, then there is no real solution.   Example 5: Solve: 15 x 2 − 5 x = 0 . Solution: In this case, c = 0 and we can solve by factoring out the GCF. Answer: The solutions are 0 and 1/3.   Example 6: Solve: 3 x 2 − 5 = 0 . Solution: In this case, b = 0 and we can solve by extracting the roots. Answer: The solutions are ± 15 √ 3 .   Example 7: Solve: 9 x 2 − 6 x − 7 = 0 . Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c as the coefficients of each term. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and then simplify. Since the discriminant is positive and not a perfect square, use the quadratic formula and expect two real solutions. Answer: The solutions are 1 ± 2 2 √ 3 .   Example 8: Solve: 4 x ( x − 2 ) = − 7 . Solution: Begin by rewriting the quadratic equation in standard form. Here Substitute these values into the discriminant and then simplify. Since the discriminant is negative, the solutions are not real numbers. Answer: No real solution   Example 9: Solve: ( 3 x + 5 ) ( 3 x + 7 ) = 6 x + 10 . Solution: Begin by rewriting the quadratic equation in standard form. Substitute a = 9, b = 30, and c = 25 into the discriminant. Since the discriminant is 0, solve by factoring and expect one real solution, a double root. Answer: The solution is −5/3.   Try this! Solve: 5 x 2 + 2 x − 7 = 2 x − 3 . Answer: ± 2 5 √ 5 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter9_4_3	Applications Involving Quadratic Equations In this section, the algebraic setups usually consist of a quadratic equation where the solutions may not be integers.   Example 10: The height of a triangle is 2 inches less than twice the length of its base. If the total area of the triangle is 11 square inches, then find the lengths of the base and height. Round answers to the nearest hundredth. Solution: Use the formula A = 1 2 b h and the fact that the area is 11 square inches to set up an algebraic equation. To rewrite this quadratic equation in standard form, first distribute 1 2 x . Use the coefficients, a = 1, b = −1, and c = −11, to determine the type of solutions. Since the discriminant is positive, expect two real solutions. In this problem, disregard the negative solution and consider only the positive solution. Back substitute to find the height. Answer: The base measures 1 + 3 5 √ 2 ≈ 3.85 inches and the height is − 1 + 3 5 √ ≈ 5.71 inches.   Example 11: The sum of the squares of two consecutive positive integers is 481. Find the integers. Solution: The algebraic setup follows: Rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form. When the coefficients are large, sometimes it is less work to use the quadratic formula instead of trying to factor it. In this case, a = 1 , b = 1 , and c = − 240 . Substitute into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Since the problem calls for positive integers, disregard the negative solution and choose n = 15. Answer: The positive integers are 15 and 16. Applications Involving Quadratic Equations In this section, the algebraic setups usually consist of a quadratic equation where the solutions may not be integers.   Example 10: The height of a triangle is 2 inches less than twice the length of its base. If the total area of the triangle is 11 square inches, then find the lengths of the base and height. Round answers to the nearest hundredth. Solution: Use the formula A = 1 2 b h and the fact that the area is 11 square inches to set up an algebraic equation. To rewrite this quadratic equation in standard form, first distribute 1 2 x . Use the coefficients, a = 1, b = −1, and c = −11, to determine the type of solutions. Since the discriminant is positive, expect two real solutions. In this problem, disregard the negative solution and consider only the positive solution. Back substitute to find the height. Answer: The base measures 1 + 3 5 √ 2 ≈ 3.85 inches and the height is − 1 + 3 5 √ ≈ 5.71 inches.   Example 11: The sum of the squares of two consecutive positive integers is 481. Find the integers. Solution: The algebraic setup follows: Rewrite the quadratic equation in standard form. When the coefficients are large, sometimes it is less work to use the quadratic formula instead of trying to factor it. In this case, a = 1 , b = 1 , and c = − 240 . Substitute into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Since the problem calls for positive integers, disregard the negative solution and choose n = 15. Answer: The positive integers are 15 and 16.  || 
book2_chapter9_5	 || The Graph of a Quadratic Equation We know that any linear equation with two variables can be written in the form y = m x + b and that its graph is a line. In this section, we will see that any quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c has a curved graph called a parabola The graph of any quadratic equation y = a x 2 + b x + c , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . . Two points determine any line. However, since a parabola is curved, we should find more than two points. In this text, we will determine at least five points as a means to produce an acceptable sketch. To begin, we graph our first parabola by plotting points. Given a quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c , x is the independent variable and y is the dependent variable. Choose some values for x and then determine the corresponding y-values. Then plot the points and sketch the graph.   Example 1: Graph by plotting points: y = x 2 − 2 x − 3 . Solution: In this example, choose the x-values {−2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4} and calculate the corresponding y-values. Plot these points and determine the shape of the graph. Answer: When graphing, we want to include certain special points in the graph. The y-intercept is the point where the graph intersects the y-axis. The x-intercepts are the points where the graph intersects the x-axis. The vertex The point that defines the minimum or maximum of a parabola. is the point that defines the minimum or maximum of the graph. Lastly, the line of symmetry The vertical line through the vertex, x = − b 2 a , about which the parabola is symmetric. (also called the axis of symmetry A term used when referencing the line of symmetry. ) is the vertical line through the vertex, about which the parabola is symmetric. For any parabola, we will find the vertex and y-intercept. In addition, if the x-intercepts exist, then we will want to determine those as well. Guessing at the x-values of these special points is not practical; therefore, we will develop techniques that will facilitate finding them. Many of these techniques will be used extensively as we progress in our study of algebra. Given a quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c , find the y-intercept by setting x = 0 and solving. In general, y = a ( 0 ) 2 + b ( 0 ) + c = c , and we have Next, recall that the x-intercepts, if they exist, can be found by setting y = 0 . Doing this, we have 0 = a 2 + b x + c , which has general solutions given by the quadratic formula, x = − b ± b 2 − 4 a c √ 2 a . Therefore, the x-intercepts have this general form: Using the fact that a parabola is symmetric, we can determine the vertical line of symmetry using the x-intercepts. To do this, we find the x-value midway between the x-intercepts by taking an average as follows: Therefore, the line of symmetry is the vertical line: We can use the line of symmetry to find the x-value of the vertex. The steps for graphing a parabola are outlined in the following example.   Example 2: Graph: y = − x 2 − 2 x + 3 . Solution: Step 1: Determine the y-intercept. To do this, set x = 0 and solve for y. The y-intercept is (0, 3). Step 2: Determine the x-intercepts. To do this, set y = 0 and solve for x. Here when y = 0, we obtain two solutions. There are two x-intercepts, (−3, 0) and (1, 0). Step 3: Determine the vertex. One way to do this is to use the equation for the line of symmetry, x = − b 2 a , to find the x-value of the vertex. In this example, a = −1 and b = −2: Substitute −1 into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (−1, 4). Step 4: Determine extra points so that we have at least five points to plot. In this example, one other point will suffice. Choose x = −2 and find the corresponding y-value. Our fifth point is (−2, 3). Step 5: Plot the points and sketch the graph. To recap, the points that we have found are y-intercept: (0, 3) x-intercept: (−3, 0) and (1, 0) Vertex: (−1, 4) Extra point: (−2, 3) Answer: The parabola opens downward. In general, use the leading coefficient to determine whether the parabola opens upward or downward. If the leading coefficient is negative, as in the previous example, then the parabola opens downward. If the leading coefficient is positive, then the parabola opens upward. All quadratic equations of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c have parabolic graphs with y-intercept (0, c). However, not all parabolas have x intercepts.   Example 3: Graph: y = 2 x 2 + 4 x + 5 . Solution: Because the leading coefficient 2 is positive, note that the parabola opens upward. Here c = 5 and the y-intercept is (0, 5). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. In this case, a = 2, b = 4, and c = 5. Use the discriminant to determine the number and type of solutions. Since the discriminant is negative, we conclude that there are no real solutions. Because there are no real solutions, there are no x-intercepts. Next, we determine the x-value of the vertex. Given that the x-value of the vertex is −1, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (−1, 3). So far, we have only two points. To determine three more, choose some x-values on either side of the line of symmetry, x = −1. Here we choose x-values −3, −2, and 1. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, 5) x-intercepts: None Vertex: (−1, 3) Extra points: (−3, 11), (−2, 5), (1, 11) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Example 4: Graph: y = − 2 x 2 + 12 x − 18 . Solution: Note that a = −2: the parabola opens downward. Since c = −18, the y-intercept is (0, −18). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. Solve by factoring. Here x = 3 is a double root, so there is only one x-intercept, (3, 0). From the original equation, a = −2, b = 12, and c = −18. The x-value of the vertex can be calculated as follows: Given that the x-value of the vertex is 3, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. Therefore, the vertex is (3, 0), which happens to be the same point as the x-intercept. So far, we have only two points. To determine three more, choose some x-values on either side of the line of symmetry, x = 3 in this case. Choose x-values 1, 5, and 6. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, −18) x-intercept: (3, 0) Vertex: (3, 0) Extra points: (1, −8), (5, −8), (6, −18) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Example 5: Graph: y = x 2 − 2 x − 1 . Solution: Since a = 1, the parabola opens upward. Furthermore, c = −1, so the y-intercept is (0, −1). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. In this case, solve using the quadratic formula with a = 1, b = −2, and c = −1. Here we obtain two real solutions for x, and thus there are two x-intercepts: Approximate values using a calculator: Use the approximate answers to place the ordered pair on the graph. However, we will present the exact x-intercepts on the graph. Next, find the vertex. Given that the x-value of the vertex is 1, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (1, −2). We need one more point. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, −1) x-intercepts: ( 1 − 2 √ , 0) and ( 1 + 2 √ , 0) Vertex: (1, −2) Extra point: (2, −1) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Try this! Graph: y = 9 x 2 − 5 . Answer: Video Solution  || Finding the Maximum and Minimum It is often useful to find the maximum and/or minimum values of functions that model real-life applications. To find these important values given a quadratic function, we use the vertex. If the leading coefficient a is positive, then the parabola opens upward and there will be a minimum y-value. If the leading coefficient a is negative, then the parabola opens downward and there will be a maximum y-value.   Example 6: Determine the maximum or minimum: y = − 4 x 2 + 24 x − 35 . Solution: Since a = −4, we know that the parabola opens downward and there will be a maximum y-value. To find it, we first find the x-value of the vertex. The x-value of the vertex is 3. Substitute this value into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (3, 1). Therefore, the maximum y-value is 1, which occurs when x = 3, as illustrated below: Note The graph is not required to answer this question. Answer: The maximum is 1.   Example 7: Determine the maximum or minimum: y = 4 x 2 − 32 x + 62 . Solution: Since a = +4, the parabola opens upward and there is a minimum y-value. Begin by finding the x-value of the vertex. Substitute x = 4 into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (4, −2). Therefore, the minimum y-value of −2 occurs when x = 4, as illustrated below: Answer: The minimum is −2.   Try this! Determine the maximum or minimum: y = ( x − 3 ) 2 − 9 . Answer: The minimum is −9. Video Solution A parabola, opening upward or downward (as opposed to sideways), defines a function and extends indefinitely to the right and left as indicated by the arrows. Therefore, the domain (the set of x-values) consists of all real numbers. However, the range (the set of y-values) is bounded by the y-value of the vertex.   Example 8: Determine the domain and range: y = x 2 − 4 x + 3 . Solution: First, note that since a = 1 is positive, the parabola opens upward. Hence there will be a minimum y-value. To find that value, find the x-value of the vertex: Then substitute into the equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (2, −1). The range consists of the set of y-values greater than or equal to the minimum y-value −1. Answer: Domain: R = (−∞, ∞); range: [−1, ∞)   Example 9: The height in feet of a projectile is given by the function h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 72 t , where t represents the time in seconds after launch. What is the maximum height reached by the projectile? Solution: Here a = − 16 , and the parabola opens downward. Therefore, the y-value of the vertex determines the maximum height. Begin by finding the x-value of the vertex: The maximum height will occur in 9/4 = 2¼ seconds. Substitute this time into the function to determine the height attained. Answer: The maximum height of the projectile is 81 feet.  || Finding the Vertex by Completing the Square In this section, we demonstrate an alternate approach for finding the vertex. Any quadratic equation y = a x 2 + b x + c can be rewritten in the form In this form, the vertex is (h, k).   Example 10: Determine the vertex: y = − 4 ( x − 3 ) 2 + 1 . Solution: When the equation is in this form, we can read the vertex directly from the equation. Here h = 3 and k = 1. Answer: The vertex is (3, 1).   Example 11: Determine the vertex: y = 2 ( x + 3 ) 2 − 2 . Solution: Rewrite the equation as follows before determining h and k. Here h = −3 and k = −2. Answer: The vertex is (−3, −2).   Often the equation is not given in this form. To obtain this form, complete the square.   Example 12: Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = x 2 + 4 x + 9 . Solution: Begin by making room for the constant term that completes the square. The idea is to add and subtract the value that completes the square, ( b 2 ) 2 , and then factor. In this case, add and subtract ( 4 2 ) 2 = ( 2 ) 2 = 4 . Adding and subtracting the same value within an expression does not change it. Doing so is equivalent to adding 0. Once the equation is in this form, we can easily determine the vertex. Here h = −2 and k = 5. Answer: The vertex is (−2, 5).   If there is a leading coefficient other than 1, then we must first factor out the leading coefficient from the first two terms of the trinomial.   Example 13: Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = 2 x 2 − 4 x + 8 . Solution: Since a = 2, factor this out of the first two terms in order to complete the square. Leave room inside the parentheses to add a constant term. Now use −2 to determine the value that completes the square. In this case, ( − 2 2 ) 2 = ( − 1 ) 2 = 1 . Add and subtract 1 and factor as follows: In this form, we can easily determine the vertex. Here h = 1 and k = 6. Answer: The vertex is (1, 6).   Try this! Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = − 2 x 2 − 12 x + 3 . Answer: y = − 2 ( x + 3 ) 2 + 21 ; vertex: (−3, 21) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter9_5_1	The Graph of a Quadratic Equation We know that any linear equation with two variables can be written in the form y = m x + b and that its graph is a line. In this section, we will see that any quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c has a curved graph called a parabola The graph of any quadratic equation y = a x 2 + b x + c , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . . Two points determine any line. However, since a parabola is curved, we should find more than two points. In this text, we will determine at least five points as a means to produce an acceptable sketch. To begin, we graph our first parabola by plotting points. Given a quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c , x is the independent variable and y is the dependent variable. Choose some values for x and then determine the corresponding y-values. Then plot the points and sketch the graph.   Example 1: Graph by plotting points: y = x 2 − 2 x − 3 . Solution: In this example, choose the x-values {−2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4} and calculate the corresponding y-values. Plot these points and determine the shape of the graph. Answer: When graphing, we want to include certain special points in the graph. The y-intercept is the point where the graph intersects the y-axis. The x-intercepts are the points where the graph intersects the x-axis. The vertex The point that defines the minimum or maximum of a parabola. is the point that defines the minimum or maximum of the graph. Lastly, the line of symmetry The vertical line through the vertex, x = − b 2 a , about which the parabola is symmetric. (also called the axis of symmetry A term used when referencing the line of symmetry. ) is the vertical line through the vertex, about which the parabola is symmetric. For any parabola, we will find the vertex and y-intercept. In addition, if the x-intercepts exist, then we will want to determine those as well. Guessing at the x-values of these special points is not practical; therefore, we will develop techniques that will facilitate finding them. Many of these techniques will be used extensively as we progress in our study of algebra. Given a quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c , find the y-intercept by setting x = 0 and solving. In general, y = a ( 0 ) 2 + b ( 0 ) + c = c , and we have Next, recall that the x-intercepts, if they exist, can be found by setting y = 0 . Doing this, we have 0 = a 2 + b x + c , which has general solutions given by the quadratic formula, x = − b ± b 2 − 4 a c √ 2 a . Therefore, the x-intercepts have this general form: Using the fact that a parabola is symmetric, we can determine the vertical line of symmetry using the x-intercepts. To do this, we find the x-value midway between the x-intercepts by taking an average as follows: Therefore, the line of symmetry is the vertical line: We can use the line of symmetry to find the x-value of the vertex. The steps for graphing a parabola are outlined in the following example.   Example 2: Graph: y = − x 2 − 2 x + 3 . Solution: Step 1: Determine the y-intercept. To do this, set x = 0 and solve for y. The y-intercept is (0, 3). Step 2: Determine the x-intercepts. To do this, set y = 0 and solve for x. Here when y = 0, we obtain two solutions. There are two x-intercepts, (−3, 0) and (1, 0). Step 3: Determine the vertex. One way to do this is to use the equation for the line of symmetry, x = − b 2 a , to find the x-value of the vertex. In this example, a = −1 and b = −2: Substitute −1 into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (−1, 4). Step 4: Determine extra points so that we have at least five points to plot. In this example, one other point will suffice. Choose x = −2 and find the corresponding y-value. Our fifth point is (−2, 3). Step 5: Plot the points and sketch the graph. To recap, the points that we have found are y-intercept: (0, 3) x-intercept: (−3, 0) and (1, 0) Vertex: (−1, 4) Extra point: (−2, 3) Answer: The parabola opens downward. In general, use the leading coefficient to determine whether the parabola opens upward or downward. If the leading coefficient is negative, as in the previous example, then the parabola opens downward. If the leading coefficient is positive, then the parabola opens upward. All quadratic equations of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c have parabolic graphs with y-intercept (0, c). However, not all parabolas have x intercepts.   Example 3: Graph: y = 2 x 2 + 4 x + 5 . Solution: Because the leading coefficient 2 is positive, note that the parabola opens upward. Here c = 5 and the y-intercept is (0, 5). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. In this case, a = 2, b = 4, and c = 5. Use the discriminant to determine the number and type of solutions. Since the discriminant is negative, we conclude that there are no real solutions. Because there are no real solutions, there are no x-intercepts. Next, we determine the x-value of the vertex. Given that the x-value of the vertex is −1, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (−1, 3). So far, we have only two points. To determine three more, choose some x-values on either side of the line of symmetry, x = −1. Here we choose x-values −3, −2, and 1. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, 5) x-intercepts: None Vertex: (−1, 3) Extra points: (−3, 11), (−2, 5), (1, 11) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Example 4: Graph: y = − 2 x 2 + 12 x − 18 . Solution: Note that a = −2: the parabola opens downward. Since c = −18, the y-intercept is (0, −18). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. Solve by factoring. Here x = 3 is a double root, so there is only one x-intercept, (3, 0). From the original equation, a = −2, b = 12, and c = −18. The x-value of the vertex can be calculated as follows: Given that the x-value of the vertex is 3, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. Therefore, the vertex is (3, 0), which happens to be the same point as the x-intercept. So far, we have only two points. To determine three more, choose some x-values on either side of the line of symmetry, x = 3 in this case. Choose x-values 1, 5, and 6. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, −18) x-intercept: (3, 0) Vertex: (3, 0) Extra points: (1, −8), (5, −8), (6, −18) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Example 5: Graph: y = x 2 − 2 x − 1 . Solution: Since a = 1, the parabola opens upward. Furthermore, c = −1, so the y-intercept is (0, −1). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. In this case, solve using the quadratic formula with a = 1, b = −2, and c = −1. Here we obtain two real solutions for x, and thus there are two x-intercepts: Approximate values using a calculator: Use the approximate answers to place the ordered pair on the graph. However, we will present the exact x-intercepts on the graph. Next, find the vertex. Given that the x-value of the vertex is 1, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (1, −2). We need one more point. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, −1) x-intercepts: ( 1 − 2 √ , 0) and ( 1 + 2 √ , 0) Vertex: (1, −2) Extra point: (2, −1) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Try this! Graph: y = 9 x 2 − 5 . Answer: Video Solution The Graph of a Quadratic Equation We know that any linear equation with two variables can be written in the form y = m x + b and that its graph is a line. In this section, we will see that any quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c has a curved graph called a parabola The graph of any quadratic equation y = a x 2 + b x + c , where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0 . . Two points determine any line. However, since a parabola is curved, we should find more than two points. In this text, we will determine at least five points as a means to produce an acceptable sketch. To begin, we graph our first parabola by plotting points. Given a quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c , x is the independent variable and y is the dependent variable. Choose some values for x and then determine the corresponding y-values. Then plot the points and sketch the graph.   Example 1: Graph by plotting points: y = x 2 − 2 x − 3 . Solution: In this example, choose the x-values {−2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4} and calculate the corresponding y-values. Plot these points and determine the shape of the graph. Answer: When graphing, we want to include certain special points in the graph. The y-intercept is the point where the graph intersects the y-axis. The x-intercepts are the points where the graph intersects the x-axis. The vertex The point that defines the minimum or maximum of a parabola. is the point that defines the minimum or maximum of the graph. Lastly, the line of symmetry The vertical line through the vertex, x = − b 2 a , about which the parabola is symmetric. (also called the axis of symmetry A term used when referencing the line of symmetry. ) is the vertical line through the vertex, about which the parabola is symmetric. For any parabola, we will find the vertex and y-intercept. In addition, if the x-intercepts exist, then we will want to determine those as well. Guessing at the x-values of these special points is not practical; therefore, we will develop techniques that will facilitate finding them. Many of these techniques will be used extensively as we progress in our study of algebra. Given a quadratic equation of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c , find the y-intercept by setting x = 0 and solving. In general, y = a ( 0 ) 2 + b ( 0 ) + c = c , and we have Next, recall that the x-intercepts, if they exist, can be found by setting y = 0 . Doing this, we have 0 = a 2 + b x + c , which has general solutions given by the quadratic formula, x = − b ± b 2 − 4 a c √ 2 a . Therefore, the x-intercepts have this general form: Using the fact that a parabola is symmetric, we can determine the vertical line of symmetry using the x-intercepts. To do this, we find the x-value midway between the x-intercepts by taking an average as follows: Therefore, the line of symmetry is the vertical line: We can use the line of symmetry to find the x-value of the vertex. The steps for graphing a parabola are outlined in the following example.   Example 2: Graph: y = − x 2 − 2 x + 3 . Solution: Step 1: Determine the y-intercept. To do this, set x = 0 and solve for y. The y-intercept is (0, 3). Step 2: Determine the x-intercepts. To do this, set y = 0 and solve for x. Here when y = 0, we obtain two solutions. There are two x-intercepts, (−3, 0) and (1, 0). Step 3: Determine the vertex. One way to do this is to use the equation for the line of symmetry, x = − b 2 a , to find the x-value of the vertex. In this example, a = −1 and b = −2: Substitute −1 into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (−1, 4). Step 4: Determine extra points so that we have at least five points to plot. In this example, one other point will suffice. Choose x = −2 and find the corresponding y-value. Our fifth point is (−2, 3). Step 5: Plot the points and sketch the graph. To recap, the points that we have found are y-intercept: (0, 3) x-intercept: (−3, 0) and (1, 0) Vertex: (−1, 4) Extra point: (−2, 3) Answer: The parabola opens downward. In general, use the leading coefficient to determine whether the parabola opens upward or downward. If the leading coefficient is negative, as in the previous example, then the parabola opens downward. If the leading coefficient is positive, then the parabola opens upward. All quadratic equations of the form y = a x 2 + b x + c have parabolic graphs with y-intercept (0, c). However, not all parabolas have x intercepts.   Example 3: Graph: y = 2 x 2 + 4 x + 5 . Solution: Because the leading coefficient 2 is positive, note that the parabola opens upward. Here c = 5 and the y-intercept is (0, 5). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. In this case, a = 2, b = 4, and c = 5. Use the discriminant to determine the number and type of solutions. Since the discriminant is negative, we conclude that there are no real solutions. Because there are no real solutions, there are no x-intercepts. Next, we determine the x-value of the vertex. Given that the x-value of the vertex is −1, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (−1, 3). So far, we have only two points. To determine three more, choose some x-values on either side of the line of symmetry, x = −1. Here we choose x-values −3, −2, and 1. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, 5) x-intercepts: None Vertex: (−1, 3) Extra points: (−3, 11), (−2, 5), (1, 11) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Example 4: Graph: y = − 2 x 2 + 12 x − 18 . Solution: Note that a = −2: the parabola opens downward. Since c = −18, the y-intercept is (0, −18). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. Solve by factoring. Here x = 3 is a double root, so there is only one x-intercept, (3, 0). From the original equation, a = −2, b = 12, and c = −18. The x-value of the vertex can be calculated as follows: Given that the x-value of the vertex is 3, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. Therefore, the vertex is (3, 0), which happens to be the same point as the x-intercept. So far, we have only two points. To determine three more, choose some x-values on either side of the line of symmetry, x = 3 in this case. Choose x-values 1, 5, and 6. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, −18) x-intercept: (3, 0) Vertex: (3, 0) Extra points: (1, −8), (5, −8), (6, −18) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Example 5: Graph: y = x 2 − 2 x − 1 . Solution: Since a = 1, the parabola opens upward. Furthermore, c = −1, so the y-intercept is (0, −1). To find the x-intercepts, set y = 0. In this case, solve using the quadratic formula with a = 1, b = −2, and c = −1. Here we obtain two real solutions for x, and thus there are two x-intercepts: Approximate values using a calculator: Use the approximate answers to place the ordered pair on the graph. However, we will present the exact x-intercepts on the graph. Next, find the vertex. Given that the x-value of the vertex is 1, substitute into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (1, −2). We need one more point. To summarize, we have y-intercept: (0, −1) x-intercepts: ( 1 − 2 √ , 0) and ( 1 + 2 √ , 0) Vertex: (1, −2) Extra point: (2, −1) Plot the points and sketch the graph. Answer:   Try this! Graph: y = 9 x 2 − 5 . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter9_5_2	Finding the Maximum and Minimum It is often useful to find the maximum and/or minimum values of functions that model real-life applications. To find these important values given a quadratic function, we use the vertex. If the leading coefficient a is positive, then the parabola opens upward and there will be a minimum y-value. If the leading coefficient a is negative, then the parabola opens downward and there will be a maximum y-value.   Example 6: Determine the maximum or minimum: y = − 4 x 2 + 24 x − 35 . Solution: Since a = −4, we know that the parabola opens downward and there will be a maximum y-value. To find it, we first find the x-value of the vertex. The x-value of the vertex is 3. Substitute this value into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (3, 1). Therefore, the maximum y-value is 1, which occurs when x = 3, as illustrated below: Note The graph is not required to answer this question. Answer: The maximum is 1.   Example 7: Determine the maximum or minimum: y = 4 x 2 − 32 x + 62 . Solution: Since a = +4, the parabola opens upward and there is a minimum y-value. Begin by finding the x-value of the vertex. Substitute x = 4 into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (4, −2). Therefore, the minimum y-value of −2 occurs when x = 4, as illustrated below: Answer: The minimum is −2.   Try this! Determine the maximum or minimum: y = ( x − 3 ) 2 − 9 . Answer: The minimum is −9. Video Solution A parabola, opening upward or downward (as opposed to sideways), defines a function and extends indefinitely to the right and left as indicated by the arrows. Therefore, the domain (the set of x-values) consists of all real numbers. However, the range (the set of y-values) is bounded by the y-value of the vertex.   Example 8: Determine the domain and range: y = x 2 − 4 x + 3 . Solution: First, note that since a = 1 is positive, the parabola opens upward. Hence there will be a minimum y-value. To find that value, find the x-value of the vertex: Then substitute into the equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (2, −1). The range consists of the set of y-values greater than or equal to the minimum y-value −1. Answer: Domain: R = (−∞, ∞); range: [−1, ∞)   Example 9: The height in feet of a projectile is given by the function h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 72 t , where t represents the time in seconds after launch. What is the maximum height reached by the projectile? Solution: Here a = − 16 , and the parabola opens downward. Therefore, the y-value of the vertex determines the maximum height. Begin by finding the x-value of the vertex: The maximum height will occur in 9/4 = 2¼ seconds. Substitute this time into the function to determine the height attained. Answer: The maximum height of the projectile is 81 feet. Finding the Maximum and Minimum It is often useful to find the maximum and/or minimum values of functions that model real-life applications. To find these important values given a quadratic function, we use the vertex. If the leading coefficient a is positive, then the parabola opens upward and there will be a minimum y-value. If the leading coefficient a is negative, then the parabola opens downward and there will be a maximum y-value.   Example 6: Determine the maximum or minimum: y = − 4 x 2 + 24 x − 35 . Solution: Since a = −4, we know that the parabola opens downward and there will be a maximum y-value. To find it, we first find the x-value of the vertex. The x-value of the vertex is 3. Substitute this value into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (3, 1). Therefore, the maximum y-value is 1, which occurs when x = 3, as illustrated below: Note The graph is not required to answer this question. Answer: The maximum is 1.   Example 7: Determine the maximum or minimum: y = 4 x 2 − 32 x + 62 . Solution: Since a = +4, the parabola opens upward and there is a minimum y-value. Begin by finding the x-value of the vertex. Substitute x = 4 into the original equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (4, −2). Therefore, the minimum y-value of −2 occurs when x = 4, as illustrated below: Answer: The minimum is −2.   Try this! Determine the maximum or minimum: y = ( x − 3 ) 2 − 9 . Answer: The minimum is −9. Video Solution A parabola, opening upward or downward (as opposed to sideways), defines a function and extends indefinitely to the right and left as indicated by the arrows. Therefore, the domain (the set of x-values) consists of all real numbers. However, the range (the set of y-values) is bounded by the y-value of the vertex.   Example 8: Determine the domain and range: y = x 2 − 4 x + 3 . Solution: First, note that since a = 1 is positive, the parabola opens upward. Hence there will be a minimum y-value. To find that value, find the x-value of the vertex: Then substitute into the equation to find the corresponding y-value. The vertex is (2, −1). The range consists of the set of y-values greater than or equal to the minimum y-value −1. Answer: Domain: R = (−∞, ∞); range: [−1, ∞)   Example 9: The height in feet of a projectile is given by the function h ( t ) = − 16 t 2 + 72 t , where t represents the time in seconds after launch. What is the maximum height reached by the projectile? Solution: Here a = − 16 , and the parabola opens downward. Therefore, the y-value of the vertex determines the maximum height. Begin by finding the x-value of the vertex: The maximum height will occur in 9/4 = 2¼ seconds. Substitute this time into the function to determine the height attained. Answer: The maximum height of the projectile is 81 feet.  || 
book2_chapter9_5_3	Finding the Vertex by Completing the Square In this section, we demonstrate an alternate approach for finding the vertex. Any quadratic equation y = a x 2 + b x + c can be rewritten in the form In this form, the vertex is (h, k).   Example 10: Determine the vertex: y = − 4 ( x − 3 ) 2 + 1 . Solution: When the equation is in this form, we can read the vertex directly from the equation. Here h = 3 and k = 1. Answer: The vertex is (3, 1).   Example 11: Determine the vertex: y = 2 ( x + 3 ) 2 − 2 . Solution: Rewrite the equation as follows before determining h and k. Here h = −3 and k = −2. Answer: The vertex is (−3, −2).   Often the equation is not given in this form. To obtain this form, complete the square.   Example 12: Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = x 2 + 4 x + 9 . Solution: Begin by making room for the constant term that completes the square. The idea is to add and subtract the value that completes the square, ( b 2 ) 2 , and then factor. In this case, add and subtract ( 4 2 ) 2 = ( 2 ) 2 = 4 . Adding and subtracting the same value within an expression does not change it. Doing so is equivalent to adding 0. Once the equation is in this form, we can easily determine the vertex. Here h = −2 and k = 5. Answer: The vertex is (−2, 5).   If there is a leading coefficient other than 1, then we must first factor out the leading coefficient from the first two terms of the trinomial.   Example 13: Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = 2 x 2 − 4 x + 8 . Solution: Since a = 2, factor this out of the first two terms in order to complete the square. Leave room inside the parentheses to add a constant term. Now use −2 to determine the value that completes the square. In this case, ( − 2 2 ) 2 = ( − 1 ) 2 = 1 . Add and subtract 1 and factor as follows: In this form, we can easily determine the vertex. Here h = 1 and k = 6. Answer: The vertex is (1, 6).   Try this! Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = − 2 x 2 − 12 x + 3 . Answer: y = − 2 ( x + 3 ) 2 + 21 ; vertex: (−3, 21) Video Solution Finding the Vertex by Completing the Square In this section, we demonstrate an alternate approach for finding the vertex. Any quadratic equation y = a x 2 + b x + c can be rewritten in the form In this form, the vertex is (h, k).   Example 10: Determine the vertex: y = − 4 ( x − 3 ) 2 + 1 . Solution: When the equation is in this form, we can read the vertex directly from the equation. Here h = 3 and k = 1. Answer: The vertex is (3, 1).   Example 11: Determine the vertex: y = 2 ( x + 3 ) 2 − 2 . Solution: Rewrite the equation as follows before determining h and k. Here h = −3 and k = −2. Answer: The vertex is (−3, −2).   Often the equation is not given in this form. To obtain this form, complete the square.   Example 12: Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = x 2 + 4 x + 9 . Solution: Begin by making room for the constant term that completes the square. The idea is to add and subtract the value that completes the square, ( b 2 ) 2 , and then factor. In this case, add and subtract ( 4 2 ) 2 = ( 2 ) 2 = 4 . Adding and subtracting the same value within an expression does not change it. Doing so is equivalent to adding 0. Once the equation is in this form, we can easily determine the vertex. Here h = −2 and k = 5. Answer: The vertex is (−2, 5).   If there is a leading coefficient other than 1, then we must first factor out the leading coefficient from the first two terms of the trinomial.   Example 13: Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = 2 x 2 − 4 x + 8 . Solution: Since a = 2, factor this out of the first two terms in order to complete the square. Leave room inside the parentheses to add a constant term. Now use −2 to determine the value that completes the square. In this case, ( − 2 2 ) 2 = ( − 1 ) 2 = 1 . Add and subtract 1 and factor as follows: In this form, we can easily determine the vertex. Here h = 1 and k = 6. Answer: The vertex is (1, 6).   Try this! Rewrite in y = a ( x − h ) 2 + k form and determine the vertex: y = − 2 x 2 − 12 x + 3 . Answer: y = − 2 ( x + 3 ) 2 + 21 ; vertex: (−3, 21) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter9_6	 || Introduction to Complex Numbers Up to this point, the square root of a negative number has been left undefined. For example, we know that − 9 − − − √ is not a real a number. There is no real number that when squared results in a negative number. We begin the resolution of this issue by defining the imaginary unit Defined as i = − 1 − − − √ and i 2 = − 1 . , i, as the square root of −1. To express a square root of a negative number in terms of the imaginary unit i, we use the following property, where a represents any nonnegative real number: With this we can write If − 9 − − − √ = 3 i , then we would expect that 3i squared equals −9: Therefore, the square root of any negative real number can be written in terms of the imaginary unit. Such numbers are often called imaginary numbers The square roots of any negative real numbers. .   Example 1: Rewrite in terms of the imaginary unit i. a. − 4 − − − √ b. − 5 − − − √ c. − 8 − − − √ Solution: a. − 4 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 4 − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 4 √ = i ⋅ 2 = 2 i b. − 5 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 5 − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 5 √ = i 5 √ c. − 8 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 2 − − − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 4 √ ⋅ 2 √ = i ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 √ = 2 i 2 √ Notation Note When an imaginary number involves a radical, place i in front of the radical. Consider the following: 2 i 2 √ = 2 2 √ i Since multiplication is commutative, these numbers are equivalent. However, in the form 2 2 √ i , the imaginary unit i is often misinterpreted to be part of the radicand. To avoid this confusion, it is a best practice to place the i in front of the radical and use 2 i 2 √ . A complex number Numbers of the form a + b i , where a and b are real numbers. is any number of the form where a and b are real numbers. Here a is called the real part The real number a of a complex number a + b i . and b is called the imaginary part The real number b of a complex number a + b i . . For example, 3 − 4 i is a complex number with a real part, 3, and an imaginary part, −4. It is important to note that any real number is also a complex number. For example, the real number 5 is also a complex number because it can be written as 5 + 0 i with a real part of 5 and an imaginary part of 0. Hence the set of real numbers, denoted R, is a subset of the set of complex numbers, denoted C. Adding and subtracting complex numbers is similar to adding and subtracting like terms. Add or subtract the real parts and then the imaginary parts.   Example 2: Add: ( 3 − 4 i ) + ( 2 + 5 i ) . Solution: Add the real parts and then add the imaginary parts. Answer:   To subtract complex numbers, subtract the real parts and subtract the imaginary parts. This is consistent with the use of the distributive property.   Example 3: Subtract: . Solution: Distribute the negative one and then combine like terms. Answer:   The distributive property also applies when multiplying complex numbers. Make use of the fact that to resolve the result into standard form: .   Example 4: Multiply: . Solution: Begin by applying the distributive property. Answer:   Example 5: Multiply: . Solution: Answer:   Given a complex number , its complex conjugate Two complex numbers whose real parts are the same and imaginary parts are opposite. If given , then its complex conjugate is . is . We next explore the product of complex conjugates.   Example 6: Multiply: . Solution: Answer: 25   In general, the product of complex conjugates The real number that results from multiplying complex conjugates: follows: Note that the result does not involve the imaginary unit; hence the result is real. This leads us to the very useful property: To divide complex numbers, we apply the technique used to rationalize the denominator. Multiply the numerator and denominator (dividend and divisor) by the conjugate of the denominator. The result can then be resolved into standard form, .   Example 7: Divide: . Solution: In this example, the conjugate of the denominator is . Multiply by 1 in the form . To express this complex number in standard form, write each term over the common denominator 5. Answer:   Example 8: Divide: . Solution: Answer:   Try this! Divide: . Answer: Video Solution  || Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions Now that complex numbers are defined, we can complete our study of solutions to quadratic equations. Often solutions to quadratic equations are not real.   Example 9: Solve using the quadratic formula: Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Check these solutions by substituting them into the original equation. Answer: The solutions are and .   The equation may not be given in standard form. The general steps for solving using the quadratic formula are outlined in the following example.   Example 10: Solve: . Solution: Step 1: Write the quadratic equation in standard form. Step 2: Identify a, b, and c for use in the quadratic formula. Here Step 3: Substitute the appropriate values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Answer: The solution is . The check is optional.   Example 11: Solve: . Solution: Begin by rewriting the equation in standard form. Here , , and . Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are and . Notation Note Consider the following: Both numbers are equivalent and is in standard form, where the real part is −1 and the imaginary part is . However, this number is often expressed as , even though this expression is not in standard form. Again, this is done to avoid the possibility of misinterpreting the imaginary unit as part of the radicand.   Try this! Solve: . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter9_6_1	Introduction to Complex Numbers Up to this point, the square root of a negative number has been left undefined. For example, we know that − 9 − − − √ is not a real a number. There is no real number that when squared results in a negative number. We begin the resolution of this issue by defining the imaginary unit Defined as i = − 1 − − − √ and i 2 = − 1 . , i, as the square root of −1. To express a square root of a negative number in terms of the imaginary unit i, we use the following property, where a represents any nonnegative real number: With this we can write If − 9 − − − √ = 3 i , then we would expect that 3i squared equals −9: Therefore, the square root of any negative real number can be written in terms of the imaginary unit. Such numbers are often called imaginary numbers The square roots of any negative real numbers. .   Example 1: Rewrite in terms of the imaginary unit i. a. − 4 − − − √ b. − 5 − − − √ c. − 8 − − − √ Solution: a. − 4 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 4 − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 4 √ = i ⋅ 2 = 2 i b. − 5 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 5 − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 5 √ = i 5 √ c. − 8 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 2 − − − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 4 √ ⋅ 2 √ = i ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 √ = 2 i 2 √ Notation Note When an imaginary number involves a radical, place i in front of the radical. Consider the following: 2 i 2 √ = 2 2 √ i Since multiplication is commutative, these numbers are equivalent. However, in the form 2 2 √ i , the imaginary unit i is often misinterpreted to be part of the radicand. To avoid this confusion, it is a best practice to place the i in front of the radical and use 2 i 2 √ . A complex number Numbers of the form a + b i , where a and b are real numbers. is any number of the form where a and b are real numbers. Here a is called the real part The real number a of a complex number a + b i . and b is called the imaginary part The real number b of a complex number a + b i . . For example, 3 − 4 i is a complex number with a real part, 3, and an imaginary part, −4. It is important to note that any real number is also a complex number. For example, the real number 5 is also a complex number because it can be written as 5 + 0 i with a real part of 5 and an imaginary part of 0. Hence the set of real numbers, denoted R, is a subset of the set of complex numbers, denoted C. Adding and subtracting complex numbers is similar to adding and subtracting like terms. Add or subtract the real parts and then the imaginary parts.   Example 2: Add: ( 3 − 4 i ) + ( 2 + 5 i ) . Solution: Add the real parts and then add the imaginary parts. Answer:   To subtract complex numbers, subtract the real parts and subtract the imaginary parts. This is consistent with the use of the distributive property.   Example 3: Subtract: . Solution: Distribute the negative one and then combine like terms. Answer:   The distributive property also applies when multiplying complex numbers. Make use of the fact that to resolve the result into standard form: .   Example 4: Multiply: . Solution: Begin by applying the distributive property. Answer:   Example 5: Multiply: . Solution: Answer:   Given a complex number , its complex conjugate Two complex numbers whose real parts are the same and imaginary parts are opposite. If given , then its complex conjugate is . is . We next explore the product of complex conjugates.   Example 6: Multiply: . Solution: Answer: 25   In general, the product of complex conjugates The real number that results from multiplying complex conjugates: follows: Note that the result does not involve the imaginary unit; hence the result is real. This leads us to the very useful property: To divide complex numbers, we apply the technique used to rationalize the denominator. Multiply the numerator and denominator (dividend and divisor) by the conjugate of the denominator. The result can then be resolved into standard form, .   Example 7: Divide: . Solution: In this example, the conjugate of the denominator is . Multiply by 1 in the form . To express this complex number in standard form, write each term over the common denominator 5. Answer:   Example 8: Divide: . Solution: Answer:   Try this! Divide: . Answer: Video Solution Introduction to Complex Numbers Up to this point, the square root of a negative number has been left undefined. For example, we know that − 9 − − − √ is not a real a number. There is no real number that when squared results in a negative number. We begin the resolution of this issue by defining the imaginary unit Defined as i = − 1 − − − √ and i 2 = − 1 . , i, as the square root of −1. To express a square root of a negative number in terms of the imaginary unit i, we use the following property, where a represents any nonnegative real number: With this we can write If − 9 − − − √ = 3 i , then we would expect that 3i squared equals −9: Therefore, the square root of any negative real number can be written in terms of the imaginary unit. Such numbers are often called imaginary numbers The square roots of any negative real numbers. .   Example 1: Rewrite in terms of the imaginary unit i. a. − 4 − − − √ b. − 5 − − − √ c. − 8 − − − √ Solution: a. − 4 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 4 − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 4 √ = i ⋅ 2 = 2 i b. − 5 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 5 − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 5 √ = i 5 √ c. − 8 − − − √ = − 1 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 2 − − − − − − − √ = − 1 − − − √ ⋅ 4 √ ⋅ 2 √ = i ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 √ = 2 i 2 √ Notation Note When an imaginary number involves a radical, place i in front of the radical. Consider the following: 2 i 2 √ = 2 2 √ i Since multiplication is commutative, these numbers are equivalent. However, in the form 2 2 √ i , the imaginary unit i is often misinterpreted to be part of the radicand. To avoid this confusion, it is a best practice to place the i in front of the radical and use 2 i 2 √ . A complex number Numbers of the form a + b i , where a and b are real numbers. is any number of the form where a and b are real numbers. Here a is called the real part The real number a of a complex number a + b i . and b is called the imaginary part The real number b of a complex number a + b i . . For example, 3 − 4 i is a complex number with a real part, 3, and an imaginary part, −4. It is important to note that any real number is also a complex number. For example, the real number 5 is also a complex number because it can be written as 5 + 0 i with a real part of 5 and an imaginary part of 0. Hence the set of real numbers, denoted R, is a subset of the set of complex numbers, denoted C. Adding and subtracting complex numbers is similar to adding and subtracting like terms. Add or subtract the real parts and then the imaginary parts.   Example 2: Add: ( 3 − 4 i ) + ( 2 + 5 i ) . Solution: Add the real parts and then add the imaginary parts. Answer:   To subtract complex numbers, subtract the real parts and subtract the imaginary parts. This is consistent with the use of the distributive property.   Example 3: Subtract: . Solution: Distribute the negative one and then combine like terms. Answer:   The distributive property also applies when multiplying complex numbers. Make use of the fact that to resolve the result into standard form: .   Example 4: Multiply: . Solution: Begin by applying the distributive property. Answer:   Example 5: Multiply: . Solution: Answer:   Given a complex number , its complex conjugate Two complex numbers whose real parts are the same and imaginary parts are opposite. If given , then its complex conjugate is . is . We next explore the product of complex conjugates.   Example 6: Multiply: . Solution: Answer: 25   In general, the product of complex conjugates The real number that results from multiplying complex conjugates: follows: Note that the result does not involve the imaginary unit; hence the result is real. This leads us to the very useful property: To divide complex numbers, we apply the technique used to rationalize the denominator. Multiply the numerator and denominator (dividend and divisor) by the conjugate of the denominator. The result can then be resolved into standard form, .   Example 7: Divide: . Solution: In this example, the conjugate of the denominator is . Multiply by 1 in the form . To express this complex number in standard form, write each term over the common denominator 5. Answer:   Example 8: Divide: . Solution: Answer:   Try this! Divide: . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter9_6_2	Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions Now that complex numbers are defined, we can complete our study of solutions to quadratic equations. Often solutions to quadratic equations are not real.   Example 9: Solve using the quadratic formula: Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Check these solutions by substituting them into the original equation. Answer: The solutions are and .   The equation may not be given in standard form. The general steps for solving using the quadratic formula are outlined in the following example.   Example 10: Solve: . Solution: Step 1: Write the quadratic equation in standard form. Step 2: Identify a, b, and c for use in the quadratic formula. Here Step 3: Substitute the appropriate values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Answer: The solution is . The check is optional.   Example 11: Solve: . Solution: Begin by rewriting the equation in standard form. Here , , and . Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are and . Notation Note Consider the following: Both numbers are equivalent and is in standard form, where the real part is −1 and the imaginary part is . However, this number is often expressed as , even though this expression is not in standard form. Again, this is done to avoid the possibility of misinterpreting the imaginary unit as part of the radicand.   Try this! Solve: . Answer: Video Solution Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions Now that complex numbers are defined, we can complete our study of solutions to quadratic equations. Often solutions to quadratic equations are not real.   Example 9: Solve using the quadratic formula: Solution: Begin by identifying a, b, and c. Here Substitute these values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Check these solutions by substituting them into the original equation. Answer: The solutions are and .   The equation may not be given in standard form. The general steps for solving using the quadratic formula are outlined in the following example.   Example 10: Solve: . Solution: Step 1: Write the quadratic equation in standard form. Step 2: Identify a, b, and c for use in the quadratic formula. Here Step 3: Substitute the appropriate values into the quadratic formula and then simplify. Answer: The solution is . The check is optional.   Example 11: Solve: . Solution: Begin by rewriting the equation in standard form. Here , , and . Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. Answer: The solutions are and . Notation Note Consider the following: Both numbers are equivalent and is in standard form, where the real part is −1 and the imaginary part is . However, this number is often expressed as , even though this expression is not in standard form. Again, this is done to avoid the possibility of misinterpreting the imaginary unit as part of the radicand.   Try this! Solve: . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4	 ||  || Definition of a Linear System Real-world applications are often modeled using more than one variable and more than one equation. A system of equations A set of two or more equations with the same variables. consists of a set of two or more equations with the same variables. In this section, we will study linear systems In this section, we restrict our study to systems of two linear equations with two variables. consisting of two linear equations each with two variables. For example, A solution to a linear system An ordered pair that satisfies both equations and corresponds to a point of intersection. , or simultaneous solution Used when referring to a solution of a system of equations. , to a linear system is an ordered pair (x, y) that solves both of the equations. In this case, (3, 2) is the only solution. To check that an ordered pair is a solution, substitute the corresponding x- and y-values into each equation and then simplify to see if you obtain a true statement for both equations.   Example 1: Determine whether (1, 0) is a solution to the system { x − y = 1 − 2 x + 3 y = 5 . Solution: Substitute the appropriate values into both equations. Answer: Since (1, 0) does not satisfy both equations, it is not a solution.   Try this! Is (−2, 4) a solution to the system {   x − y = − 6 − 2 x + 3 y = 16 ? Answer: Yes Video Solution  || Solve by Graphing Geometrically, a linear system consists of two lines, where a solution is a point of intersection. To illustrate this, we will graph the following linear system with a solution of (3, 2): First, rewrite the equations in slope-intercept form so that we may easily graph them. Next, replace these forms of the original equations in the system to obtain what is called an equivalent system A system consisting of equivalent equations that share the same solution set. . Equivalent systems share the same solution set. If we graph both of the lines on the same set of axes, then we can see that the point of intersection is indeed (3, 2), the solution to the system. To summarize, linear systems described in this section consist of two linear equations each with two variables. A solution is an ordered pair that corresponds to a point where the two lines in the rectangular coordinate plane intersect. Therefore, we can solve linear systems by graphing both lines on the same set of axes and determining the point where they cross. When graphing the lines, take care to choose a good scale and use a straightedge to draw the line through the points; accuracy is very important here. The steps for solving linear systems using the graphing method A means of solving a system by graphing the equations on the same set of axes and determining where they intersect. are outlined in the following example.   Example 2: Solve by graphing: { x − y = − 4 2 x + y = 1 . Solution: Step 1: Rewrite the linear equations in slope-intercept form. Step 2: Write the equivalent system and graph the lines on the same set of axes. Step 3: Use the graph to estimate the point where the lines intersect and check to see if it solves the original system. In the above graph, the point of intersection appears to be (−1, 3). Answer: (−1, 3)   Example 3: Solve by graphing: { 2 x + y = 2 − 2 x + 3 y = − 18 . Solution: We first solve each equation for y to obtain an equivalent system where the lines are in slope-intercept form. Graph the lines and determine the point of intersection. Answer: (3, −4)   Example 4: Solve by graphing: { 3 x + y = 6 y = − 3 . Solution: Answer: (3, −3)   The graphing method for solving linear systems is not ideal when the solution consists of coordinates that are not integers. There will be more accurate algebraic methods in sections to come, but for now, the goal is to understand the geometry involved when solving systems. It is important to remember that the solutions to a system correspond to the point, or points, where the graphs of the equations intersect.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { − x + y = 6   5 x + 2 y = − 2 . Answer: (−2, 4) Video Solution  || Dependent and Inconsistent Systems Systems with at least one solution are called consistent systems A system with at least one solution. . Up to this point, all of the examples have been of consistent systems with exactly one ordered pair solution. It turns out that this is not always the case. Sometimes systems consist of two linear equations that are equivalent. If this is the case, the two lines are the same and when graphed will coincide. Hence the solution set consists of all the points on the line. This is a dependent system A system that consists of equivalent equations with infinitely many ordered pair solutions, denoted by (x, mx + b). . Given a consistent linear system with two variables, there are two possible results: The solutions to independent systems A system of equations with one ordered pair solution (x, y). are ordered pairs (x, y). We need some way to express the solution sets to dependent systems, since these systems have infinitely many solutions, or points of intersection. Recall that any line can be written in slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . Here, y depends on x. So we may express all the ordered pair solutions ( x ,   y ) in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) , where x is any real number.   Example 5: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 3 y = − 9   4 x − 6 y = 18 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation in the system. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and same y-intercept. They are, in fact, the same line. And the system is dependent. Answer: ( x ,   2 3 x − 3 )   In this example, it is important to notice that the two lines have the same slope and same y-intercept. This tells us that the two equations are equivalent and that the simultaneous solutions are all the points on the line y = 2 3 x − 3 . This is a dependent system, and the infinitely many solutions are expressed using the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Other resources may express this set using set notation, {(x, y) | y = 2 3 x − 3 }, which reads “the set of all ordered pairs (x, y) such that y equals two-thirds x minus 3.” Sometimes the lines do not cross and there is no point of intersection. Such systems have no solution, Ø, and are called inconsistent systems A system with no simultaneous solution. .   Example 6: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 5 y = − 15 − 4 x + 10 y = 10 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and different y-intercepts. Therefore, they are parallel and will never intersect. Answer: There is no simultaneous solution, Ø.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { x + y = − 1 − 2 x − 2 y = 2 . Answer: ( x ,   − x − 1 ) Video Solution  ||  || The Substitution Method In this section, we will define a completely algebraic technique for solving systems. The idea is to solve one equation for one of the variables and substitute the result into the other equation. After performing this substitution step, we will be left with a single equation with one variable, which can be solved using algebra. This is called the substitution method A means of solving a linear system by solving for one of the variables and substituting the result into the other equation. , and the steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Solve by substitution: { 2 x + y = 7 3 x − 2 y = − 7 . Solution: Step 1: Solve for either variable in either equation. If you choose the first equation, you can isolate y in one step. Step 2: Substitute the expression − 2 x + 7 for the y variable in the other equation. This leaves you with an equivalent equation with one variable, which can be solved using the techniques learned up to this point. Step 3: Solve for the remaining variable. To solve for x, first distribute −2: Step 4: Back substitute Once a value is found for a variable, substitute it back into one of the original equations, or their equivalent equations, to determine the corresponding value of the other variable. to find the value of the other coordinate. Substitute x = 1 into either of the original equations or their equivalents. Typically, we use the equivalent equation that we found when isolating a variable in step 1. The solution to the system is (1, 5). Be sure to present the solution as an ordered pair. Step 5: Check. Verify that these coordinates solve both equations of the original system: The graph of this linear system follows: The substitution method for solving systems is a completely algebraic method. Thus graphing the lines is not required. Answer: (1, 5)   Example 2: Solve by substitution: { 2 x − y = 12 x − y = 3 . Solution: In this example, we can see that x has a coefficient of 1 in the second equation. This indicates that it can be isolated in one step as follows: Substitute 3 + y for x in the first equation. Use parentheses and take care to distribute. Use x = 3 + y to find x. Answer: (9, 6). The check is left to the reader.   Example 3: Solve by substitution: { 3 x − 5 y = 17 x = − 1 . Solution: In this example, the variable x is already isolated. Hence we can substitute x = − 1 into the first equation. Answer: (−1, −4). It is a good exercise to graph this particular system to compare the substitution method to the graphing method for solving systems.   Try this! Solve by substitution: { 3 x + y = 4 8 x + 2 y = 10 . Answer: (1, 1) Video Solution Solving systems algebraically frequently requires work with fractions.   Example 4: Solve by substitution: { 2 x + 8 y = 5 24 x − 4 y = − 15 . Solution: Begin by solving for x in the first equation. Next, substitute into the second equation and solve for y. Back substitute into the equation used in the substitution step: Answer: (−1/2, 3/4)   As we know, not all linear systems have only one ordered pair solution. Recall that some systems have infinitely many ordered pair solutions and some do not have any solutions. Next, we explore what happens when using the substitution method to solve a dependent system.   Example 5: Solve by substitution: { − 5 x + y = − 1 10 x − 2 y = 2 . Solution: Since the first equation has a term with coefficient 1, we choose to solve for that first. Next, substitute this expression in for y in the second equation. This process led to a true statement; hence the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution. This indicates that the system is dependent. The simultaneous solutions take the form (x, mx + b), or in this case, (x, 5x − 1), where x is any real number. Answer: ( x ,   5 x − 1 )   To have a better understanding of the previous example, rewrite both equations in slope-intercept form and graph them on the same set of axes. We can see that both equations represent the same line, and thus the system is dependent. Now explore what happens when solving an inconsistent system using the substitution method.   Example 6: Solve by substitution: { − 7 x + 3 y = 3 14 x − 6 y = − 16 . Solution: Solve for y in the first equation. Substitute into the second equation and solve. Solving leads to a false statement. This indicates that the equation is a contradiction. There is no solution for x and hence no solution to the system. Answer: No solution, Ø   A false statement indicates that the system is inconsistent, or in geometric terms, that the lines are parallel and do not intersect. To illustrate this, determine the slope-intercept form of each line and graph them on the same set of axes. In slope-intercept form, it is easy to see that the two lines have the same slope but different y-intercepts.   Try this! Solve by substitution: { 2 x − 5 y = 3 4 x − 10 y = 6 . Answer: ( x ,   2 5 x − 3 5 ) Video Solution  ||  || The Elimination Method In this section, the goal is to develop another completely algebraic method for solving a system of linear equations. We begin by defining what it means to add equations together. In the following example, notice that if we add the expressions on both sides of the equal sign, we obtain another true statement. This is true in general: if A, B, C, and D are algebraic expressions, then we have the following addition property of equations If A, B, C, and D are algebraic expressions, where A = B and C = D, then A + C = B + D. : For the system we add the two equations together: The sum of y and −y is zero and that term is eliminated. This leaves us with a linear equation with one variable that can be easily solved: At this point, we have the x coordinate of the simultaneous solution, so all that is left to do is back substitute to find the corresponding y-value. Hence the solution to the system is (3, 2). This process describes the elimination (or addition) method A means of solving a system by adding equivalent equations in such a way as to eliminate a variable. for solving linear systems. Of course, the variable is not always so easily eliminated. Typically, we have to find an equivalent system by applying the multiplication property of equality to one or both of the equations as a means to line up one of the variables to eliminate. The goal is to arrange that either the x terms or the y terms are opposites, so that when the equations are added, the terms eliminate. The steps for the elimination method are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Solve by elimination: { 2 x + y = 7 3 x − 2 y = − 7 . Solution: Step 1: Multiply one, or both, of the equations to set up the elimination of one of the variables. In this example, we will eliminate the variable y by multiplying both sides of the first equation by 2. Take care to distribute. This leaves us with an equivalent system where the variable y is lined up to eliminate. Step 2: Add the equations together to eliminate one of the variables. Step 3: Solve for the remaining variable. Step 3: Back substitute into either equation or its equivalent equation. Step 4: Check. Remember that the solution must solve both of the original equations. Answer: (1, 5)   Occasionally, we will have to multiply both equations to line up one of the variables to eliminate. We want the resulting equivalent equations to have terms with opposite coefficients.   Example 2: Solve by elimination: { 5 x − 3 y = − 1 3 x + 2 y = 7 . Solution: We choose to eliminate the terms with variable y because the coefficients have different signs. To do this, we first determine the least common multiple of the coefficients; in this case, the LCM(3, 2) is 6. Therefore, multiply both sides of both equations by the appropriate values to obtain coefficients of −6 and 6. This results in the following equivalent system: The y terms are now lined up to eliminate. Back substitute. Answer: (1, 2)   Sometimes linear systems are not given in standard form. When this is the case, it is best to first rearrange the equations before beginning the steps to solve by elimination.   Example 3: Solve by elimination: { 5 x + 12 y = 11 3 y = 4 x + 1 . Solution: First, rewrite the second equation in standard form. This results in the following equivalent system where like terms are aligned in columns: We can eliminate the term with variable y if we multiply the second equation by −4. Next, we add the equations together, Back substitute. Answer: (1/3, 7/9)   Try this! Solve by elimination: { 2 x + y = − 3 − 3 x − 2 y = 4 . Answer: (−2, 1) Video Solution At this point, we explore what happens when solving dependent and inconsistent systems using the elimination method.   Example 4: Solve by elimination: { 3 x − y = 7 6 x − 2 y = 14 . Solution: To eliminate the variable x, we could multiply the first equation by −2. Now adding the equations we have A true statement indicates that this is a dependent system. The lines coincide, and we need y in terms of x to present the solution set in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Choose one of the original equations and solve for y. Since the equations are equivalent, it does not matter which one we choose. Answer: ( x ,   3 x − 7 )   Example 5: Solve by elimination: { − x + 3 y = 9   2 x − 6 y = 12 . Solution: We can eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by 2. Now adding the equations we have A false statement indicates that the system is inconsistent. The lines are parallel and do not intersect. Answer: No solution, ∅   Try this! Solve by elimination: { 3 x + 15 y = − 15 2 x + 10 y = 30 . Answer: No solution, ∅ Video Solution  || Clearing Fractions and Decimals Given a linear system where the equations have fractional coefficients, it is usually best to clear the fractions before beginning the elimination method.   Example 6: Solve: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ − 1 10 x + 1 2 y = 4 5   1 7 x + 1 3 y = − 2 21 . Solution: Recall that we can clear fractions by multiplying both sides of an equation by the least common denominator (LCD). Take care to distribute and then simplify. This results in an equivalent system where the equations have integer coefficients, Solve using the elimination method. Back substitute. Answer: (−3, 1)   We can use a similar technique to clear decimals before solving.   Example 7: Solve: { 3 x − 0.6 y = − 0.9 − 0.5 x + 0.12 y = 0.16 . Solution: Multiply each equation by the lowest power of 10 necessary to result in integer coefficients. In this case, multiply the first equation by 10 and the second equation by 100. This results in an equivalent system where the equations have integer coefficients: Solve using the elimination method. Back substitute. Answer: (−0.2, 0.5)   Try this! Solve using elimination: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ 1 3 x − 2 3 y = 3 1 3 x − 1 2 y = 8 3 . Answer: (5, −2) Video Solution  ||  || Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We now have the techniques needed to solve linear systems. For this reason, we are no longer limited to using one variable when setting up equations that model applications. If we translate an application to a mathematical setup using two variables, then we need to form a linear system with two equations.   Example 1: The sum of two numbers is 40 and their difference is 8. Find the numbers. Solution: Identify variables. Set up equations: When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first key phrase, “the sum of the two numbers is 40,” translates as follows: And the second key phrase, “the difference is 8,” leads us to the second equation: Therefore, our algebraic setup consists of the following system: Solve: We can solve the resulting system using any method of our choosing. Here we choose to solve by elimination. Adding the equations together eliminates the variable y. Once we have x, back substitute to find y. Check: The sum of the two numbers should be 42 and their difference 8. Answer: The two numbers are 24 and 16.   Example 2: The sum of 9 times a larger number and twice a smaller is 6. The difference of 3 times the larger and the smaller is 7. Find the numbers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the larger and smaller number. The first sentence describes a sum and the second sentence describes a difference. This leads to the following system: Solve using the elimination method. Multiply the second equation by 2 and add. Back substitute to find y. Answer: The larger number is 4/3 and the smaller number is −3.   Try this! The sum of two numbers is 3. When twice the smaller number is subtracted from 6 times the larger the result is 22. Find the numbers. Answer: The two numbers are −1/2 and 7/2. Video Solution  || Interest and Money Problems In this section, the interest and money problems Applications involving simple interest and money. should seem familiar. The difference is that we will be making use of two variables when setting up the algebraic equations.   Example 3: A roll of 32 bills contains only $5 bills and $10 bills. If the value of the roll is $220, then how many of each bill are in the roll? Solution: Begin by identifying the variables. When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first equation is created from the fact that there are 32 bills. The second equation sums the value of each bill: the total value is $220. Present both equations as a system; this is our algebraic setup. Here we choose to solve by elimination, although substitution would work just as well. Eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by −5. Now add the equations together: Once we have y, the number of $10 bills, back substitute to find x. Answer: There are twenty $5 bills and twelve $10 bills. The check is left to the reader.   Example 4: A total of $6,300 was invested in two accounts. Part was invested in a CD at a 4 1 2 % annual interest rate and part was invested in a money market fund at a 3 3 4 % annual interest rate. If the total simple interest for one year was $267.75, then how much was invested in each account? Solution: The total amount in both accounts can be expressed as To set up a second equation, use the fact that the total interest was $267.75. Recall that the interest for one year is the interest rate times the principal ( I = p r t = p r ⋅ 1 = p r ). Use this to add the interest in both accounts. Be sure to use the decimal equivalents for the interest rates given as percentages. These two equations together form the following linear system: Eliminate y by multiplying the first equation by −0.0375. Next, add the equations together to eliminate the variable y. Back substitute. Answer: $4,200 was invested at 4 1 2 % and $2,100 was invested at 3 3 4 % .   At this point, we should be able to solve these types of problems in two ways: with one variable and now with two variables. Setting up word problems with two variables often simplifies the entire process, particularly when the relationships between the variables are not so clear.   Try this! On the first day of a two-day meeting, 10 coffees and 10 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $20.00. Since nobody drank the coffee and all the doughnuts were eaten, the next day only 2 coffees and 14 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $13.00. How much did each coffee and each doughnut cost? Answer: Coffee: $1.25; doughnut: $0.75 Video Solution  || Mixture Problems Mixture problems Applications involving a mixture of amounts usually given as a percentage of some total. often include a percentage and some total amount. It is important to make a distinction between these two types of quantities. For example, if a problem states that a 20-ounce container is filled with a 2% saline (salt) solution, then this means that the container is filled with a mixture of salt and water as follows: Percentage Amount Salt 2% = 0.02 0.02(20 ounces) = 0.4 ounces Water 98% = 0.98 0.98(20 ounces) = 19.6 ounces In other words, we multiply the percentage times the total to get the amount of each part of the mixture.   Example 5: A 2% saline solution is to be combined and mixed with a 5% saline solution to produce 72 ounces of a 2.5% saline solution. How much of each is needed? Solution: The total amount of saline solution needed is 72 ounces. This leads to one equation, The second equation adds up the amount of salt in the correct percentages. The amount of salt is obtained by multiplying the percentage times the amount, where the variables x and y represent the amounts of the solutions. The algebraic setup consists of both equations presented as a system: Solve. Back substitute. Answer: We need 60 ounces of the 2% saline solution and 12 ounces of the 5% saline solution.   Example 6: A 50% alcohol solution is to be mixed with a 10% alcohol solution to create an 8-ounce mixture of a 32% alcohol solution. How much of each is needed? Solution: The total amount of the mixture must be 8 ounces. The second equation adds up the amount of alcohol from each solution in the correct percentages. The amount of alcohol in the end result is 32% of 8 ounces, or 0.032(8). Now we can form a system of two linear equations and two variables as follows: In this example, multiply the second equation by 100 to eliminate the decimals. In addition, multiply the first equation by −10 to line up the variable y to eliminate. We obtain the following equivalent system: Add the equations and then solve for x: Back substitute. Answer: To obtain 8 ounces of a 32% alcohol mixture we need to mix 4.4 ounces of the 50% alcohol solution and 3.6 ounces of the 10% solution.   Try this! A 70% antifreeze concentrate is to be mixed with water to produce a 5-gallon mixture containing 28% antifreeze. How much water and antifreeze concentrate is needed? Answer: We need to mix 3 gallons of water with 2 gallons of antifreeze concentrate. Video Solution  || Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Recall that the distance traveled is equal to the average rate times the time traveled at that rate, D = r ⋅ t . These uniform motion problems Applications relating distance, average rate, and time. usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize that data in a chart and then set up a linear system. In this section, you are encouraged to use two variables.   Example 7: An executive traveled a total of 8 hours and 1,930 miles by car and by plane. Driving to the airport by car, she averaged 60 miles per hour. In the air, the plane averaged 350 miles per hour. How long did it take her to drive to the airport? Solution: We are asked to find the time it takes her to drive to the airport; this indicates that time is the unknown quantity. Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. The distance column and the time column of the chart help us to set up the following linear system. Solve. Now back substitute to find the time it took to drive to the airport x: Answer: It took her 3 hours to drive to the airport.   It is not always the case that time is the unknown quantity. Read the problem carefully and identify what you are asked to find; this defines your variables.   Example 8: Flying with the wind, an airplane traveled 1,365 miles in 3 hours. The plane then turned against the wind and traveled another 870 miles in 2 hours. Find the speed of the airplane and the speed of the wind. Solution: There is no obvious relationship between the speed of the plane and the speed of the wind. For this reason, use two variables as follows: Use the following chart to organize the data: With the wind, the airplane’s total speed is x + w . Flying against the wind, the total speed is x − w . Use the rows of the chart along with the formula D = r ⋅ t to construct a linear system that models this problem. Take care to group the quantities that represent the rate in parentheses. If we divide both sides of the first equation by 3 and both sides of the second equation by 2, then we obtain the following equivalent system: Back substitute. Answer: The speed of the airplane is 445 miles per hour and the speed of the wind is 10 miles per hour.   Try this! A boat traveled 24 miles downstream in 2 hours. The return trip, which was against the current, took twice as long. What are the speeds of the boat and of the current? Answer: The speed of the boat is 9 miles per hour and the speed of the current is 3 miles per hour. Video Solution  ||  || Solutions to Systems of Linear Inequalities A system of linear inequalities A set of two or more linear inequalities that define the conditions to be considered simultaneously. consists of a set of two or more linear inequalities with the same variables. The inequalities define the conditions that are to be considered simultaneously. For example, We know that each inequality in the set contains infinitely many ordered pair solutions defined by a region in a rectangular coordinate plane. When considering two of these inequalities together, the intersection of these sets defines the set of simultaneous ordered pair solutions. When we graph each of the above inequalities separately, we have When graphed on the same set of axes, the intersection can be determined. The intersection is shaded darker and the final graph of the solution set is presented as follows: The graph suggests that (3, 2) is a solution because it is in the intersection. To verify this, show that it solves both of the original inequalities: Points on the solid boundary are included in the set of simultaneous solutions and points on the dashed boundary are not. Consider the point (−1, 0) on the solid boundary defined by y = 2 x + 2 and verify that it solves the original system: Notice that this point satisfies both inequalities and thus is included in the solution set. Now consider the point (2, 0) on the dashed boundary defined by y = x − 2 and verify that it does not solve the original system: This point does not satisfy both inequalities and thus is not included in the solution set.  || Solving Systems of Linear Inequalities Solutions to a system of linear inequalities are the ordered pairs that solve all the inequalities in the system. Therefore, to solve these systems, graph the solution sets of the inequalities on the same set of axes and determine where they intersect. This intersection, or overlap, defines the region of common ordered pair solutions.   Example 1: Graph the solution set: { − 2 x + y > − 4 3 x − 6 y ≥ 6 . Solution: To facilitate the graphing process, we first solve for y. For the first inequality, we use a dashed boundary defined by y = 2 x − 4 and shade all points above the line. For the second inequality, we use a solid boundary defined by y = 1 2 x − 1 and shade all points below. The intersection is darkened. Now we present the solution with only the intersection shaded. Answer:   Example 2: Graph the solution set: { − 2 x + 3 y > 6 4 x − 6 y > 12 . Solution: Begin by solving both inequalities for y. Use a dashed line for each boundary. For the first inequality, shade all points above the boundary. For the second inequality, shade all points below the boundary. As you can see, there is no intersection of these two shaded regions. Therefore, there are no simultaneous solutions. Answer: No solution, ∅   Example 3: Graph the solution set: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ y ≥ − 4 y < x + 3 y ≤ − 3 x + 3 . Solution: The intersection of all the shaded regions forms the triangular region as pictured darkened below: After graphing all three inequalities on the same set of axes, we determine that the intersection lies in the triangular region pictured. Answer: The graphic suggests that (−1, 1) is a common point. As a check, substitute that point into the inequalities and verify that it solves all three conditions.  || 
book2_chapter4_1	 || Definition of a Linear System Real-world applications are often modeled using more than one variable and more than one equation. A system of equations A set of two or more equations with the same variables. consists of a set of two or more equations with the same variables. In this section, we will study linear systems In this section, we restrict our study to systems of two linear equations with two variables. consisting of two linear equations each with two variables. For example, A solution to a linear system An ordered pair that satisfies both equations and corresponds to a point of intersection. , or simultaneous solution Used when referring to a solution of a system of equations. , to a linear system is an ordered pair (x, y) that solves both of the equations. In this case, (3, 2) is the only solution. To check that an ordered pair is a solution, substitute the corresponding x- and y-values into each equation and then simplify to see if you obtain a true statement for both equations.   Example 1: Determine whether (1, 0) is a solution to the system { x − y = 1 − 2 x + 3 y = 5 . Solution: Substitute the appropriate values into both equations. Answer: Since (1, 0) does not satisfy both equations, it is not a solution.   Try this! Is (−2, 4) a solution to the system {   x − y = − 6 − 2 x + 3 y = 16 ? Answer: Yes Video Solution  || Solve by Graphing Geometrically, a linear system consists of two lines, where a solution is a point of intersection. To illustrate this, we will graph the following linear system with a solution of (3, 2): First, rewrite the equations in slope-intercept form so that we may easily graph them. Next, replace these forms of the original equations in the system to obtain what is called an equivalent system A system consisting of equivalent equations that share the same solution set. . Equivalent systems share the same solution set. If we graph both of the lines on the same set of axes, then we can see that the point of intersection is indeed (3, 2), the solution to the system. To summarize, linear systems described in this section consist of two linear equations each with two variables. A solution is an ordered pair that corresponds to a point where the two lines in the rectangular coordinate plane intersect. Therefore, we can solve linear systems by graphing both lines on the same set of axes and determining the point where they cross. When graphing the lines, take care to choose a good scale and use a straightedge to draw the line through the points; accuracy is very important here. The steps for solving linear systems using the graphing method A means of solving a system by graphing the equations on the same set of axes and determining where they intersect. are outlined in the following example.   Example 2: Solve by graphing: { x − y = − 4 2 x + y = 1 . Solution: Step 1: Rewrite the linear equations in slope-intercept form. Step 2: Write the equivalent system and graph the lines on the same set of axes. Step 3: Use the graph to estimate the point where the lines intersect and check to see if it solves the original system. In the above graph, the point of intersection appears to be (−1, 3). Answer: (−1, 3)   Example 3: Solve by graphing: { 2 x + y = 2 − 2 x + 3 y = − 18 . Solution: We first solve each equation for y to obtain an equivalent system where the lines are in slope-intercept form. Graph the lines and determine the point of intersection. Answer: (3, −4)   Example 4: Solve by graphing: { 3 x + y = 6 y = − 3 . Solution: Answer: (3, −3)   The graphing method for solving linear systems is not ideal when the solution consists of coordinates that are not integers. There will be more accurate algebraic methods in sections to come, but for now, the goal is to understand the geometry involved when solving systems. It is important to remember that the solutions to a system correspond to the point, or points, where the graphs of the equations intersect.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { − x + y = 6   5 x + 2 y = − 2 . Answer: (−2, 4) Video Solution  || Dependent and Inconsistent Systems Systems with at least one solution are called consistent systems A system with at least one solution. . Up to this point, all of the examples have been of consistent systems with exactly one ordered pair solution. It turns out that this is not always the case. Sometimes systems consist of two linear equations that are equivalent. If this is the case, the two lines are the same and when graphed will coincide. Hence the solution set consists of all the points on the line. This is a dependent system A system that consists of equivalent equations with infinitely many ordered pair solutions, denoted by (x, mx + b). . Given a consistent linear system with two variables, there are two possible results: The solutions to independent systems A system of equations with one ordered pair solution (x, y). are ordered pairs (x, y). We need some way to express the solution sets to dependent systems, since these systems have infinitely many solutions, or points of intersection. Recall that any line can be written in slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . Here, y depends on x. So we may express all the ordered pair solutions ( x ,   y ) in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) , where x is any real number.   Example 5: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 3 y = − 9   4 x − 6 y = 18 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation in the system. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and same y-intercept. They are, in fact, the same line. And the system is dependent. Answer: ( x ,   2 3 x − 3 )   In this example, it is important to notice that the two lines have the same slope and same y-intercept. This tells us that the two equations are equivalent and that the simultaneous solutions are all the points on the line y = 2 3 x − 3 . This is a dependent system, and the infinitely many solutions are expressed using the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Other resources may express this set using set notation, {(x, y) | y = 2 3 x − 3 }, which reads “the set of all ordered pairs (x, y) such that y equals two-thirds x minus 3.” Sometimes the lines do not cross and there is no point of intersection. Such systems have no solution, Ø, and are called inconsistent systems A system with no simultaneous solution. .   Example 6: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 5 y = − 15 − 4 x + 10 y = 10 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and different y-intercepts. Therefore, they are parallel and will never intersect. Answer: There is no simultaneous solution, Ø.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { x + y = − 1 − 2 x − 2 y = 2 . Answer: ( x ,   − x − 1 ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4_1_1	Definition of a Linear System Real-world applications are often modeled using more than one variable and more than one equation. A system of equations A set of two or more equations with the same variables. consists of a set of two or more equations with the same variables. In this section, we will study linear systems In this section, we restrict our study to systems of two linear equations with two variables. consisting of two linear equations each with two variables. For example, A solution to a linear system An ordered pair that satisfies both equations and corresponds to a point of intersection. , or simultaneous solution Used when referring to a solution of a system of equations. , to a linear system is an ordered pair (x, y) that solves both of the equations. In this case, (3, 2) is the only solution. To check that an ordered pair is a solution, substitute the corresponding x- and y-values into each equation and then simplify to see if you obtain a true statement for both equations.   Example 1: Determine whether (1, 0) is a solution to the system { x − y = 1 − 2 x + 3 y = 5 . Solution: Substitute the appropriate values into both equations. Answer: Since (1, 0) does not satisfy both equations, it is not a solution.   Try this! Is (−2, 4) a solution to the system {   x − y = − 6 − 2 x + 3 y = 16 ? Answer: Yes Video Solution Definition of a Linear System Real-world applications are often modeled using more than one variable and more than one equation. A system of equations A set of two or more equations with the same variables. consists of a set of two or more equations with the same variables. In this section, we will study linear systems In this section, we restrict our study to systems of two linear equations with two variables. consisting of two linear equations each with two variables. For example, A solution to a linear system An ordered pair that satisfies both equations and corresponds to a point of intersection. , or simultaneous solution Used when referring to a solution of a system of equations. , to a linear system is an ordered pair (x, y) that solves both of the equations. In this case, (3, 2) is the only solution. To check that an ordered pair is a solution, substitute the corresponding x- and y-values into each equation and then simplify to see if you obtain a true statement for both equations.   Example 1: Determine whether (1, 0) is a solution to the system { x − y = 1 − 2 x + 3 y = 5 . Solution: Substitute the appropriate values into both equations. Answer: Since (1, 0) does not satisfy both equations, it is not a solution.   Try this! Is (−2, 4) a solution to the system {   x − y = − 6 − 2 x + 3 y = 16 ? Answer: Yes Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4_1_2	Solve by Graphing Geometrically, a linear system consists of two lines, where a solution is a point of intersection. To illustrate this, we will graph the following linear system with a solution of (3, 2): First, rewrite the equations in slope-intercept form so that we may easily graph them. Next, replace these forms of the original equations in the system to obtain what is called an equivalent system A system consisting of equivalent equations that share the same solution set. . Equivalent systems share the same solution set. If we graph both of the lines on the same set of axes, then we can see that the point of intersection is indeed (3, 2), the solution to the system. To summarize, linear systems described in this section consist of two linear equations each with two variables. A solution is an ordered pair that corresponds to a point where the two lines in the rectangular coordinate plane intersect. Therefore, we can solve linear systems by graphing both lines on the same set of axes and determining the point where they cross. When graphing the lines, take care to choose a good scale and use a straightedge to draw the line through the points; accuracy is very important here. The steps for solving linear systems using the graphing method A means of solving a system by graphing the equations on the same set of axes and determining where they intersect. are outlined in the following example.   Example 2: Solve by graphing: { x − y = − 4 2 x + y = 1 . Solution: Step 1: Rewrite the linear equations in slope-intercept form. Step 2: Write the equivalent system and graph the lines on the same set of axes. Step 3: Use the graph to estimate the point where the lines intersect and check to see if it solves the original system. In the above graph, the point of intersection appears to be (−1, 3). Answer: (−1, 3)   Example 3: Solve by graphing: { 2 x + y = 2 − 2 x + 3 y = − 18 . Solution: We first solve each equation for y to obtain an equivalent system where the lines are in slope-intercept form. Graph the lines and determine the point of intersection. Answer: (3, −4)   Example 4: Solve by graphing: { 3 x + y = 6 y = − 3 . Solution: Answer: (3, −3)   The graphing method for solving linear systems is not ideal when the solution consists of coordinates that are not integers. There will be more accurate algebraic methods in sections to come, but for now, the goal is to understand the geometry involved when solving systems. It is important to remember that the solutions to a system correspond to the point, or points, where the graphs of the equations intersect.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { − x + y = 6   5 x + 2 y = − 2 . Answer: (−2, 4) Video Solution Solve by Graphing Geometrically, a linear system consists of two lines, where a solution is a point of intersection. To illustrate this, we will graph the following linear system with a solution of (3, 2): First, rewrite the equations in slope-intercept form so that we may easily graph them. Next, replace these forms of the original equations in the system to obtain what is called an equivalent system A system consisting of equivalent equations that share the same solution set. . Equivalent systems share the same solution set. If we graph both of the lines on the same set of axes, then we can see that the point of intersection is indeed (3, 2), the solution to the system. To summarize, linear systems described in this section consist of two linear equations each with two variables. A solution is an ordered pair that corresponds to a point where the two lines in the rectangular coordinate plane intersect. Therefore, we can solve linear systems by graphing both lines on the same set of axes and determining the point where they cross. When graphing the lines, take care to choose a good scale and use a straightedge to draw the line through the points; accuracy is very important here. The steps for solving linear systems using the graphing method A means of solving a system by graphing the equations on the same set of axes and determining where they intersect. are outlined in the following example.   Example 2: Solve by graphing: { x − y = − 4 2 x + y = 1 . Solution: Step 1: Rewrite the linear equations in slope-intercept form. Step 2: Write the equivalent system and graph the lines on the same set of axes. Step 3: Use the graph to estimate the point where the lines intersect and check to see if it solves the original system. In the above graph, the point of intersection appears to be (−1, 3). Answer: (−1, 3)   Example 3: Solve by graphing: { 2 x + y = 2 − 2 x + 3 y = − 18 . Solution: We first solve each equation for y to obtain an equivalent system where the lines are in slope-intercept form. Graph the lines and determine the point of intersection. Answer: (3, −4)   Example 4: Solve by graphing: { 3 x + y = 6 y = − 3 . Solution: Answer: (3, −3)   The graphing method for solving linear systems is not ideal when the solution consists of coordinates that are not integers. There will be more accurate algebraic methods in sections to come, but for now, the goal is to understand the geometry involved when solving systems. It is important to remember that the solutions to a system correspond to the point, or points, where the graphs of the equations intersect.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { − x + y = 6   5 x + 2 y = − 2 . Answer: (−2, 4) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4_1_3	Dependent and Inconsistent Systems Systems with at least one solution are called consistent systems A system with at least one solution. . Up to this point, all of the examples have been of consistent systems with exactly one ordered pair solution. It turns out that this is not always the case. Sometimes systems consist of two linear equations that are equivalent. If this is the case, the two lines are the same and when graphed will coincide. Hence the solution set consists of all the points on the line. This is a dependent system A system that consists of equivalent equations with infinitely many ordered pair solutions, denoted by (x, mx + b). . Given a consistent linear system with two variables, there are two possible results: The solutions to independent systems A system of equations with one ordered pair solution (x, y). are ordered pairs (x, y). We need some way to express the solution sets to dependent systems, since these systems have infinitely many solutions, or points of intersection. Recall that any line can be written in slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . Here, y depends on x. So we may express all the ordered pair solutions ( x ,   y ) in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) , where x is any real number.   Example 5: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 3 y = − 9   4 x − 6 y = 18 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation in the system. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and same y-intercept. They are, in fact, the same line. And the system is dependent. Answer: ( x ,   2 3 x − 3 )   In this example, it is important to notice that the two lines have the same slope and same y-intercept. This tells us that the two equations are equivalent and that the simultaneous solutions are all the points on the line y = 2 3 x − 3 . This is a dependent system, and the infinitely many solutions are expressed using the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Other resources may express this set using set notation, {(x, y) | y = 2 3 x − 3 }, which reads “the set of all ordered pairs (x, y) such that y equals two-thirds x minus 3.” Sometimes the lines do not cross and there is no point of intersection. Such systems have no solution, Ø, and are called inconsistent systems A system with no simultaneous solution. .   Example 6: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 5 y = − 15 − 4 x + 10 y = 10 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and different y-intercepts. Therefore, they are parallel and will never intersect. Answer: There is no simultaneous solution, Ø.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { x + y = − 1 − 2 x − 2 y = 2 . Answer: ( x ,   − x − 1 ) Video Solution Dependent and Inconsistent Systems Systems with at least one solution are called consistent systems A system with at least one solution. . Up to this point, all of the examples have been of consistent systems with exactly one ordered pair solution. It turns out that this is not always the case. Sometimes systems consist of two linear equations that are equivalent. If this is the case, the two lines are the same and when graphed will coincide. Hence the solution set consists of all the points on the line. This is a dependent system A system that consists of equivalent equations with infinitely many ordered pair solutions, denoted by (x, mx + b). . Given a consistent linear system with two variables, there are two possible results: The solutions to independent systems A system of equations with one ordered pair solution (x, y). are ordered pairs (x, y). We need some way to express the solution sets to dependent systems, since these systems have infinitely many solutions, or points of intersection. Recall that any line can be written in slope-intercept form, y = m x + b . Here, y depends on x. So we may express all the ordered pair solutions ( x ,   y ) in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) , where x is any real number.   Example 5: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 3 y = − 9   4 x − 6 y = 18 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation in the system. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and same y-intercept. They are, in fact, the same line. And the system is dependent. Answer: ( x ,   2 3 x − 3 )   In this example, it is important to notice that the two lines have the same slope and same y-intercept. This tells us that the two equations are equivalent and that the simultaneous solutions are all the points on the line y = 2 3 x − 3 . This is a dependent system, and the infinitely many solutions are expressed using the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Other resources may express this set using set notation, {(x, y) | y = 2 3 x − 3 }, which reads “the set of all ordered pairs (x, y) such that y equals two-thirds x minus 3.” Sometimes the lines do not cross and there is no point of intersection. Such systems have no solution, Ø, and are called inconsistent systems A system with no simultaneous solution. .   Example 6: Solve by graphing: { − 2 x + 5 y = − 15 − 4 x + 10 y = 10 . Solution: Determine slope-intercept form for each linear equation. In slope-intercept form, we can easily see that the system consists of two lines with the same slope and different y-intercepts. Therefore, they are parallel and will never intersect. Answer: There is no simultaneous solution, Ø.   Try this! Solve by graphing: { x + y = − 1 − 2 x − 2 y = 2 . Answer: ( x ,   − x − 1 ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4_2	 || The Substitution Method In this section, we will define a completely algebraic technique for solving systems. The idea is to solve one equation for one of the variables and substitute the result into the other equation. After performing this substitution step, we will be left with a single equation with one variable, which can be solved using algebra. This is called the substitution method A means of solving a linear system by solving for one of the variables and substituting the result into the other equation. , and the steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Solve by substitution: { 2 x + y = 7 3 x − 2 y = − 7 . Solution: Step 1: Solve for either variable in either equation. If you choose the first equation, you can isolate y in one step. Step 2: Substitute the expression − 2 x + 7 for the y variable in the other equation. This leaves you with an equivalent equation with one variable, which can be solved using the techniques learned up to this point. Step 3: Solve for the remaining variable. To solve for x, first distribute −2: Step 4: Back substitute Once a value is found for a variable, substitute it back into one of the original equations, or their equivalent equations, to determine the corresponding value of the other variable. to find the value of the other coordinate. Substitute x = 1 into either of the original equations or their equivalents. Typically, we use the equivalent equation that we found when isolating a variable in step 1. The solution to the system is (1, 5). Be sure to present the solution as an ordered pair. Step 5: Check. Verify that these coordinates solve both equations of the original system: The graph of this linear system follows: The substitution method for solving systems is a completely algebraic method. Thus graphing the lines is not required. Answer: (1, 5)   Example 2: Solve by substitution: { 2 x − y = 12 x − y = 3 . Solution: In this example, we can see that x has a coefficient of 1 in the second equation. This indicates that it can be isolated in one step as follows: Substitute 3 + y for x in the first equation. Use parentheses and take care to distribute. Use x = 3 + y to find x. Answer: (9, 6). The check is left to the reader.   Example 3: Solve by substitution: { 3 x − 5 y = 17 x = − 1 . Solution: In this example, the variable x is already isolated. Hence we can substitute x = − 1 into the first equation. Answer: (−1, −4). It is a good exercise to graph this particular system to compare the substitution method to the graphing method for solving systems.   Try this! Solve by substitution: { 3 x + y = 4 8 x + 2 y = 10 . Answer: (1, 1) Video Solution Solving systems algebraically frequently requires work with fractions.   Example 4: Solve by substitution: { 2 x + 8 y = 5 24 x − 4 y = − 15 . Solution: Begin by solving for x in the first equation. Next, substitute into the second equation and solve for y. Back substitute into the equation used in the substitution step: Answer: (−1/2, 3/4)   As we know, not all linear systems have only one ordered pair solution. Recall that some systems have infinitely many ordered pair solutions and some do not have any solutions. Next, we explore what happens when using the substitution method to solve a dependent system.   Example 5: Solve by substitution: { − 5 x + y = − 1 10 x − 2 y = 2 . Solution: Since the first equation has a term with coefficient 1, we choose to solve for that first. Next, substitute this expression in for y in the second equation. This process led to a true statement; hence the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution. This indicates that the system is dependent. The simultaneous solutions take the form (x, mx + b), or in this case, (x, 5x − 1), where x is any real number. Answer: ( x ,   5 x − 1 )   To have a better understanding of the previous example, rewrite both equations in slope-intercept form and graph them on the same set of axes. We can see that both equations represent the same line, and thus the system is dependent. Now explore what happens when solving an inconsistent system using the substitution method.   Example 6: Solve by substitution: { − 7 x + 3 y = 3 14 x − 6 y = − 16 . Solution: Solve for y in the first equation. Substitute into the second equation and solve. Solving leads to a false statement. This indicates that the equation is a contradiction. There is no solution for x and hence no solution to the system. Answer: No solution, Ø   A false statement indicates that the system is inconsistent, or in geometric terms, that the lines are parallel and do not intersect. To illustrate this, determine the slope-intercept form of each line and graph them on the same set of axes. In slope-intercept form, it is easy to see that the two lines have the same slope but different y-intercepts.   Try this! Solve by substitution: { 2 x − 5 y = 3 4 x − 10 y = 6 . Answer: ( x ,   2 5 x − 3 5 ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4_2_1	The Substitution Method In this section, we will define a completely algebraic technique for solving systems. The idea is to solve one equation for one of the variables and substitute the result into the other equation. After performing this substitution step, we will be left with a single equation with one variable, which can be solved using algebra. This is called the substitution method A means of solving a linear system by solving for one of the variables and substituting the result into the other equation. , and the steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Solve by substitution: { 2 x + y = 7 3 x − 2 y = − 7 . Solution: Step 1: Solve for either variable in either equation. If you choose the first equation, you can isolate y in one step. Step 2: Substitute the expression − 2 x + 7 for the y variable in the other equation. This leaves you with an equivalent equation with one variable, which can be solved using the techniques learned up to this point. Step 3: Solve for the remaining variable. To solve for x, first distribute −2: Step 4: Back substitute Once a value is found for a variable, substitute it back into one of the original equations, or their equivalent equations, to determine the corresponding value of the other variable. to find the value of the other coordinate. Substitute x = 1 into either of the original equations or their equivalents. Typically, we use the equivalent equation that we found when isolating a variable in step 1. The solution to the system is (1, 5). Be sure to present the solution as an ordered pair. Step 5: Check. Verify that these coordinates solve both equations of the original system: The graph of this linear system follows: The substitution method for solving systems is a completely algebraic method. Thus graphing the lines is not required. Answer: (1, 5)   Example 2: Solve by substitution: { 2 x − y = 12 x − y = 3 . Solution: In this example, we can see that x has a coefficient of 1 in the second equation. This indicates that it can be isolated in one step as follows: Substitute 3 + y for x in the first equation. Use parentheses and take care to distribute. Use x = 3 + y to find x. Answer: (9, 6). The check is left to the reader.   Example 3: Solve by substitution: { 3 x − 5 y = 17 x = − 1 . Solution: In this example, the variable x is already isolated. Hence we can substitute x = − 1 into the first equation. Answer: (−1, −4). It is a good exercise to graph this particular system to compare the substitution method to the graphing method for solving systems.   Try this! Solve by substitution: { 3 x + y = 4 8 x + 2 y = 10 . Answer: (1, 1) Video Solution Solving systems algebraically frequently requires work with fractions.   Example 4: Solve by substitution: { 2 x + 8 y = 5 24 x − 4 y = − 15 . Solution: Begin by solving for x in the first equation. Next, substitute into the second equation and solve for y. Back substitute into the equation used in the substitution step: Answer: (−1/2, 3/4)   As we know, not all linear systems have only one ordered pair solution. Recall that some systems have infinitely many ordered pair solutions and some do not have any solutions. Next, we explore what happens when using the substitution method to solve a dependent system.   Example 5: Solve by substitution: { − 5 x + y = − 1 10 x − 2 y = 2 . Solution: Since the first equation has a term with coefficient 1, we choose to solve for that first. Next, substitute this expression in for y in the second equation. This process led to a true statement; hence the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution. This indicates that the system is dependent. The simultaneous solutions take the form (x, mx + b), or in this case, (x, 5x − 1), where x is any real number. Answer: ( x ,   5 x − 1 )   To have a better understanding of the previous example, rewrite both equations in slope-intercept form and graph them on the same set of axes. We can see that both equations represent the same line, and thus the system is dependent. Now explore what happens when solving an inconsistent system using the substitution method.   Example 6: Solve by substitution: { − 7 x + 3 y = 3 14 x − 6 y = − 16 . Solution: Solve for y in the first equation. Substitute into the second equation and solve. Solving leads to a false statement. This indicates that the equation is a contradiction. There is no solution for x and hence no solution to the system. Answer: No solution, Ø   A false statement indicates that the system is inconsistent, or in geometric terms, that the lines are parallel and do not intersect. To illustrate this, determine the slope-intercept form of each line and graph them on the same set of axes. In slope-intercept form, it is easy to see that the two lines have the same slope but different y-intercepts.   Try this! Solve by substitution: { 2 x − 5 y = 3 4 x − 10 y = 6 . Answer: ( x ,   2 5 x − 3 5 ) Video Solution The Substitution Method In this section, we will define a completely algebraic technique for solving systems. The idea is to solve one equation for one of the variables and substitute the result into the other equation. After performing this substitution step, we will be left with a single equation with one variable, which can be solved using algebra. This is called the substitution method A means of solving a linear system by solving for one of the variables and substituting the result into the other equation. , and the steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Solve by substitution: { 2 x + y = 7 3 x − 2 y = − 7 . Solution: Step 1: Solve for either variable in either equation. If you choose the first equation, you can isolate y in one step. Step 2: Substitute the expression − 2 x + 7 for the y variable in the other equation. This leaves you with an equivalent equation with one variable, which can be solved using the techniques learned up to this point. Step 3: Solve for the remaining variable. To solve for x, first distribute −2: Step 4: Back substitute Once a value is found for a variable, substitute it back into one of the original equations, or their equivalent equations, to determine the corresponding value of the other variable. to find the value of the other coordinate. Substitute x = 1 into either of the original equations or their equivalents. Typically, we use the equivalent equation that we found when isolating a variable in step 1. The solution to the system is (1, 5). Be sure to present the solution as an ordered pair. Step 5: Check. Verify that these coordinates solve both equations of the original system: The graph of this linear system follows: The substitution method for solving systems is a completely algebraic method. Thus graphing the lines is not required. Answer: (1, 5)   Example 2: Solve by substitution: { 2 x − y = 12 x − y = 3 . Solution: In this example, we can see that x has a coefficient of 1 in the second equation. This indicates that it can be isolated in one step as follows: Substitute 3 + y for x in the first equation. Use parentheses and take care to distribute. Use x = 3 + y to find x. Answer: (9, 6). The check is left to the reader.   Example 3: Solve by substitution: { 3 x − 5 y = 17 x = − 1 . Solution: In this example, the variable x is already isolated. Hence we can substitute x = − 1 into the first equation. Answer: (−1, −4). It is a good exercise to graph this particular system to compare the substitution method to the graphing method for solving systems.   Try this! Solve by substitution: { 3 x + y = 4 8 x + 2 y = 10 . Answer: (1, 1) Video Solution Solving systems algebraically frequently requires work with fractions.   Example 4: Solve by substitution: { 2 x + 8 y = 5 24 x − 4 y = − 15 . Solution: Begin by solving for x in the first equation. Next, substitute into the second equation and solve for y. Back substitute into the equation used in the substitution step: Answer: (−1/2, 3/4)   As we know, not all linear systems have only one ordered pair solution. Recall that some systems have infinitely many ordered pair solutions and some do not have any solutions. Next, we explore what happens when using the substitution method to solve a dependent system.   Example 5: Solve by substitution: { − 5 x + y = − 1 10 x − 2 y = 2 . Solution: Since the first equation has a term with coefficient 1, we choose to solve for that first. Next, substitute this expression in for y in the second equation. This process led to a true statement; hence the equation is an identity and any real number is a solution. This indicates that the system is dependent. The simultaneous solutions take the form (x, mx + b), or in this case, (x, 5x − 1), where x is any real number. Answer: ( x ,   5 x − 1 )   To have a better understanding of the previous example, rewrite both equations in slope-intercept form and graph them on the same set of axes. We can see that both equations represent the same line, and thus the system is dependent. Now explore what happens when solving an inconsistent system using the substitution method.   Example 6: Solve by substitution: { − 7 x + 3 y = 3 14 x − 6 y = − 16 . Solution: Solve for y in the first equation. Substitute into the second equation and solve. Solving leads to a false statement. This indicates that the equation is a contradiction. There is no solution for x and hence no solution to the system. Answer: No solution, Ø   A false statement indicates that the system is inconsistent, or in geometric terms, that the lines are parallel and do not intersect. To illustrate this, determine the slope-intercept form of each line and graph them on the same set of axes. In slope-intercept form, it is easy to see that the two lines have the same slope but different y-intercepts.   Try this! Solve by substitution: { 2 x − 5 y = 3 4 x − 10 y = 6 . Answer: ( x ,   2 5 x − 3 5 ) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4_3	 || The Elimination Method In this section, the goal is to develop another completely algebraic method for solving a system of linear equations. We begin by defining what it means to add equations together. In the following example, notice that if we add the expressions on both sides of the equal sign, we obtain another true statement. This is true in general: if A, B, C, and D are algebraic expressions, then we have the following addition property of equations If A, B, C, and D are algebraic expressions, where A = B and C = D, then A + C = B + D. : For the system we add the two equations together: The sum of y and −y is zero and that term is eliminated. This leaves us with a linear equation with one variable that can be easily solved: At this point, we have the x coordinate of the simultaneous solution, so all that is left to do is back substitute to find the corresponding y-value. Hence the solution to the system is (3, 2). This process describes the elimination (or addition) method A means of solving a system by adding equivalent equations in such a way as to eliminate a variable. for solving linear systems. Of course, the variable is not always so easily eliminated. Typically, we have to find an equivalent system by applying the multiplication property of equality to one or both of the equations as a means to line up one of the variables to eliminate. The goal is to arrange that either the x terms or the y terms are opposites, so that when the equations are added, the terms eliminate. The steps for the elimination method are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Solve by elimination: { 2 x + y = 7 3 x − 2 y = − 7 . Solution: Step 1: Multiply one, or both, of the equations to set up the elimination of one of the variables. In this example, we will eliminate the variable y by multiplying both sides of the first equation by 2. Take care to distribute. This leaves us with an equivalent system where the variable y is lined up to eliminate. Step 2: Add the equations together to eliminate one of the variables. Step 3: Solve for the remaining variable. Step 3: Back substitute into either equation or its equivalent equation. Step 4: Check. Remember that the solution must solve both of the original equations. Answer: (1, 5)   Occasionally, we will have to multiply both equations to line up one of the variables to eliminate. We want the resulting equivalent equations to have terms with opposite coefficients.   Example 2: Solve by elimination: { 5 x − 3 y = − 1 3 x + 2 y = 7 . Solution: We choose to eliminate the terms with variable y because the coefficients have different signs. To do this, we first determine the least common multiple of the coefficients; in this case, the LCM(3, 2) is 6. Therefore, multiply both sides of both equations by the appropriate values to obtain coefficients of −6 and 6. This results in the following equivalent system: The y terms are now lined up to eliminate. Back substitute. Answer: (1, 2)   Sometimes linear systems are not given in standard form. When this is the case, it is best to first rearrange the equations before beginning the steps to solve by elimination.   Example 3: Solve by elimination: { 5 x + 12 y = 11 3 y = 4 x + 1 . Solution: First, rewrite the second equation in standard form. This results in the following equivalent system where like terms are aligned in columns: We can eliminate the term with variable y if we multiply the second equation by −4. Next, we add the equations together, Back substitute. Answer: (1/3, 7/9)   Try this! Solve by elimination: { 2 x + y = − 3 − 3 x − 2 y = 4 . Answer: (−2, 1) Video Solution At this point, we explore what happens when solving dependent and inconsistent systems using the elimination method.   Example 4: Solve by elimination: { 3 x − y = 7 6 x − 2 y = 14 . Solution: To eliminate the variable x, we could multiply the first equation by −2. Now adding the equations we have A true statement indicates that this is a dependent system. The lines coincide, and we need y in terms of x to present the solution set in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Choose one of the original equations and solve for y. Since the equations are equivalent, it does not matter which one we choose. Answer: ( x ,   3 x − 7 )   Example 5: Solve by elimination: { − x + 3 y = 9   2 x − 6 y = 12 . Solution: We can eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by 2. Now adding the equations we have A false statement indicates that the system is inconsistent. The lines are parallel and do not intersect. Answer: No solution, ∅   Try this! Solve by elimination: { 3 x + 15 y = − 15 2 x + 10 y = 30 . Answer: No solution, ∅ Video Solution  || Clearing Fractions and Decimals Given a linear system where the equations have fractional coefficients, it is usually best to clear the fractions before beginning the elimination method.   Example 6: Solve: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ − 1 10 x + 1 2 y = 4 5   1 7 x + 1 3 y = − 2 21 . Solution: Recall that we can clear fractions by multiplying both sides of an equation by the least common denominator (LCD). Take care to distribute and then simplify. This results in an equivalent system where the equations have integer coefficients, Solve using the elimination method. Back substitute. Answer: (−3, 1)   We can use a similar technique to clear decimals before solving.   Example 7: Solve: { 3 x − 0.6 y = − 0.9 − 0.5 x + 0.12 y = 0.16 . Solution: Multiply each equation by the lowest power of 10 necessary to result in integer coefficients. In this case, multiply the first equation by 10 and the second equation by 100. This results in an equivalent system where the equations have integer coefficients: Solve using the elimination method. Back substitute. Answer: (−0.2, 0.5)   Try this! Solve using elimination: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ 1 3 x − 2 3 y = 3 1 3 x − 1 2 y = 8 3 . Answer: (5, −2) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4_3_1	The Elimination Method In this section, the goal is to develop another completely algebraic method for solving a system of linear equations. We begin by defining what it means to add equations together. In the following example, notice that if we add the expressions on both sides of the equal sign, we obtain another true statement. This is true in general: if A, B, C, and D are algebraic expressions, then we have the following addition property of equations If A, B, C, and D are algebraic expressions, where A = B and C = D, then A + C = B + D. : For the system we add the two equations together: The sum of y and −y is zero and that term is eliminated. This leaves us with a linear equation with one variable that can be easily solved: At this point, we have the x coordinate of the simultaneous solution, so all that is left to do is back substitute to find the corresponding y-value. Hence the solution to the system is (3, 2). This process describes the elimination (or addition) method A means of solving a system by adding equivalent equations in such a way as to eliminate a variable. for solving linear systems. Of course, the variable is not always so easily eliminated. Typically, we have to find an equivalent system by applying the multiplication property of equality to one or both of the equations as a means to line up one of the variables to eliminate. The goal is to arrange that either the x terms or the y terms are opposites, so that when the equations are added, the terms eliminate. The steps for the elimination method are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Solve by elimination: { 2 x + y = 7 3 x − 2 y = − 7 . Solution: Step 1: Multiply one, or both, of the equations to set up the elimination of one of the variables. In this example, we will eliminate the variable y by multiplying both sides of the first equation by 2. Take care to distribute. This leaves us with an equivalent system where the variable y is lined up to eliminate. Step 2: Add the equations together to eliminate one of the variables. Step 3: Solve for the remaining variable. Step 3: Back substitute into either equation or its equivalent equation. Step 4: Check. Remember that the solution must solve both of the original equations. Answer: (1, 5)   Occasionally, we will have to multiply both equations to line up one of the variables to eliminate. We want the resulting equivalent equations to have terms with opposite coefficients.   Example 2: Solve by elimination: { 5 x − 3 y = − 1 3 x + 2 y = 7 . Solution: We choose to eliminate the terms with variable y because the coefficients have different signs. To do this, we first determine the least common multiple of the coefficients; in this case, the LCM(3, 2) is 6. Therefore, multiply both sides of both equations by the appropriate values to obtain coefficients of −6 and 6. This results in the following equivalent system: The y terms are now lined up to eliminate. Back substitute. Answer: (1, 2)   Sometimes linear systems are not given in standard form. When this is the case, it is best to first rearrange the equations before beginning the steps to solve by elimination.   Example 3: Solve by elimination: { 5 x + 12 y = 11 3 y = 4 x + 1 . Solution: First, rewrite the second equation in standard form. This results in the following equivalent system where like terms are aligned in columns: We can eliminate the term with variable y if we multiply the second equation by −4. Next, we add the equations together, Back substitute. Answer: (1/3, 7/9)   Try this! Solve by elimination: { 2 x + y = − 3 − 3 x − 2 y = 4 . Answer: (−2, 1) Video Solution At this point, we explore what happens when solving dependent and inconsistent systems using the elimination method.   Example 4: Solve by elimination: { 3 x − y = 7 6 x − 2 y = 14 . Solution: To eliminate the variable x, we could multiply the first equation by −2. Now adding the equations we have A true statement indicates that this is a dependent system. The lines coincide, and we need y in terms of x to present the solution set in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Choose one of the original equations and solve for y. Since the equations are equivalent, it does not matter which one we choose. Answer: ( x ,   3 x − 7 )   Example 5: Solve by elimination: { − x + 3 y = 9   2 x − 6 y = 12 . Solution: We can eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by 2. Now adding the equations we have A false statement indicates that the system is inconsistent. The lines are parallel and do not intersect. Answer: No solution, ∅   Try this! Solve by elimination: { 3 x + 15 y = − 15 2 x + 10 y = 30 . Answer: No solution, ∅ Video Solution The Elimination Method In this section, the goal is to develop another completely algebraic method for solving a system of linear equations. We begin by defining what it means to add equations together. In the following example, notice that if we add the expressions on both sides of the equal sign, we obtain another true statement. This is true in general: if A, B, C, and D are algebraic expressions, then we have the following addition property of equations If A, B, C, and D are algebraic expressions, where A = B and C = D, then A + C = B + D. : For the system we add the two equations together: The sum of y and −y is zero and that term is eliminated. This leaves us with a linear equation with one variable that can be easily solved: At this point, we have the x coordinate of the simultaneous solution, so all that is left to do is back substitute to find the corresponding y-value. Hence the solution to the system is (3, 2). This process describes the elimination (or addition) method A means of solving a system by adding equivalent equations in such a way as to eliminate a variable. for solving linear systems. Of course, the variable is not always so easily eliminated. Typically, we have to find an equivalent system by applying the multiplication property of equality to one or both of the equations as a means to line up one of the variables to eliminate. The goal is to arrange that either the x terms or the y terms are opposites, so that when the equations are added, the terms eliminate. The steps for the elimination method are outlined in the following example.   Example 1: Solve by elimination: { 2 x + y = 7 3 x − 2 y = − 7 . Solution: Step 1: Multiply one, or both, of the equations to set up the elimination of one of the variables. In this example, we will eliminate the variable y by multiplying both sides of the first equation by 2. Take care to distribute. This leaves us with an equivalent system where the variable y is lined up to eliminate. Step 2: Add the equations together to eliminate one of the variables. Step 3: Solve for the remaining variable. Step 3: Back substitute into either equation or its equivalent equation. Step 4: Check. Remember that the solution must solve both of the original equations. Answer: (1, 5)   Occasionally, we will have to multiply both equations to line up one of the variables to eliminate. We want the resulting equivalent equations to have terms with opposite coefficients.   Example 2: Solve by elimination: { 5 x − 3 y = − 1 3 x + 2 y = 7 . Solution: We choose to eliminate the terms with variable y because the coefficients have different signs. To do this, we first determine the least common multiple of the coefficients; in this case, the LCM(3, 2) is 6. Therefore, multiply both sides of both equations by the appropriate values to obtain coefficients of −6 and 6. This results in the following equivalent system: The y terms are now lined up to eliminate. Back substitute. Answer: (1, 2)   Sometimes linear systems are not given in standard form. When this is the case, it is best to first rearrange the equations before beginning the steps to solve by elimination.   Example 3: Solve by elimination: { 5 x + 12 y = 11 3 y = 4 x + 1 . Solution: First, rewrite the second equation in standard form. This results in the following equivalent system where like terms are aligned in columns: We can eliminate the term with variable y if we multiply the second equation by −4. Next, we add the equations together, Back substitute. Answer: (1/3, 7/9)   Try this! Solve by elimination: { 2 x + y = − 3 − 3 x − 2 y = 4 . Answer: (−2, 1) Video Solution At this point, we explore what happens when solving dependent and inconsistent systems using the elimination method.   Example 4: Solve by elimination: { 3 x − y = 7 6 x − 2 y = 14 . Solution: To eliminate the variable x, we could multiply the first equation by −2. Now adding the equations we have A true statement indicates that this is a dependent system. The lines coincide, and we need y in terms of x to present the solution set in the form ( x ,   m x + b ) . Choose one of the original equations and solve for y. Since the equations are equivalent, it does not matter which one we choose. Answer: ( x ,   3 x − 7 )   Example 5: Solve by elimination: { − x + 3 y = 9   2 x − 6 y = 12 . Solution: We can eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by 2. Now adding the equations we have A false statement indicates that the system is inconsistent. The lines are parallel and do not intersect. Answer: No solution, ∅   Try this! Solve by elimination: { 3 x + 15 y = − 15 2 x + 10 y = 30 . Answer: No solution, ∅ Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4_3_2	Clearing Fractions and Decimals Given a linear system where the equations have fractional coefficients, it is usually best to clear the fractions before beginning the elimination method.   Example 6: Solve: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ − 1 10 x + 1 2 y = 4 5   1 7 x + 1 3 y = − 2 21 . Solution: Recall that we can clear fractions by multiplying both sides of an equation by the least common denominator (LCD). Take care to distribute and then simplify. This results in an equivalent system where the equations have integer coefficients, Solve using the elimination method. Back substitute. Answer: (−3, 1)   We can use a similar technique to clear decimals before solving.   Example 7: Solve: { 3 x − 0.6 y = − 0.9 − 0.5 x + 0.12 y = 0.16 . Solution: Multiply each equation by the lowest power of 10 necessary to result in integer coefficients. In this case, multiply the first equation by 10 and the second equation by 100. This results in an equivalent system where the equations have integer coefficients: Solve using the elimination method. Back substitute. Answer: (−0.2, 0.5)   Try this! Solve using elimination: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ 1 3 x − 2 3 y = 3 1 3 x − 1 2 y = 8 3 . Answer: (5, −2) Video Solution Clearing Fractions and Decimals Given a linear system where the equations have fractional coefficients, it is usually best to clear the fractions before beginning the elimination method.   Example 6: Solve: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ − 1 10 x + 1 2 y = 4 5   1 7 x + 1 3 y = − 2 21 . Solution: Recall that we can clear fractions by multiplying both sides of an equation by the least common denominator (LCD). Take care to distribute and then simplify. This results in an equivalent system where the equations have integer coefficients, Solve using the elimination method. Back substitute. Answer: (−3, 1)   We can use a similar technique to clear decimals before solving.   Example 7: Solve: { 3 x − 0.6 y = − 0.9 − 0.5 x + 0.12 y = 0.16 . Solution: Multiply each equation by the lowest power of 10 necessary to result in integer coefficients. In this case, multiply the first equation by 10 and the second equation by 100. This results in an equivalent system where the equations have integer coefficients: Solve using the elimination method. Back substitute. Answer: (−0.2, 0.5)   Try this! Solve using elimination: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ 1 3 x − 2 3 y = 3 1 3 x − 1 2 y = 8 3 . Answer: (5, −2) Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4_4	 || Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We now have the techniques needed to solve linear systems. For this reason, we are no longer limited to using one variable when setting up equations that model applications. If we translate an application to a mathematical setup using two variables, then we need to form a linear system with two equations.   Example 1: The sum of two numbers is 40 and their difference is 8. Find the numbers. Solution: Identify variables. Set up equations: When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first key phrase, “the sum of the two numbers is 40,” translates as follows: And the second key phrase, “the difference is 8,” leads us to the second equation: Therefore, our algebraic setup consists of the following system: Solve: We can solve the resulting system using any method of our choosing. Here we choose to solve by elimination. Adding the equations together eliminates the variable y. Once we have x, back substitute to find y. Check: The sum of the two numbers should be 42 and their difference 8. Answer: The two numbers are 24 and 16.   Example 2: The sum of 9 times a larger number and twice a smaller is 6. The difference of 3 times the larger and the smaller is 7. Find the numbers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the larger and smaller number. The first sentence describes a sum and the second sentence describes a difference. This leads to the following system: Solve using the elimination method. Multiply the second equation by 2 and add. Back substitute to find y. Answer: The larger number is 4/3 and the smaller number is −3.   Try this! The sum of two numbers is 3. When twice the smaller number is subtracted from 6 times the larger the result is 22. Find the numbers. Answer: The two numbers are −1/2 and 7/2. Video Solution  || Interest and Money Problems In this section, the interest and money problems Applications involving simple interest and money. should seem familiar. The difference is that we will be making use of two variables when setting up the algebraic equations.   Example 3: A roll of 32 bills contains only $5 bills and $10 bills. If the value of the roll is $220, then how many of each bill are in the roll? Solution: Begin by identifying the variables. When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first equation is created from the fact that there are 32 bills. The second equation sums the value of each bill: the total value is $220. Present both equations as a system; this is our algebraic setup. Here we choose to solve by elimination, although substitution would work just as well. Eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by −5. Now add the equations together: Once we have y, the number of $10 bills, back substitute to find x. Answer: There are twenty $5 bills and twelve $10 bills. The check is left to the reader.   Example 4: A total of $6,300 was invested in two accounts. Part was invested in a CD at a 4 1 2 % annual interest rate and part was invested in a money market fund at a 3 3 4 % annual interest rate. If the total simple interest for one year was $267.75, then how much was invested in each account? Solution: The total amount in both accounts can be expressed as To set up a second equation, use the fact that the total interest was $267.75. Recall that the interest for one year is the interest rate times the principal ( I = p r t = p r ⋅ 1 = p r ). Use this to add the interest in both accounts. Be sure to use the decimal equivalents for the interest rates given as percentages. These two equations together form the following linear system: Eliminate y by multiplying the first equation by −0.0375. Next, add the equations together to eliminate the variable y. Back substitute. Answer: $4,200 was invested at 4 1 2 % and $2,100 was invested at 3 3 4 % .   At this point, we should be able to solve these types of problems in two ways: with one variable and now with two variables. Setting up word problems with two variables often simplifies the entire process, particularly when the relationships between the variables are not so clear.   Try this! On the first day of a two-day meeting, 10 coffees and 10 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $20.00. Since nobody drank the coffee and all the doughnuts were eaten, the next day only 2 coffees and 14 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $13.00. How much did each coffee and each doughnut cost? Answer: Coffee: $1.25; doughnut: $0.75 Video Solution  || Mixture Problems Mixture problems Applications involving a mixture of amounts usually given as a percentage of some total. often include a percentage and some total amount. It is important to make a distinction between these two types of quantities. For example, if a problem states that a 20-ounce container is filled with a 2% saline (salt) solution, then this means that the container is filled with a mixture of salt and water as follows: Percentage Amount Salt 2% = 0.02 0.02(20 ounces) = 0.4 ounces Water 98% = 0.98 0.98(20 ounces) = 19.6 ounces In other words, we multiply the percentage times the total to get the amount of each part of the mixture.   Example 5: A 2% saline solution is to be combined and mixed with a 5% saline solution to produce 72 ounces of a 2.5% saline solution. How much of each is needed? Solution: The total amount of saline solution needed is 72 ounces. This leads to one equation, The second equation adds up the amount of salt in the correct percentages. The amount of salt is obtained by multiplying the percentage times the amount, where the variables x and y represent the amounts of the solutions. The algebraic setup consists of both equations presented as a system: Solve. Back substitute. Answer: We need 60 ounces of the 2% saline solution and 12 ounces of the 5% saline solution.   Example 6: A 50% alcohol solution is to be mixed with a 10% alcohol solution to create an 8-ounce mixture of a 32% alcohol solution. How much of each is needed? Solution: The total amount of the mixture must be 8 ounces. The second equation adds up the amount of alcohol from each solution in the correct percentages. The amount of alcohol in the end result is 32% of 8 ounces, or 0.032(8). Now we can form a system of two linear equations and two variables as follows: In this example, multiply the second equation by 100 to eliminate the decimals. In addition, multiply the first equation by −10 to line up the variable y to eliminate. We obtain the following equivalent system: Add the equations and then solve for x: Back substitute. Answer: To obtain 8 ounces of a 32% alcohol mixture we need to mix 4.4 ounces of the 50% alcohol solution and 3.6 ounces of the 10% solution.   Try this! A 70% antifreeze concentrate is to be mixed with water to produce a 5-gallon mixture containing 28% antifreeze. How much water and antifreeze concentrate is needed? Answer: We need to mix 3 gallons of water with 2 gallons of antifreeze concentrate. Video Solution  || Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Recall that the distance traveled is equal to the average rate times the time traveled at that rate, D = r ⋅ t . These uniform motion problems Applications relating distance, average rate, and time. usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize that data in a chart and then set up a linear system. In this section, you are encouraged to use two variables.   Example 7: An executive traveled a total of 8 hours and 1,930 miles by car and by plane. Driving to the airport by car, she averaged 60 miles per hour. In the air, the plane averaged 350 miles per hour. How long did it take her to drive to the airport? Solution: We are asked to find the time it takes her to drive to the airport; this indicates that time is the unknown quantity. Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. The distance column and the time column of the chart help us to set up the following linear system. Solve. Now back substitute to find the time it took to drive to the airport x: Answer: It took her 3 hours to drive to the airport.   It is not always the case that time is the unknown quantity. Read the problem carefully and identify what you are asked to find; this defines your variables.   Example 8: Flying with the wind, an airplane traveled 1,365 miles in 3 hours. The plane then turned against the wind and traveled another 870 miles in 2 hours. Find the speed of the airplane and the speed of the wind. Solution: There is no obvious relationship between the speed of the plane and the speed of the wind. For this reason, use two variables as follows: Use the following chart to organize the data: With the wind, the airplane’s total speed is x + w . Flying against the wind, the total speed is x − w . Use the rows of the chart along with the formula D = r ⋅ t to construct a linear system that models this problem. Take care to group the quantities that represent the rate in parentheses. If we divide both sides of the first equation by 3 and both sides of the second equation by 2, then we obtain the following equivalent system: Back substitute. Answer: The speed of the airplane is 445 miles per hour and the speed of the wind is 10 miles per hour.   Try this! A boat traveled 24 miles downstream in 2 hours. The return trip, which was against the current, took twice as long. What are the speeds of the boat and of the current? Answer: The speed of the boat is 9 miles per hour and the speed of the current is 3 miles per hour. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4_4_1	Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We now have the techniques needed to solve linear systems. For this reason, we are no longer limited to using one variable when setting up equations that model applications. If we translate an application to a mathematical setup using two variables, then we need to form a linear system with two equations.   Example 1: The sum of two numbers is 40 and their difference is 8. Find the numbers. Solution: Identify variables. Set up equations: When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first key phrase, “the sum of the two numbers is 40,” translates as follows: And the second key phrase, “the difference is 8,” leads us to the second equation: Therefore, our algebraic setup consists of the following system: Solve: We can solve the resulting system using any method of our choosing. Here we choose to solve by elimination. Adding the equations together eliminates the variable y. Once we have x, back substitute to find y. Check: The sum of the two numbers should be 42 and their difference 8. Answer: The two numbers are 24 and 16.   Example 2: The sum of 9 times a larger number and twice a smaller is 6. The difference of 3 times the larger and the smaller is 7. Find the numbers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the larger and smaller number. The first sentence describes a sum and the second sentence describes a difference. This leads to the following system: Solve using the elimination method. Multiply the second equation by 2 and add. Back substitute to find y. Answer: The larger number is 4/3 and the smaller number is −3.   Try this! The sum of two numbers is 3. When twice the smaller number is subtracted from 6 times the larger the result is 22. Find the numbers. Answer: The two numbers are −1/2 and 7/2. Video Solution Problems Involving Relationships between Real Numbers We now have the techniques needed to solve linear systems. For this reason, we are no longer limited to using one variable when setting up equations that model applications. If we translate an application to a mathematical setup using two variables, then we need to form a linear system with two equations.   Example 1: The sum of two numbers is 40 and their difference is 8. Find the numbers. Solution: Identify variables. Set up equations: When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first key phrase, “the sum of the two numbers is 40,” translates as follows: And the second key phrase, “the difference is 8,” leads us to the second equation: Therefore, our algebraic setup consists of the following system: Solve: We can solve the resulting system using any method of our choosing. Here we choose to solve by elimination. Adding the equations together eliminates the variable y. Once we have x, back substitute to find y. Check: The sum of the two numbers should be 42 and their difference 8. Answer: The two numbers are 24 and 16.   Example 2: The sum of 9 times a larger number and twice a smaller is 6. The difference of 3 times the larger and the smaller is 7. Find the numbers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the larger and smaller number. The first sentence describes a sum and the second sentence describes a difference. This leads to the following system: Solve using the elimination method. Multiply the second equation by 2 and add. Back substitute to find y. Answer: The larger number is 4/3 and the smaller number is −3.   Try this! The sum of two numbers is 3. When twice the smaller number is subtracted from 6 times the larger the result is 22. Find the numbers. Answer: The two numbers are −1/2 and 7/2. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4_4_2	Interest and Money Problems In this section, the interest and money problems Applications involving simple interest and money. should seem familiar. The difference is that we will be making use of two variables when setting up the algebraic equations.   Example 3: A roll of 32 bills contains only $5 bills and $10 bills. If the value of the roll is $220, then how many of each bill are in the roll? Solution: Begin by identifying the variables. When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first equation is created from the fact that there are 32 bills. The second equation sums the value of each bill: the total value is $220. Present both equations as a system; this is our algebraic setup. Here we choose to solve by elimination, although substitution would work just as well. Eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by −5. Now add the equations together: Once we have y, the number of $10 bills, back substitute to find x. Answer: There are twenty $5 bills and twelve $10 bills. The check is left to the reader.   Example 4: A total of $6,300 was invested in two accounts. Part was invested in a CD at a 4 1 2 % annual interest rate and part was invested in a money market fund at a 3 3 4 % annual interest rate. If the total simple interest for one year was $267.75, then how much was invested in each account? Solution: The total amount in both accounts can be expressed as To set up a second equation, use the fact that the total interest was $267.75. Recall that the interest for one year is the interest rate times the principal ( I = p r t = p r ⋅ 1 = p r ). Use this to add the interest in both accounts. Be sure to use the decimal equivalents for the interest rates given as percentages. These two equations together form the following linear system: Eliminate y by multiplying the first equation by −0.0375. Next, add the equations together to eliminate the variable y. Back substitute. Answer: $4,200 was invested at 4 1 2 % and $2,100 was invested at 3 3 4 % .   At this point, we should be able to solve these types of problems in two ways: with one variable and now with two variables. Setting up word problems with two variables often simplifies the entire process, particularly when the relationships between the variables are not so clear.   Try this! On the first day of a two-day meeting, 10 coffees and 10 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $20.00. Since nobody drank the coffee and all the doughnuts were eaten, the next day only 2 coffees and 14 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $13.00. How much did each coffee and each doughnut cost? Answer: Coffee: $1.25; doughnut: $0.75 Video Solution Interest and Money Problems In this section, the interest and money problems Applications involving simple interest and money. should seem familiar. The difference is that we will be making use of two variables when setting up the algebraic equations.   Example 3: A roll of 32 bills contains only $5 bills and $10 bills. If the value of the roll is $220, then how many of each bill are in the roll? Solution: Begin by identifying the variables. When using two variables, we need to set up two equations. The first equation is created from the fact that there are 32 bills. The second equation sums the value of each bill: the total value is $220. Present both equations as a system; this is our algebraic setup. Here we choose to solve by elimination, although substitution would work just as well. Eliminate x by multiplying the first equation by −5. Now add the equations together: Once we have y, the number of $10 bills, back substitute to find x. Answer: There are twenty $5 bills and twelve $10 bills. The check is left to the reader.   Example 4: A total of $6,300 was invested in two accounts. Part was invested in a CD at a 4 1 2 % annual interest rate and part was invested in a money market fund at a 3 3 4 % annual interest rate. If the total simple interest for one year was $267.75, then how much was invested in each account? Solution: The total amount in both accounts can be expressed as To set up a second equation, use the fact that the total interest was $267.75. Recall that the interest for one year is the interest rate times the principal ( I = p r t = p r ⋅ 1 = p r ). Use this to add the interest in both accounts. Be sure to use the decimal equivalents for the interest rates given as percentages. These two equations together form the following linear system: Eliminate y by multiplying the first equation by −0.0375. Next, add the equations together to eliminate the variable y. Back substitute. Answer: $4,200 was invested at 4 1 2 % and $2,100 was invested at 3 3 4 % .   At this point, we should be able to solve these types of problems in two ways: with one variable and now with two variables. Setting up word problems with two variables often simplifies the entire process, particularly when the relationships between the variables are not so clear.   Try this! On the first day of a two-day meeting, 10 coffees and 10 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $20.00. Since nobody drank the coffee and all the doughnuts were eaten, the next day only 2 coffees and 14 doughnuts were purchased for a total of $13.00. How much did each coffee and each doughnut cost? Answer: Coffee: $1.25; doughnut: $0.75 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4_4_3	Mixture Problems Mixture problems Applications involving a mixture of amounts usually given as a percentage of some total. often include a percentage and some total amount. It is important to make a distinction between these two types of quantities. For example, if a problem states that a 20-ounce container is filled with a 2% saline (salt) solution, then this means that the container is filled with a mixture of salt and water as follows: Percentage Amount Salt 2% = 0.02 0.02(20 ounces) = 0.4 ounces Water 98% = 0.98 0.98(20 ounces) = 19.6 ounces In other words, we multiply the percentage times the total to get the amount of each part of the mixture.   Example 5: A 2% saline solution is to be combined and mixed with a 5% saline solution to produce 72 ounces of a 2.5% saline solution. How much of each is needed? Solution: The total amount of saline solution needed is 72 ounces. This leads to one equation, The second equation adds up the amount of salt in the correct percentages. The amount of salt is obtained by multiplying the percentage times the amount, where the variables x and y represent the amounts of the solutions. The algebraic setup consists of both equations presented as a system: Solve. Back substitute. Answer: We need 60 ounces of the 2% saline solution and 12 ounces of the 5% saline solution.   Example 6: A 50% alcohol solution is to be mixed with a 10% alcohol solution to create an 8-ounce mixture of a 32% alcohol solution. How much of each is needed? Solution: The total amount of the mixture must be 8 ounces. The second equation adds up the amount of alcohol from each solution in the correct percentages. The amount of alcohol in the end result is 32% of 8 ounces, or 0.032(8). Now we can form a system of two linear equations and two variables as follows: In this example, multiply the second equation by 100 to eliminate the decimals. In addition, multiply the first equation by −10 to line up the variable y to eliminate. We obtain the following equivalent system: Add the equations and then solve for x: Back substitute. Answer: To obtain 8 ounces of a 32% alcohol mixture we need to mix 4.4 ounces of the 50% alcohol solution and 3.6 ounces of the 10% solution.   Try this! A 70% antifreeze concentrate is to be mixed with water to produce a 5-gallon mixture containing 28% antifreeze. How much water and antifreeze concentrate is needed? Answer: We need to mix 3 gallons of water with 2 gallons of antifreeze concentrate. Video Solution Mixture Problems Mixture problems Applications involving a mixture of amounts usually given as a percentage of some total. often include a percentage and some total amount. It is important to make a distinction between these two types of quantities. For example, if a problem states that a 20-ounce container is filled with a 2% saline (salt) solution, then this means that the container is filled with a mixture of salt and water as follows: Percentage Amount Salt 2% = 0.02 0.02(20 ounces) = 0.4 ounces Water 98% = 0.98 0.98(20 ounces) = 19.6 ounces In other words, we multiply the percentage times the total to get the amount of each part of the mixture.   Example 5: A 2% saline solution is to be combined and mixed with a 5% saline solution to produce 72 ounces of a 2.5% saline solution. How much of each is needed? Solution: The total amount of saline solution needed is 72 ounces. This leads to one equation, The second equation adds up the amount of salt in the correct percentages. The amount of salt is obtained by multiplying the percentage times the amount, where the variables x and y represent the amounts of the solutions. The algebraic setup consists of both equations presented as a system: Solve. Back substitute. Answer: We need 60 ounces of the 2% saline solution and 12 ounces of the 5% saline solution.   Example 6: A 50% alcohol solution is to be mixed with a 10% alcohol solution to create an 8-ounce mixture of a 32% alcohol solution. How much of each is needed? Solution: The total amount of the mixture must be 8 ounces. The second equation adds up the amount of alcohol from each solution in the correct percentages. The amount of alcohol in the end result is 32% of 8 ounces, or 0.032(8). Now we can form a system of two linear equations and two variables as follows: In this example, multiply the second equation by 100 to eliminate the decimals. In addition, multiply the first equation by −10 to line up the variable y to eliminate. We obtain the following equivalent system: Add the equations and then solve for x: Back substitute. Answer: To obtain 8 ounces of a 32% alcohol mixture we need to mix 4.4 ounces of the 50% alcohol solution and 3.6 ounces of the 10% solution.   Try this! A 70% antifreeze concentrate is to be mixed with water to produce a 5-gallon mixture containing 28% antifreeze. How much water and antifreeze concentrate is needed? Answer: We need to mix 3 gallons of water with 2 gallons of antifreeze concentrate. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4_4_4	Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Recall that the distance traveled is equal to the average rate times the time traveled at that rate, D = r ⋅ t . These uniform motion problems Applications relating distance, average rate, and time. usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize that data in a chart and then set up a linear system. In this section, you are encouraged to use two variables.   Example 7: An executive traveled a total of 8 hours and 1,930 miles by car and by plane. Driving to the airport by car, she averaged 60 miles per hour. In the air, the plane averaged 350 miles per hour. How long did it take her to drive to the airport? Solution: We are asked to find the time it takes her to drive to the airport; this indicates that time is the unknown quantity. Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. The distance column and the time column of the chart help us to set up the following linear system. Solve. Now back substitute to find the time it took to drive to the airport x: Answer: It took her 3 hours to drive to the airport.   It is not always the case that time is the unknown quantity. Read the problem carefully and identify what you are asked to find; this defines your variables.   Example 8: Flying with the wind, an airplane traveled 1,365 miles in 3 hours. The plane then turned against the wind and traveled another 870 miles in 2 hours. Find the speed of the airplane and the speed of the wind. Solution: There is no obvious relationship between the speed of the plane and the speed of the wind. For this reason, use two variables as follows: Use the following chart to organize the data: With the wind, the airplane’s total speed is x + w . Flying against the wind, the total speed is x − w . Use the rows of the chart along with the formula D = r ⋅ t to construct a linear system that models this problem. Take care to group the quantities that represent the rate in parentheses. If we divide both sides of the first equation by 3 and both sides of the second equation by 2, then we obtain the following equivalent system: Back substitute. Answer: The speed of the airplane is 445 miles per hour and the speed of the wind is 10 miles per hour.   Try this! A boat traveled 24 miles downstream in 2 hours. The return trip, which was against the current, took twice as long. What are the speeds of the boat and of the current? Answer: The speed of the boat is 9 miles per hour and the speed of the current is 3 miles per hour. Video Solution Uniform Motion Problems (Distance Problems) Recall that the distance traveled is equal to the average rate times the time traveled at that rate, D = r ⋅ t . These uniform motion problems Applications relating distance, average rate, and time. usually have a lot of data, so it helps to first organize that data in a chart and then set up a linear system. In this section, you are encouraged to use two variables.   Example 7: An executive traveled a total of 8 hours and 1,930 miles by car and by plane. Driving to the airport by car, she averaged 60 miles per hour. In the air, the plane averaged 350 miles per hour. How long did it take her to drive to the airport? Solution: We are asked to find the time it takes her to drive to the airport; this indicates that time is the unknown quantity. Use the formula D = r ⋅ t to fill in the unknown distances. The distance column and the time column of the chart help us to set up the following linear system. Solve. Now back substitute to find the time it took to drive to the airport x: Answer: It took her 3 hours to drive to the airport.   It is not always the case that time is the unknown quantity. Read the problem carefully and identify what you are asked to find; this defines your variables.   Example 8: Flying with the wind, an airplane traveled 1,365 miles in 3 hours. The plane then turned against the wind and traveled another 870 miles in 2 hours. Find the speed of the airplane and the speed of the wind. Solution: There is no obvious relationship between the speed of the plane and the speed of the wind. For this reason, use two variables as follows: Use the following chart to organize the data: With the wind, the airplane’s total speed is x + w . Flying against the wind, the total speed is x − w . Use the rows of the chart along with the formula D = r ⋅ t to construct a linear system that models this problem. Take care to group the quantities that represent the rate in parentheses. If we divide both sides of the first equation by 3 and both sides of the second equation by 2, then we obtain the following equivalent system: Back substitute. Answer: The speed of the airplane is 445 miles per hour and the speed of the wind is 10 miles per hour.   Try this! A boat traveled 24 miles downstream in 2 hours. The return trip, which was against the current, took twice as long. What are the speeds of the boat and of the current? Answer: The speed of the boat is 9 miles per hour and the speed of the current is 3 miles per hour. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter4_5	 || Solutions to Systems of Linear Inequalities A system of linear inequalities A set of two or more linear inequalities that define the conditions to be considered simultaneously. consists of a set of two or more linear inequalities with the same variables. The inequalities define the conditions that are to be considered simultaneously. For example, We know that each inequality in the set contains infinitely many ordered pair solutions defined by a region in a rectangular coordinate plane. When considering two of these inequalities together, the intersection of these sets defines the set of simultaneous ordered pair solutions. When we graph each of the above inequalities separately, we have When graphed on the same set of axes, the intersection can be determined. The intersection is shaded darker and the final graph of the solution set is presented as follows: The graph suggests that (3, 2) is a solution because it is in the intersection. To verify this, show that it solves both of the original inequalities: Points on the solid boundary are included in the set of simultaneous solutions and points on the dashed boundary are not. Consider the point (−1, 0) on the solid boundary defined by y = 2 x + 2 and verify that it solves the original system: Notice that this point satisfies both inequalities and thus is included in the solution set. Now consider the point (2, 0) on the dashed boundary defined by y = x − 2 and verify that it does not solve the original system: This point does not satisfy both inequalities and thus is not included in the solution set.  || Solving Systems of Linear Inequalities Solutions to a system of linear inequalities are the ordered pairs that solve all the inequalities in the system. Therefore, to solve these systems, graph the solution sets of the inequalities on the same set of axes and determine where they intersect. This intersection, or overlap, defines the region of common ordered pair solutions.   Example 1: Graph the solution set: { − 2 x + y > − 4 3 x − 6 y ≥ 6 . Solution: To facilitate the graphing process, we first solve for y. For the first inequality, we use a dashed boundary defined by y = 2 x − 4 and shade all points above the line. For the second inequality, we use a solid boundary defined by y = 1 2 x − 1 and shade all points below. The intersection is darkened. Now we present the solution with only the intersection shaded. Answer:   Example 2: Graph the solution set: { − 2 x + 3 y > 6 4 x − 6 y > 12 . Solution: Begin by solving both inequalities for y. Use a dashed line for each boundary. For the first inequality, shade all points above the boundary. For the second inequality, shade all points below the boundary. As you can see, there is no intersection of these two shaded regions. Therefore, there are no simultaneous solutions. Answer: No solution, ∅   Example 3: Graph the solution set: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ y ≥ − 4 y < x + 3 y ≤ − 3 x + 3 . Solution: The intersection of all the shaded regions forms the triangular region as pictured darkened below: After graphing all three inequalities on the same set of axes, we determine that the intersection lies in the triangular region pictured. Answer: The graphic suggests that (−1, 1) is a common point. As a check, substitute that point into the inequalities and verify that it solves all three conditions.  || 
book2_chapter4_5_1	Solutions to Systems of Linear Inequalities A system of linear inequalities A set of two or more linear inequalities that define the conditions to be considered simultaneously. consists of a set of two or more linear inequalities with the same variables. The inequalities define the conditions that are to be considered simultaneously. For example, We know that each inequality in the set contains infinitely many ordered pair solutions defined by a region in a rectangular coordinate plane. When considering two of these inequalities together, the intersection of these sets defines the set of simultaneous ordered pair solutions. When we graph each of the above inequalities separately, we have When graphed on the same set of axes, the intersection can be determined. The intersection is shaded darker and the final graph of the solution set is presented as follows: The graph suggests that (3, 2) is a solution because it is in the intersection. To verify this, show that it solves both of the original inequalities: Points on the solid boundary are included in the set of simultaneous solutions and points on the dashed boundary are not. Consider the point (−1, 0) on the solid boundary defined by y = 2 x + 2 and verify that it solves the original system: Notice that this point satisfies both inequalities and thus is included in the solution set. Now consider the point (2, 0) on the dashed boundary defined by y = x − 2 and verify that it does not solve the original system: This point does not satisfy both inequalities and thus is not included in the solution set. Solutions to Systems of Linear Inequalities A system of linear inequalities A set of two or more linear inequalities that define the conditions to be considered simultaneously. consists of a set of two or more linear inequalities with the same variables. The inequalities define the conditions that are to be considered simultaneously. For example, We know that each inequality in the set contains infinitely many ordered pair solutions defined by a region in a rectangular coordinate plane. When considering two of these inequalities together, the intersection of these sets defines the set of simultaneous ordered pair solutions. When we graph each of the above inequalities separately, we have When graphed on the same set of axes, the intersection can be determined. The intersection is shaded darker and the final graph of the solution set is presented as follows: The graph suggests that (3, 2) is a solution because it is in the intersection. To verify this, show that it solves both of the original inequalities: Points on the solid boundary are included in the set of simultaneous solutions and points on the dashed boundary are not. Consider the point (−1, 0) on the solid boundary defined by y = 2 x + 2 and verify that it solves the original system: Notice that this point satisfies both inequalities and thus is included in the solution set. Now consider the point (2, 0) on the dashed boundary defined by y = x − 2 and verify that it does not solve the original system: This point does not satisfy both inequalities and thus is not included in the solution set.  || 
book2_chapter4_5_2	Solving Systems of Linear Inequalities Solutions to a system of linear inequalities are the ordered pairs that solve all the inequalities in the system. Therefore, to solve these systems, graph the solution sets of the inequalities on the same set of axes and determine where they intersect. This intersection, or overlap, defines the region of common ordered pair solutions.   Example 1: Graph the solution set: { − 2 x + y > − 4 3 x − 6 y ≥ 6 . Solution: To facilitate the graphing process, we first solve for y. For the first inequality, we use a dashed boundary defined by y = 2 x − 4 and shade all points above the line. For the second inequality, we use a solid boundary defined by y = 1 2 x − 1 and shade all points below. The intersection is darkened. Now we present the solution with only the intersection shaded. Answer:   Example 2: Graph the solution set: { − 2 x + 3 y > 6 4 x − 6 y > 12 . Solution: Begin by solving both inequalities for y. Use a dashed line for each boundary. For the first inequality, shade all points above the boundary. For the second inequality, shade all points below the boundary. As you can see, there is no intersection of these two shaded regions. Therefore, there are no simultaneous solutions. Answer: No solution, ∅   Example 3: Graph the solution set: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ y ≥ − 4 y < x + 3 y ≤ − 3 x + 3 . Solution: The intersection of all the shaded regions forms the triangular region as pictured darkened below: After graphing all three inequalities on the same set of axes, we determine that the intersection lies in the triangular region pictured. Answer: The graphic suggests that (−1, 1) is a common point. As a check, substitute that point into the inequalities and verify that it solves all three conditions. Solving Systems of Linear Inequalities Solutions to a system of linear inequalities are the ordered pairs that solve all the inequalities in the system. Therefore, to solve these systems, graph the solution sets of the inequalities on the same set of axes and determine where they intersect. This intersection, or overlap, defines the region of common ordered pair solutions.   Example 1: Graph the solution set: { − 2 x + y > − 4 3 x − 6 y ≥ 6 . Solution: To facilitate the graphing process, we first solve for y. For the first inequality, we use a dashed boundary defined by y = 2 x − 4 and shade all points above the line. For the second inequality, we use a solid boundary defined by y = 1 2 x − 1 and shade all points below. The intersection is darkened. Now we present the solution with only the intersection shaded. Answer:   Example 2: Graph the solution set: { − 2 x + 3 y > 6 4 x − 6 y > 12 . Solution: Begin by solving both inequalities for y. Use a dashed line for each boundary. For the first inequality, shade all points above the boundary. For the second inequality, shade all points below the boundary. As you can see, there is no intersection of these two shaded regions. Therefore, there are no simultaneous solutions. Answer: No solution, ∅   Example 3: Graph the solution set: ⎧ ⎩ ⎨ y ≥ − 4 y < x + 3 y ≤ − 3 x + 3 . Solution: The intersection of all the shaded regions forms the triangular region as pictured darkened below: After graphing all three inequalities on the same set of axes, we determine that the intersection lies in the triangular region pictured. Answer: The graphic suggests that (−1, 1) is a common point. As a check, substitute that point into the inequalities and verify that it solves all three conditions.  || 
book2_chapter7	 ||  || Rational Expressions, Evaluating, and Restrictions A rational number, or fraction a b , is a real number defined as a quotient of two integers a and b, where b ≠ 0 . Similarly, we define a rational expression The quotient P Q of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0. , or algebraic fraction Term used when referring to a rational expression. P Q , as the quotient of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0 . Some examples of rational expressions follow: The example x + 3 x − 5 consists of linear expressions in both the numerator and denominator. Because the denominator contains a variable, this expression is not defined for all values of x.   Example 1: Evaluate x + 3 x − 5 for the set of x-values {−3, 4, 5}. Solution: Substitute the values in for x. Answer: When x = − 3 , the value of the rational expression is 0; when x = 4 , the value of the rational expression is −7; and when x = 5 , the value of the rational expression is undefined.   This example illustrates that variables are restricted to values that do not make the denominator equal to 0. The domain of a rational expression The set of real numbers for which the rational expression is defined. is the set of real numbers for which it is defined, and restrictions The set of real numbers for which a rational expression is not defined. are the real numbers for which the expression is not defined. We often express the domain of a rational expression in terms of its restrictions.   Example 2: Find the domain of the following: x + 7 2 x 2 + x − 6 . Solution: In this example, the numerator x + 7 is a linear expression and the denominator 2 x 2 + x − 6 is a quadratic expression. If we factor the denominator, then we will obtain an equivalent expression. Because rational expressions are undefined when the denominator is 0, we wish to find the values for x that make it 0. To do this, apply the zero-product property. Set each factor in the denominator equal to 0 and solve. We conclude that the original expression is defined for any real number except 3/2 and −2. These two values are the restrictions to the domain. It is important to note that −7 is not a restriction to the domain because the expression is defined as 0 when the numerator is 0. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ 3 2 and x ≠ − 2 .   We can express the domain of the previous example using notation as follows: The restrictions to the domain of a rational expression are determined by the denominator. Ignore the numerator when finding those restrictions.   Example 3: Determine the domain: x 4 + x 3 − 2 x 2 − x x 2 − 1 . Solution: To find the restrictions to the domain, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve: These two values cause the denominator to be 0. Hence they are restricted from the domain. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ ± 1 .   Example 4: Determine the domain: x 2 − 25 4 . Solution: There is no variable in the denominator and thus no restriction to the domain. Answer: The domain consists of all real numbers, R.  || Simplifying Rational Expressions When simplifying fractions, look for common factors that cancel. For example, We say that the fraction 12/60 is equivalent to 1/5. Fractions are in simplest form if the numerator and denominator share no common factor other than 1. Similarly, when working with rational expressions, look for factors to cancel. For example, The resulting rational expression is equivalent if it shares the same domain. Therefore, we must make note of the restrictions and write In words, x + 4 ( x − 3 ) ( x + 4 ) is equivalent to 1 x − 3 , if x ≠ 3 and x ≠ − 4 . We can verify this by choosing a few values with which to evaluate both expressions to see if the results are the same. Here we choose x = 7 and evaluate as follows: It is important to state the restrictions before simplifying rational expressions because the simplified expression may be defined for restrictions of the original. In this case, the expressions are not equivalent. Here −4 is defined for the simplified equivalent but not for the original, as illustrated below:   Example 5: Simplify and state the restriction: 25 x 2 15 x 3 . Solution: In this example, the expression is undefined when x is 0. Therefore, the domain consists of all real numbers x, where x ≠ 0 . With this understanding, we can cancel common factors. Answer: 5 3 x , where x ≠ 0   Example 6: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x ( x − 5 ) ( 2 x + 1 ) ( x − 5 ) . Solution: To determine the restrictions, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except for −1/2 and 5. Next, we find an equivalent expression by canceling common factors. Answer: 3 x 2 x + 1 , where x ≠ − 1 2 and x ≠ 5   Typically, rational expressions are not given in factored form. If this is the case, factor first and then cancel. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 7: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x + 6 x 2 + x − 2 . Solution: Step 1: Completely factor the numerator and denominator. Step 2: Determine the restrictions to the domain. To do this, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except −2 and 1. Step 3: Cancel common factors, if any. Answer: 3 x − 1 , where x ≠ 1 and x ≠ − 2   Example 8: State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 + 7 x − 30 x 2 − 7 x + 12 . Solution: First, factor the numerator and denominator. Any value of x that results in a value of 0 in the denominator is a restriction. By inspection, we determine that the domain consists of all real numbers except 4 and 3. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: x + 10 x − 4 , where x ≠ 3 and x ≠ 4   It is important to remember that we can only cancel factors of a product. A common mistake is to cancel terms. For example,   Try this! State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 − 16 5 x 2 − 20 x . Answer: x + 4 5 x , where x ≠ 0 and x ≠ 4 Video Solution In some examples, we will make a broad assumption that the denominator is nonzero. When we make that assumption, we do not need to determine the restrictions.   Example 9: Simplify: x y + y 2 − 3 x − 3 y x 2 − y 2 . (Assume all denominators are nonzero.) Solution: Factor the numerator by grouping. Factor the denominator using the formula for a difference of squares. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: y − 3 x − y  || Opposite Binomial Factors Recall that the opposite of the real number a is −a. Similarly, we can define the opposite of a polynomial P to be −P. We first consider the opposite of the binomial a − b : This leads us to the opposite binomial property If given a binomial a − b , then the opposite is − ( a − b ) = b − a . : This is equivalent to factoring out a –1. If a ≠ b , then we can divide both sides by ( a − b ) and obtain the following:   Example 10: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 − x x − 3 . Solution: By inspection, we can see that the denominator is 0 if x = 3 . Therefore, 3 is the restriction to the domain. Apply the opposite binomial property to the numerator and then cancel. Answer: 3 − x x − 3 = − 1 , where x ≠ 3   Since addition is commutative, we have or Take care not to confuse this with the opposite binomial property. Also, it is important to recall that In other words, show a negative fraction by placing the negative sign in the numerator, in front of the fraction bar, or in the denominator. Generally, negative denominators are avoided.   Example 11: Simplify and state the restrictions: 4 − x 2 x 2 + 3 x − 10 . Solution: Begin by factoring the numerator and denominator. Answer: − x + 2 x + 5 , where x ≠ 2 and x ≠ − 5   Try this! Simplify and state the restrictions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 15 25 − x 2 . Answer: − 2 x + 3 x + 5 , where x ≠ ± 5 Video Solution  || Rational Functions Rational functions have the form where p ( x ) and q ( x ) are polynomials and q ( x ) ≠ 0 . The domain of a rational function consists of all real numbers x such that the denominator q ( x ) ≠ 0 .   Example 12: a. Simplify: r ( x ) = 2 x 2 + 5 x − 3 6 x 2 + 18 x . b. State the domain. c. Calculate r ( − 2 ) . Solution: a. To simplify the rational function, first factor and then cancel. b. To determine the restrictions, set the denominator of the original function equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers x, where x ≠ 0 and x ≠ − 3 . c. Since −2 is not a restriction, substitute it for the variable x using the simplified form. Answers: a. r ( x ) = 2 x − 1 6 x b. The domain is all real numbers except 0 and −3. c. r ( − 2 ) = 5 12   If a cost function A function that represents the cost of producing a certain number of units. C ( x ) represents the cost of producing x units, then the average cost The total cost divided by the number of units produced, which can be represented by c ( x ) = C ( x ) x , where C ( x ) is a cost function. c ( x ) is the cost divided by the number of units produced.   Example 13: The cost in dollars of producing t-shirts with a company logo is given by C ( x ) = 7 x + 200 , where x represents the number of shirts produced. Determine the average cost of producing a. 40 t-shirts b. 250 t-shirts c. 1,000 t-shirts Solution: Set up a function representing the average cost. Next, calculate c ( 40 ) , c ( 250 ) , and c ( 1000 ) . Answers: a. If 40 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $12.00. b. If 250 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $7.80. c. If 1,000 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $7.20.  ||  || Multiplying Rational Expressions When multiplying fractions, we can multiply the numerators and denominators together and then reduce, as illustrated: Multiplying rational expressions is performed in a similar manner. For example, In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where Q ≠ 0 and S ≠ 0 , we have In this section, assume that all variable expressions in the denominator are nonzero unless otherwise stated.   Example 1: Multiply: 12 x 2 5 y 3 ⋅ 20 y 4 6 x 3 . Solution: Multiply numerators and denominators and then cancel common factors. Answer: 8 y x   Example 2: Multiply: x − 3 x + 5 ⋅ x + 5 x + 7 . Solution: Leave the product in factored form and cancel the common factors. Answer: x − 3 x + 7   Example 3: Multiply: 15 x 2 y 3 ( 2 x − 1 ) ⋅ x ( 2 x − 1 ) 3 x 2 y ( x + 3 ) . Solution: Leave the polynomials in the numerator and denominator factored so that we can cancel the factors. In other words, do not apply the distributive property. Answer: 5 x y 2 x + 3   Typically, rational expressions will not be given in factored form. In this case, first factor all numerators and denominators completely. Next, multiply and cancel any common factors, if there are any.   Example 4: Multiply: x + 5 x − 5 ⋅ x − 5 x 2 − 25 . Solution: Factor the denominator x 2 − 25 as a difference of squares. Then multiply and cancel. Keep in mind that 1 is always a factor; so when the entire numerator cancels out, make sure to write the factor 1. Answer: 1 x − 5   Example 5: Multiply: x 2 + 3 x + 2 x 2 − 5 x + 6 ⋅ x 2 − 7 x + 12 x 2 + 8 x + 7 . Solution: It is a best practice to leave the final answer in factored form. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x − 4 ) ( x − 2 ) ( x + 7 )   Example 6: Multiply: . Solution: The trinomial in the numerator has a negative leading coefficient. Recall that it is a best practice to first factor out a −1 and then factor the resulting trinomial. Answer:   Example 7: Multiply: . Solution: We replace with so that we can cancel this factor. Answer:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || Dividing Rational Expressions To divide two fractions, we multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor, as illustrated: Dividing rational expressions is performed in a similar manner. For example, In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where , , and , we have   Example 8: Divide: . Solution: First, multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor and then cancel. Answer:   Example 9: Divide: . Solution: After multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor, factor and cancel. Answer:   Example 10: Divide: . Solution: Begin by multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. After doing so, factor and cancel. Answer:   Example 11: Divide: . Solution: Just as we do with fractions, think of the divisor as an algebraic fraction over 1. Answer:   Try this! Divide: . Answer: Video Solution  || Multiplying and Dividing Rational Functions The product and quotient of two rational functions can be simplified using the techniques described in this section. The restrictions to the domain of a product consist of the restrictions of each function.   Example 12: Calculate and determine the restrictions to the domain. Solution: In this case, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 0, and the domain of consists of all real numbers except 1/4. Therefore, the domain of the product consists of all real numbers except 0 and 1/4. Multiply the functions and then simplify the result. Answer: , where   The restrictions to the domain of a quotient will consist of the restrictions of each function as well as the restrictions on the reciprocal of the divisor.   Example 13: Calculate and determine the restrictions. Solution: In this case, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 3 and 8, and the domain of consists all real numbers except 3. In addition, the reciprocal of has a restriction of −8. Therefore, the domain of this quotient consists of all real numbers except 3, 8, and −8. Answer: , where  ||  || Adding and Subtracting with Common Denominators Adding and subtracting rational expressions is similar to adding and subtracting fractions. Recall that if the denominators are the same, we can add or subtract the numerators and write the result over the common denominator. When working with rational expressions, the common denominator will be a polynomial. In general, given polynomials P, Q, and R, where Q ≠ 0 , we have the following: In this section, assume that all variable factors in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 1: Add: 3 y + 7 y . Solution: Add the numerators 3 and 7, and write the result over the common denominator, y. Answer: 10 y   Example 2: Subtract: x − 5 2 x − 1 − 1 2 x − 1 . Solution: Subtract the numerators x − 5 and 1, and write the result over the common denominator, 2 x − 1 . Answer: x − 6 2 x − 1   Example 3: Subtract: 2 x + 7 ( x + 5 ) ( x − 3 ) − x + 10 ( x + 5 ) ( x − 3 ) . Solution: We use parentheses to remind us to subtract the entire numerator of the second rational expression. Answer: 1 x + 5   Example 4: Simplify: 2 x 2 + 10 x + 3 x 2 − 36 − x 2 + 6 x + 5 x 2 − 36 + x − 4 x 2 − 36 . Solution: Subtract and add the numerators. Make use of parentheses and write the result over the common denominator, x 2 − 36 . Answer: x − 1 x − 6   Try this! Subtract: x 2 + 1 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 − x 2 − 2 x 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 . Answer: 1 x − 4 Video Solution  || Adding and Subtracting with Unlike Denominators To add rational expressions with unlike denominators, first find equivalent expressions with common denominators. Do this just as you have with fractions. If the denominators of fractions are relatively prime, then the least common denominator (LCD) is their product. For example, Multiply each fraction by the appropriate form of 1 to obtain equivalent fractions with a common denominator. The process of adding and subtracting rational expressions is similar. In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where Q ≠ 0 and S ≠ 0 , we have the following: In this section, assume that all variable factors in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 5: Add: 1 x + 1 y . Solution: In this example, the L C D = x y . To obtain equivalent terms with this common denominator, multiply the first term by y y and the second term by x x . Answer: y + x x y   Example 6: Subtract: 1 y − 1 y − 3 . Solution: Since the L C D = y ( y − 3 ) , multiply the first term by 1 in the form of ( y − 3 ) ( y − 3 ) and the second term by y y . Answer: − 3 y ( y − 3 )   It is not always the case that the LCD is the product of the given denominators. Typically, the denominators are not relatively prime; thus determining the LCD requires some thought. Begin by factoring all denominators. The LCD is the product of all factors with the highest power. For example, given there are three base factors in the denominator: x , ( x + 2 ) , and ( x − 3 ) . The highest powers of these factors are x 3 , ( x + 2 ) 2 , and ( x − 3 ) 1 . Therefore, The general steps for adding or subtracting rational expressions are illustrated in the following example.   Example 7: Subtract: x x 2 + 4 x + 3 − 3 x 2 − 4 x − 5 . Solution: Step 1: Factor all denominators to determine the LCD. The LCD   is   ( x + 1 ) ( x + 3 ) ( x − 5 ) . Step 2: Multiply by the appropriate factors to obtain equivalent terms with a common denominator. To do this, multiply the first term by and the second term by . Step 3: Add or subtract the numerators and place the result over the common denominator. Step 4: Simplify the resulting algebraic fraction. Answer:   Example 8: Subtract: . Solution: It is best not to factor the numerator, , because we will most likely need to simplify after we subtract. Answer:   Example 9: Subtract: . Solution: First, factor the denominators and determine the LCD. Notice how the opposite binomial property is applied to obtain a more workable denominator. The LCD is . Multiply the second term by 1 in the form of . Now that we have equivalent terms with a common denominator, add the numerators and write the result over the common denominator. Answer:   Example 10: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by factoring the denominator. We can see that the . Find equivalent fractions with this denominator. Next, subtract and add the numerators and place the result over the common denominator. Finish by simplifying the resulting rational expression. Answer:   Try this! Simplify: . Answer: Video Solution Rational expressions are sometimes expressed using negative exponents. In this case, apply the rules for negative exponents before simplifying the expression.   Example 11: Simplify: . Solution: Recall that . We begin by rewriting the negative exponents as rational expressions. Answer:  || Adding and Subtracting Rational Functions We can simplify sums or differences of rational functions using the techniques learned in this section. The restrictions of the result consist of the restrictions to the domains of each function.   Example 12: Calculate , given and , and state the restrictions. Solution: Here the domain of f consists of all real numbers except −3, and the domain of g consists of all real numbers except 2. Therefore, the domain of f + g consists of all real numbers except −3 and 2. Answer: , where   Example 13: Calculate , given and , and state the restrictions to the domain. Solution: The domain of f consists of all real numbers except 5 and −5, and the domain of g consists of all real numbers except 5. Therefore, the domain of f − g consists of all real numbers except −5 and 5. Answer: , where  ||  || Definitions A complex fraction A fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. is a fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. For example, Simplifying such a fraction requires us to find an equivalent fraction with integer numerator and denominator. One way to do this is to divide. Recall that dividing fractions involves multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. An alternative method for simplifying this complex fraction involves multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the LCD of all the given fractions. In this case, the LCD = 4. A complex rational expression A rational expression where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more rational expressions. is defined as a rational expression that contains one or more rational expressions in the numerator or denominator or both. For example, We simplify a complex rational expression by finding an equivalent fraction where the numerator and denominator are polynomials. As illustrated above, there are two methods for simplifying complex rational expressions, and we will outline the steps for both methods. For the sake of clarity, assume that variable expressions used as denominators are nonzero.  || Method 1: Simplify Using Division We begin our discussion on simplifying complex rational expressions using division. Before we can multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor, we must simplify the numerator and denominator separately. The goal is to first obtain single algebraic fractions in the numerator and the denominator. The steps for simplifying a complex algebraic fraction are illustrated in the following example.   Example 1: Simplify: 1 2 + 1 x 1 4 − 1 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Simplify the numerator and denominator. The goal is to obtain a single algebraic fraction divided by another single algebraic fraction. In this example, find equivalent terms with a common denominator in both the numerator and denominator before adding and subtracting. At this point we have a single algebraic fraction divided by a single algebraic fraction. Step 2: Multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the divisor. Step 3: Factor all numerators and denominators completely. Step 4: Cancel all common factors. Answer: 2 x x − 2   Example 2: Simplify: 1 x − 1 x − 2 4 x 2 − 2 x . Solution: Answer: − 1 2   Example 3: Simplify   1 − 4 x − 21 x 2   1 − 2 x − 15 x 2 . Solution: The LCD of the rational expressions in both the numerator and denominator is x 2 . Multiply by the appropriate factors to obtain equivalent terms with this as the denominator and then subtract. We now have a single rational expression divided by another single rational expression. Next, multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the divisor and then factor and cancel. Answer: x − 7 x − 5   Example 4: Simplify:     1 − 1 x 2     1 x − 1 . Solution: Answer: − x + 1 x   Try this! Simplify:   1 81 − 1 x 2   1 9 + 1 x . Answer: x − 9 9 x Video Solution  || Method 2: Simplify Using the LCD An alternative method for simplifying complex rational expressions involves clearing the fractions by multiplying the expression by a special form of 1. In this method, multiply the numerator and denominator by the least common denominator (LCD) of all given fractions.   Example 5: Simplify: 1 2 + 1 x 1 4 − 1 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Determine the LCD of all the fractions in the numerator and denominator. In this case, the denominators of the given fractions are 2, x , 4, and x 2 . Therefore, the L C D  is  4 x 2 . Step 2: Multiply the numerator and denominator by the LCD. This step should clear the fractions in both the numerator and denominator. This leaves us with a single algebraic fraction with a polynomial in the numerator and in the denominator. Step 3: Factor the numerator and denominator completely. Step 4: Cancel all common factors. Answer: 2 x x − 2 Note This was the same problem that we began this section with, and the results here are the same. It is worth taking the time to compare the steps involved using both methods on the same problem.   Example 6: Simplify:   1 − 2 x − 15 x 2     3 − 14 x − 5 x 2 . Solution: Considering all of the denominators, we find that the LCD is  x 2 . Therefore, multiply the numerator and denominator by x 2 : At this point, we have a rational expression that can be simplified by factoring and then canceling the common factors. Answer: x + 3 3 x + 1   It is important to point out that multiplying the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero factor is equivalent to multiplying by 1 and does not change the problem. Because x 2 x 2 = 1 , we can multiply the numerator and denominator by x 2 in the previous example and obtain an equivalent expression.   Example 7: Simplify:   1 x + 1 + 3 x − 3   2 x − 3 − 1 x + 1 . Solution: The LCM of all the denominators is ( x + 1 ) ( x − 3 ) . Begin by multiplying the numerator and denominator by these factors. Answer: 4 x x + 5   Try this! Simplify: 1 y − 1 4 1 16 − 1 y 2 . Answer: − 4 y y + 4 Video Solution  ||  || Solving Rational Equations A rational equation An equation containing at least one rational expression. is an equation containing at least one rational expression. Rational expressions typically contain a variable in the denominator. For this reason, we will take care to ensure that the denominator is not 0 by making note of restrictions and checking our solutions. Solve rational equations by clearing the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD).   Example 1: Solve: 5 x − 1 3 = 1 x . Solution: We first make a note that x ≠ 0 and then multiply both sides by the LCD, 3x: Check your answer by substituting 12 for x to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is 12.   After multiplying both sides of the previous example by the LCD, we were left with a linear equation to solve. This is not always the case; sometimes we will be left with a quadratic equation.   Example 2: Solve: 2 − 1 x ( x + 1 ) = 3 x + 1 . Solution: In this example, there are two restrictions, x ≠ 0 and x ≠ − 1 . Begin by multiplying both sides by the LCD, x ( x + 1 ) . After distributing and dividing out the common factors, a quadratic equation remains. To solve it, rewrite it in standard form, factor, and then set each factor equal to 0. Check to see if these values solve the original equation. Answer: The solutions are −1/2 and 1.   Up to this point, all of the possible solutions have solved the original equation. However, this may not always be the case. Multiplying both sides of an equation by variable factors may lead to extraneous solutions A solution that does not solve the original equation. , which are solutions that do not solve the original equation. A complete list of steps for solving a rational equation is outlined in the following example.   Example 3: Solve: x x + 2 + 2 x 2 + 5 x + 6 = 5 x + 3 . Solution: Step 1: Factor all denominators and determine the LCD. The LCD is  ( x + 2 ) ( x + 3 ) . Step 2: Identify the restrictions. In this case, they are x ≠ − 2 and x ≠ − 3 . Step 3: Multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD. Distribute carefully and then simplify. Step 4: Solve the resulting equation. Here the result is a quadratic equation. Rewrite it in standard form, factor, and then set each factor equal to 0. Step 5: Check for extraneous solutions. Always substitute into the original equation, or the factored equivalent. In this case, choose the factored equivalent to check: Here −2 is an extraneous solution and is not included in the solution set. It is important to note that −2 is a restriction. Answer: The solution is 4.   If this process produces a solution that happens to be a restriction, then disregard it as an extraneous solution.   Try this! Solve: x x − 5 + 3 x + 2 = 7 x x 2 − 3 x − 10 . Answer: −3 Video Solution Sometimes all potential solutions are extraneous, in which case we say that there is no solution to the original equation. In the next two examples, we demonstrate two ways in which a rational equation can have no solutions.   Example 4: Solve: 3 x x 2 − 4 − 2 x + 2 = 1 x + 2 . Solution: To identify the LCD, first factor the denominators. Multiply both sides by the least common denonominator (LCD), ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 ) , distributing carefully. The equation is a contradiction and thus has no solution. Answer: No solution, ∅   Example 5: Solve: x x − 4 − 4 x + 5 = 36 x 2 + x − 20 . Solution: First, factor the denominators. Take note that the restrictions are x ≠ 4 and x ≠ − 5 . To clear the fractions, multiply by the LCD, ( x − 4 ) ( x + 5 ) . Both of these values are restrictions of the original equation; hence both are extraneous. Answer: No solution, ∅   Try this! Solve: 1 x + 1 + x x − 3 = 4 x x 2 − 2 x − 3 . Answer: ∅ Video Solution It is important to point out that this technique for clearing algebraic fractions only works for equations. Do not try to clear algebraic fractions when simplifying expressions. As a reminder, we have Expressions are to be simplified and equations are to be solved. If we multiply the expression by the LCD, x ( 2 x + 1 ) , we obtain another expression that is not equivalent.  || Literal Equations Literal equations, or formulas, are often rational equations. Hence the techniques described in this section can be used to solve for particular variables. Assume that all variable expressions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 6: Solve for x:    z = x − 5 y . Solution: The goal is to isolate x. Assuming that y is nonzero, multiply both sides by y and then add 5 to both sides. Answer: x = y z + 5   Example 7: Solve for c:    1 c = 1 a + 1 b . Solution: In this example, the goal is to isolate c. We begin by multiplying both sides by the LCD, a ⋅ b ⋅ c , distributing carefully. On the right side of the equation, factor out c. Next, divide both sides of the equation by the quantity . Answer:   Try this! Solve for y:    . Answer: Video Solution  ||  || Number Problems Recall that the reciprocal The reciprocal of a nonzero number n is 1/n. of a nonzero number n is 1/n. For example, the reciprocal of 5 is 1/5 and 5 ⋅ 1/5 = 1. In this section, the applications will often involve the key word “reciprocal.” When this is the case, we will see that the algebraic setup results in a rational equation.   Example 1: A positive integer is 4 less than another. The sum of the reciprocals of the two positive integers is 10/21. Find the two integers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the unknowns. Next, use the reciprocals 1 n and 1 n − 4 to translate the sentences into an algebraic equation. We can solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD). In this case, the LCD is 21 n ( n − 4 ) . Solve the resulting quadratic equation. The question calls for integers and the only integer solution is n = 7 . Hence disregard 6/5. Use the expression n − 4 to find the smaller integer. Answer: The two positive integers are 3 and 7. The check is left to the reader.   Example 2: A positive integer is 4 less than another. If the reciprocal of the smaller integer is subtracted from twice the reciprocal of the larger, then the result is 1/30. Find the two integers. Solution: Set up an algebraic equation. Solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides by the LCD. The LCD is 30 n ( n − 4 ) . Here we have two viable possibilities for the larger integer. For this reason, we will we have two solutions to this problem. As a check, perform the operations indicated in the problem. Answer: Two sets of positive integers solve this problem: {6, 10} and {20, 24}.   Try this! The difference between the reciprocals of two consecutive positive odd integers is 2/15. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 3 and 5. Video Solution  || Uniform Motion Problems Uniform motion Described by the formula D = r t , where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. problems, also referred to as distance problems, involve the formula where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. If we divide both sides by the average rate, r, then we obtain the formula For this reason, when the unknown quantity is time, the algebraic setup for distance problems often results in a rational equation. Similarly, when the unknown quantity is the rate, the setup also may result in a rational equation. We begin any uniform motion problem by first organizing our data with a chart. Use this information to set up an algebraic equation that models the application.   Example 5: Mary spent the first 120 miles of her road trip in traffic. When the traffic cleared, she was able to drive twice as fast for the remaining 300 miles. If the total trip took 9 hours, then how fast was she moving in traffic? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. To avoid introducing two more variables for the time column, use the formula t = D r . Here the time for each leg of the trip is calculated as follows: Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 9 hours: We begin solving this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, 2x. Answer: Mary averaged 30 miles per hour in traffic.   Example 6: A passenger train can travel, on average, 20 miles per hour faster than a freight train. If the passenger train covers 390 miles in the same time it takes the freight train to cover 270 miles, then how fast is each train? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantities and organize the data. Next, organize the given data in a chart. Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each train. Because the trains travel the same amount of time, finish the algebraic setup by equating the expressions that represent the times: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, x ( x + 20 ) . Use x + 20 to find the speed of the passenger train. Answer: The speed of the passenger train is 65 miles per hour and the speed of the freight train is 45 miles per hour.   Example 7: Brett lives on the river 8 miles upstream from town. When the current is 2 miles per hour, he can row his boat downstream to town for supplies and back in 3 hours. What is his average rowing speed in still water? Solution: Rowing downstream, the current increases his speed, and his rate is x + 2 miles per hour. Rowing upstream, the current decreases his speed, and his rate is x − 2 miles per hour. Begin by organizing the data in the following chart: Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each leg of the trip. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 3 hours: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 ) . Next, solve the resulting quadratic equation. Use only the positive solution, x = 6 miles per hour. Answer: His rowing speed is 6 miles per hour.   Try this! Dwayne drove 18 miles to the airport to pick up his father and then returned home. On the return trip he was able to drive an average of 15 miles per hour faster than he did on the trip there. If the total driving time was 1 hour, then what was his average speed driving to the airport? Answer: His average speed driving to the airport was 30 miles per hour. Video Solution  || Work-Rate Problems The rate at which a task can be performed is called a work rate The rate at which a task can be performed. . For example, if a painter can paint a room in 8 hours, then the task is to paint the room, and we can write In other words, the painter can complete 1 8 of the task per hour. If he works for less than 8 hours, then he will perform a fraction of the task. For example, Obtain the amount of the task completed by multiplying the work rate by the amount of time the painter works. Typically, work-rate problems involve people working together to complete tasks. When this is the case, we can organize the data in a chart, just as we have done with distance problems. Suppose an apprentice painter can paint the same room by himself in 10 hours. Then we say that he can complete 1 10 of the task per hour. Let t represent the time it takes both of the painters, working together, to paint the room. To complete the chart, multiply the work rate by the time for each person. The portion of the room each can paint adds to a total of 1 task completed. This is represented by the equation obtained from the first column of the chart: This setup results in a rational equation that can be solved for t by multiplying both sides by the LCD, 40. Therefore, the two painters, working together, complete the task in 4 4 9 hours. In general, we have the following work-rate formula 1 t 1 ⋅ t + 1 t 2 ⋅ t = 1 , where 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete the task working together. : Here 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete one task working together. If we factor out the time, t, and then divide both sides by t, we obtain an equivalent work-rate formula: In summary, we have the following equivalent work-rate formulas:   Example 3: Working alone, Billy’s dad can complete the yard work in 3 hours. If Billy helps his dad, then the yard work takes 2 hours. How long would it take Billy working alone to complete the yard work? Solution: The given information tells us that Billy’s dad has an individual work rate of 1 3 task per hour. If we let x represent the time it takes Billy working alone to complete the yard work, then Billy’s individual work rate is 1 x , and we can write Working together, they can complete the task in 2 hours. Multiply the individual work rates by 2 hours to fill in the chart. The amount of the task each completes will total 1 completed task. To solve for x, we first multiply both sides by the LCD, 3x. Answer: It takes Billy 6 hours to complete the yard work alone.   Of course, the unit of time for the work rate need not always be in hours.   Example 4: Working together, two construction crews can build a shed in 5 days. Working separately, the less experienced crew takes twice as long to build a shed than the more experienced crew. Working separately, how long does it take each crew to build a shed? Solution: Working together, the job is completed in 5 days. This gives the following setup: The first column in the chart gives us an algebraic equation that models the problem: Solve the equation by multiplying both sides by 2x. To determine the time it takes the less experienced crew, we use 2x: Answer: Working separately, the experienced crew takes 7½ days to build a shed, and the less experienced crew takes 15 days to build a shed.   Try this! Joe’s garden hose fills the pool in 12 hours. His neighbor has a thinner hose that fills the pool in 15 hours. How long will it take to fill the pool using both hoses? Answer: It will take both hoses 6 2 3 hours to fill the pool. Video Solution  ||  || Direct Variation Consider a freight train moving at a constant speed of 30 miles per hour. The equation that expresses the distance traveled at that speed in terms of time is given by After 1 hour the train has traveled 30 miles, after 2 hours the train has traveled 60 miles, and so on. We can construct a chart and graph this relation. In this example, we can see that the distance varies over time as the product of the constant rate, 30 miles per hour, and the variable, t. This relationship is described as direct variation Describes two quantities x and y that are constant multiples of each other: y = k x . and 30 is called the variation constant. In addition, if we divide both sides of D = 30 t by t we have In this form, it is reasonable to say that D is proportional to t, where 30 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies directly as x” y = k x “y is directly proportional Used when referring to direct variation. to x” “y is proportional to x” Here k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation The nonzero multiple k, when quantities vary directly or inversely. or the constant of proportionality Used when referring to the constant of variation. .   Example 1: The circumference of a circle is directly proportional to its diameter, and the constant of proportionality is π . If the circumference is measured to be 20 inches, then what is the radius of the circle? Solution: Use the fact that “the circumference is directly proportional to the diameter” to write an equation that relates the two variables. We are given that “the constant of proportionality is π ,” or k = π . Therefore, we write Now use this formula to find d when the circumference is 20 inches. The radius of the circle, r, is one-half of its diameter. Answer: The radius is 10 π inches, or approximately 3.18 inches.   Typically, we will not be given the constant of variation. Instead, we will be given information from which it can be determined.   Example 2: An object’s weight on earth varies directly to its weight on the moon. If a man weighs 180 pounds on earth, then he will weigh 30 pounds on the moon. Set up an algebraic equation that expresses the weight on earth in terms of the weight on the moon and use it to determine the weight of a woman on the moon if she weighs 120 pounds on earth. Solution: We are given that the “weight on earth varies directly to the weight on the moon.” To find the constant of variation k, use the given information. A 180-pound man on earth weighs 30 pounds on the moon, or y = 180 when x = 30 . Solve for k. Next, set up a formula that models the given information. This implies that a person’s weight on earth is 6 times her weight on the moon. To answer the question, use the woman’s weight on earth, y = 120   pounds , and solve for x. Answer: The woman weighs 20 pounds on the moon.  || Inverse Variation Next, consider the relationship between time and rate, If we wish to travel a fixed distance, then we can determine the average speed required to travel that distance in a given amount of time. For example, if we wish to drive 240 miles in 4 hours, we can determine the required average speed as follows: The average speed required to drive 240 miles in 4 hours is 60 miles per hour. If we wish to drive the 240 miles in 5 hours, then determine the required speed using a similar equation: In this case, we would only have to average 48 miles per hour. We can make a chart and view this relationship on a graph. This is an example of an inverse relationship. We say that r is inversely proportional to the time t, where 240 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies inversely Describes two quantities x and y, where one variable is directly proportional to the reciprocal of the other: y = k x . as x” y = k x “y is inversely proportional Used when referring to inverse variation. to x” Again, k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation or the constant of proportionality.   Example 3: If y varies inversely as x and y = 5 when x = 2 , then find the constant of proportionality and an equation that relates the two variables. Solution: If we let k represent the constant of proportionality, then the statement “y varies inversely as x” can be written as follows: Use the given information, y = 5 when x = 2 , to find k. Solve for k. Therefore, the formula that models the problem is Answer: The constant of proportionality is 10, and the equation is y = 10 x .   Example 4: The weight of an object varies inversely as the square of its distance from the center of earth. If an object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth (approximately 4,000 miles from the center), then how much will it weigh at 1,000 miles above earth’s surface? Solution: Since “w varies inversely as the square of d,” we can write Use the given information to find k. An object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth, approximately 4,000 miles from the center. In other words, w = 100 when d = 4,000: Solve for k. Therefore, we can model the problem with the following formula: To use the formula to find the weight, we need the distance from the center of earth. Since the object is 1,000 miles above the surface, find the distance from the center of earth by adding 4,000 miles: To answer the question, use the formula with d = 5,000. Answer: The object will weigh 64 pounds at a distance 1,000 miles above the surface of earth.  || Joint Variation Lastly, we define relationships between multiple variables. In general, we have Vocabulary Translation “y varies jointly Describes a quantity y that varies directly as the product of two other quantities x and z: y = k x z . as x and z” y = k x z “y is jointly proportional Used when referring to joint variation. to x and z” Here k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation or the constant of proportionality.   Example 5: The area of an ellipse varies jointly as a, half of the ellipse’s major axis, and b, half of the ellipse’s minor axis. If the area of an ellipse is 300 π   cm 2 , where a = 10   cm and b = 30   cm , then what is the constant of proportionality? Give a formula for the area of an ellipse. Solution: If we let A represent the area of an ellipse, then we can use the statement “area varies jointly as a and b” to write To find the constant of variation, k, use the fact that the area is 300 π when a = 10 and b = 30 . Therefore, the formula for the area of an ellipse is Answer: The constant of proportionality is π , and the formula for the area is A = a b π .   Try this! Given that y varies directly as the square of x and inversely to z, where y = 2 when x = 3 and z = 27, find y when x = 2 and z = 16. Answer: 3/2 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_1	 || Rational Expressions, Evaluating, and Restrictions A rational number, or fraction a b , is a real number defined as a quotient of two integers a and b, where b ≠ 0 . Similarly, we define a rational expression The quotient P Q of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0. , or algebraic fraction Term used when referring to a rational expression. P Q , as the quotient of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0 . Some examples of rational expressions follow: The example x + 3 x − 5 consists of linear expressions in both the numerator and denominator. Because the denominator contains a variable, this expression is not defined for all values of x.   Example 1: Evaluate x + 3 x − 5 for the set of x-values {−3, 4, 5}. Solution: Substitute the values in for x. Answer: When x = − 3 , the value of the rational expression is 0; when x = 4 , the value of the rational expression is −7; and when x = 5 , the value of the rational expression is undefined.   This example illustrates that variables are restricted to values that do not make the denominator equal to 0. The domain of a rational expression The set of real numbers for which the rational expression is defined. is the set of real numbers for which it is defined, and restrictions The set of real numbers for which a rational expression is not defined. are the real numbers for which the expression is not defined. We often express the domain of a rational expression in terms of its restrictions.   Example 2: Find the domain of the following: x + 7 2 x 2 + x − 6 . Solution: In this example, the numerator x + 7 is a linear expression and the denominator 2 x 2 + x − 6 is a quadratic expression. If we factor the denominator, then we will obtain an equivalent expression. Because rational expressions are undefined when the denominator is 0, we wish to find the values for x that make it 0. To do this, apply the zero-product property. Set each factor in the denominator equal to 0 and solve. We conclude that the original expression is defined for any real number except 3/2 and −2. These two values are the restrictions to the domain. It is important to note that −7 is not a restriction to the domain because the expression is defined as 0 when the numerator is 0. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ 3 2 and x ≠ − 2 .   We can express the domain of the previous example using notation as follows: The restrictions to the domain of a rational expression are determined by the denominator. Ignore the numerator when finding those restrictions.   Example 3: Determine the domain: x 4 + x 3 − 2 x 2 − x x 2 − 1 . Solution: To find the restrictions to the domain, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve: These two values cause the denominator to be 0. Hence they are restricted from the domain. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ ± 1 .   Example 4: Determine the domain: x 2 − 25 4 . Solution: There is no variable in the denominator and thus no restriction to the domain. Answer: The domain consists of all real numbers, R.  || Simplifying Rational Expressions When simplifying fractions, look for common factors that cancel. For example, We say that the fraction 12/60 is equivalent to 1/5. Fractions are in simplest form if the numerator and denominator share no common factor other than 1. Similarly, when working with rational expressions, look for factors to cancel. For example, The resulting rational expression is equivalent if it shares the same domain. Therefore, we must make note of the restrictions and write In words, x + 4 ( x − 3 ) ( x + 4 ) is equivalent to 1 x − 3 , if x ≠ 3 and x ≠ − 4 . We can verify this by choosing a few values with which to evaluate both expressions to see if the results are the same. Here we choose x = 7 and evaluate as follows: It is important to state the restrictions before simplifying rational expressions because the simplified expression may be defined for restrictions of the original. In this case, the expressions are not equivalent. Here −4 is defined for the simplified equivalent but not for the original, as illustrated below:   Example 5: Simplify and state the restriction: 25 x 2 15 x 3 . Solution: In this example, the expression is undefined when x is 0. Therefore, the domain consists of all real numbers x, where x ≠ 0 . With this understanding, we can cancel common factors. Answer: 5 3 x , where x ≠ 0   Example 6: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x ( x − 5 ) ( 2 x + 1 ) ( x − 5 ) . Solution: To determine the restrictions, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except for −1/2 and 5. Next, we find an equivalent expression by canceling common factors. Answer: 3 x 2 x + 1 , where x ≠ − 1 2 and x ≠ 5   Typically, rational expressions are not given in factored form. If this is the case, factor first and then cancel. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 7: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x + 6 x 2 + x − 2 . Solution: Step 1: Completely factor the numerator and denominator. Step 2: Determine the restrictions to the domain. To do this, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except −2 and 1. Step 3: Cancel common factors, if any. Answer: 3 x − 1 , where x ≠ 1 and x ≠ − 2   Example 8: State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 + 7 x − 30 x 2 − 7 x + 12 . Solution: First, factor the numerator and denominator. Any value of x that results in a value of 0 in the denominator is a restriction. By inspection, we determine that the domain consists of all real numbers except 4 and 3. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: x + 10 x − 4 , where x ≠ 3 and x ≠ 4   It is important to remember that we can only cancel factors of a product. A common mistake is to cancel terms. For example,   Try this! State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 − 16 5 x 2 − 20 x . Answer: x + 4 5 x , where x ≠ 0 and x ≠ 4 Video Solution In some examples, we will make a broad assumption that the denominator is nonzero. When we make that assumption, we do not need to determine the restrictions.   Example 9: Simplify: x y + y 2 − 3 x − 3 y x 2 − y 2 . (Assume all denominators are nonzero.) Solution: Factor the numerator by grouping. Factor the denominator using the formula for a difference of squares. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: y − 3 x − y  || Opposite Binomial Factors Recall that the opposite of the real number a is −a. Similarly, we can define the opposite of a polynomial P to be −P. We first consider the opposite of the binomial a − b : This leads us to the opposite binomial property If given a binomial a − b , then the opposite is − ( a − b ) = b − a . : This is equivalent to factoring out a –1. If a ≠ b , then we can divide both sides by ( a − b ) and obtain the following:   Example 10: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 − x x − 3 . Solution: By inspection, we can see that the denominator is 0 if x = 3 . Therefore, 3 is the restriction to the domain. Apply the opposite binomial property to the numerator and then cancel. Answer: 3 − x x − 3 = − 1 , where x ≠ 3   Since addition is commutative, we have or Take care not to confuse this with the opposite binomial property. Also, it is important to recall that In other words, show a negative fraction by placing the negative sign in the numerator, in front of the fraction bar, or in the denominator. Generally, negative denominators are avoided.   Example 11: Simplify and state the restrictions: 4 − x 2 x 2 + 3 x − 10 . Solution: Begin by factoring the numerator and denominator. Answer: − x + 2 x + 5 , where x ≠ 2 and x ≠ − 5   Try this! Simplify and state the restrictions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 15 25 − x 2 . Answer: − 2 x + 3 x + 5 , where x ≠ ± 5 Video Solution  || Rational Functions Rational functions have the form where p ( x ) and q ( x ) are polynomials and q ( x ) ≠ 0 . The domain of a rational function consists of all real numbers x such that the denominator q ( x ) ≠ 0 .   Example 12: a. Simplify: r ( x ) = 2 x 2 + 5 x − 3 6 x 2 + 18 x . b. State the domain. c. Calculate r ( − 2 ) . Solution: a. To simplify the rational function, first factor and then cancel. b. To determine the restrictions, set the denominator of the original function equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers x, where x ≠ 0 and x ≠ − 3 . c. Since −2 is not a restriction, substitute it for the variable x using the simplified form. Answers: a. r ( x ) = 2 x − 1 6 x b. The domain is all real numbers except 0 and −3. c. r ( − 2 ) = 5 12   If a cost function A function that represents the cost of producing a certain number of units. C ( x ) represents the cost of producing x units, then the average cost The total cost divided by the number of units produced, which can be represented by c ( x ) = C ( x ) x , where C ( x ) is a cost function. c ( x ) is the cost divided by the number of units produced.   Example 13: The cost in dollars of producing t-shirts with a company logo is given by C ( x ) = 7 x + 200 , where x represents the number of shirts produced. Determine the average cost of producing a. 40 t-shirts b. 250 t-shirts c. 1,000 t-shirts Solution: Set up a function representing the average cost. Next, calculate c ( 40 ) , c ( 250 ) , and c ( 1000 ) . Answers: a. If 40 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $12.00. b. If 250 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $7.80. c. If 1,000 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $7.20.  || 
book2_chapter7_1_1	Rational Expressions, Evaluating, and Restrictions A rational number, or fraction a b , is a real number defined as a quotient of two integers a and b, where b ≠ 0 . Similarly, we define a rational expression The quotient P Q of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0. , or algebraic fraction Term used when referring to a rational expression. P Q , as the quotient of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0 . Some examples of rational expressions follow: The example x + 3 x − 5 consists of linear expressions in both the numerator and denominator. Because the denominator contains a variable, this expression is not defined for all values of x.   Example 1: Evaluate x + 3 x − 5 for the set of x-values {−3, 4, 5}. Solution: Substitute the values in for x. Answer: When x = − 3 , the value of the rational expression is 0; when x = 4 , the value of the rational expression is −7; and when x = 5 , the value of the rational expression is undefined.   This example illustrates that variables are restricted to values that do not make the denominator equal to 0. The domain of a rational expression The set of real numbers for which the rational expression is defined. is the set of real numbers for which it is defined, and restrictions The set of real numbers for which a rational expression is not defined. are the real numbers for which the expression is not defined. We often express the domain of a rational expression in terms of its restrictions.   Example 2: Find the domain of the following: x + 7 2 x 2 + x − 6 . Solution: In this example, the numerator x + 7 is a linear expression and the denominator 2 x 2 + x − 6 is a quadratic expression. If we factor the denominator, then we will obtain an equivalent expression. Because rational expressions are undefined when the denominator is 0, we wish to find the values for x that make it 0. To do this, apply the zero-product property. Set each factor in the denominator equal to 0 and solve. We conclude that the original expression is defined for any real number except 3/2 and −2. These two values are the restrictions to the domain. It is important to note that −7 is not a restriction to the domain because the expression is defined as 0 when the numerator is 0. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ 3 2 and x ≠ − 2 .   We can express the domain of the previous example using notation as follows: The restrictions to the domain of a rational expression are determined by the denominator. Ignore the numerator when finding those restrictions.   Example 3: Determine the domain: x 4 + x 3 − 2 x 2 − x x 2 − 1 . Solution: To find the restrictions to the domain, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve: These two values cause the denominator to be 0. Hence they are restricted from the domain. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ ± 1 .   Example 4: Determine the domain: x 2 − 25 4 . Solution: There is no variable in the denominator and thus no restriction to the domain. Answer: The domain consists of all real numbers, R. Rational Expressions, Evaluating, and Restrictions A rational number, or fraction a b , is a real number defined as a quotient of two integers a and b, where b ≠ 0 . Similarly, we define a rational expression The quotient P Q of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0. , or algebraic fraction Term used when referring to a rational expression. P Q , as the quotient of two polynomials P and Q, where Q ≠ 0 . Some examples of rational expressions follow: The example x + 3 x − 5 consists of linear expressions in both the numerator and denominator. Because the denominator contains a variable, this expression is not defined for all values of x.   Example 1: Evaluate x + 3 x − 5 for the set of x-values {−3, 4, 5}. Solution: Substitute the values in for x. Answer: When x = − 3 , the value of the rational expression is 0; when x = 4 , the value of the rational expression is −7; and when x = 5 , the value of the rational expression is undefined.   This example illustrates that variables are restricted to values that do not make the denominator equal to 0. The domain of a rational expression The set of real numbers for which the rational expression is defined. is the set of real numbers for which it is defined, and restrictions The set of real numbers for which a rational expression is not defined. are the real numbers for which the expression is not defined. We often express the domain of a rational expression in terms of its restrictions.   Example 2: Find the domain of the following: x + 7 2 x 2 + x − 6 . Solution: In this example, the numerator x + 7 is a linear expression and the denominator 2 x 2 + x − 6 is a quadratic expression. If we factor the denominator, then we will obtain an equivalent expression. Because rational expressions are undefined when the denominator is 0, we wish to find the values for x that make it 0. To do this, apply the zero-product property. Set each factor in the denominator equal to 0 and solve. We conclude that the original expression is defined for any real number except 3/2 and −2. These two values are the restrictions to the domain. It is important to note that −7 is not a restriction to the domain because the expression is defined as 0 when the numerator is 0. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ 3 2 and x ≠ − 2 .   We can express the domain of the previous example using notation as follows: The restrictions to the domain of a rational expression are determined by the denominator. Ignore the numerator when finding those restrictions.   Example 3: Determine the domain: x 4 + x 3 − 2 x 2 − x x 2 − 1 . Solution: To find the restrictions to the domain, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve: These two values cause the denominator to be 0. Hence they are restricted from the domain. Answer: The domain consists of any real number x, where x ≠ ± 1 .   Example 4: Determine the domain: x 2 − 25 4 . Solution: There is no variable in the denominator and thus no restriction to the domain. Answer: The domain consists of all real numbers, R.  || 
book2_chapter7_1_2	Simplifying Rational Expressions When simplifying fractions, look for common factors that cancel. For example, We say that the fraction 12/60 is equivalent to 1/5. Fractions are in simplest form if the numerator and denominator share no common factor other than 1. Similarly, when working with rational expressions, look for factors to cancel. For example, The resulting rational expression is equivalent if it shares the same domain. Therefore, we must make note of the restrictions and write In words, x + 4 ( x − 3 ) ( x + 4 ) is equivalent to 1 x − 3 , if x ≠ 3 and x ≠ − 4 . We can verify this by choosing a few values with which to evaluate both expressions to see if the results are the same. Here we choose x = 7 and evaluate as follows: It is important to state the restrictions before simplifying rational expressions because the simplified expression may be defined for restrictions of the original. In this case, the expressions are not equivalent. Here −4 is defined for the simplified equivalent but not for the original, as illustrated below:   Example 5: Simplify and state the restriction: 25 x 2 15 x 3 . Solution: In this example, the expression is undefined when x is 0. Therefore, the domain consists of all real numbers x, where x ≠ 0 . With this understanding, we can cancel common factors. Answer: 5 3 x , where x ≠ 0   Example 6: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x ( x − 5 ) ( 2 x + 1 ) ( x − 5 ) . Solution: To determine the restrictions, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except for −1/2 and 5. Next, we find an equivalent expression by canceling common factors. Answer: 3 x 2 x + 1 , where x ≠ − 1 2 and x ≠ 5   Typically, rational expressions are not given in factored form. If this is the case, factor first and then cancel. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 7: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x + 6 x 2 + x − 2 . Solution: Step 1: Completely factor the numerator and denominator. Step 2: Determine the restrictions to the domain. To do this, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except −2 and 1. Step 3: Cancel common factors, if any. Answer: 3 x − 1 , where x ≠ 1 and x ≠ − 2   Example 8: State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 + 7 x − 30 x 2 − 7 x + 12 . Solution: First, factor the numerator and denominator. Any value of x that results in a value of 0 in the denominator is a restriction. By inspection, we determine that the domain consists of all real numbers except 4 and 3. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: x + 10 x − 4 , where x ≠ 3 and x ≠ 4   It is important to remember that we can only cancel factors of a product. A common mistake is to cancel terms. For example,   Try this! State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 − 16 5 x 2 − 20 x . Answer: x + 4 5 x , where x ≠ 0 and x ≠ 4 Video Solution In some examples, we will make a broad assumption that the denominator is nonzero. When we make that assumption, we do not need to determine the restrictions.   Example 9: Simplify: x y + y 2 − 3 x − 3 y x 2 − y 2 . (Assume all denominators are nonzero.) Solution: Factor the numerator by grouping. Factor the denominator using the formula for a difference of squares. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: y − 3 x − y Simplifying Rational Expressions When simplifying fractions, look for common factors that cancel. For example, We say that the fraction 12/60 is equivalent to 1/5. Fractions are in simplest form if the numerator and denominator share no common factor other than 1. Similarly, when working with rational expressions, look for factors to cancel. For example, The resulting rational expression is equivalent if it shares the same domain. Therefore, we must make note of the restrictions and write In words, x + 4 ( x − 3 ) ( x + 4 ) is equivalent to 1 x − 3 , if x ≠ 3 and x ≠ − 4 . We can verify this by choosing a few values with which to evaluate both expressions to see if the results are the same. Here we choose x = 7 and evaluate as follows: It is important to state the restrictions before simplifying rational expressions because the simplified expression may be defined for restrictions of the original. In this case, the expressions are not equivalent. Here −4 is defined for the simplified equivalent but not for the original, as illustrated below:   Example 5: Simplify and state the restriction: 25 x 2 15 x 3 . Solution: In this example, the expression is undefined when x is 0. Therefore, the domain consists of all real numbers x, where x ≠ 0 . With this understanding, we can cancel common factors. Answer: 5 3 x , where x ≠ 0   Example 6: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x ( x − 5 ) ( 2 x + 1 ) ( x − 5 ) . Solution: To determine the restrictions, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except for −1/2 and 5. Next, we find an equivalent expression by canceling common factors. Answer: 3 x 2 x + 1 , where x ≠ − 1 2 and x ≠ 5   Typically, rational expressions are not given in factored form. If this is the case, factor first and then cancel. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 7: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 x + 6 x 2 + x − 2 . Solution: Step 1: Completely factor the numerator and denominator. Step 2: Determine the restrictions to the domain. To do this, set the denominator equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers except −2 and 1. Step 3: Cancel common factors, if any. Answer: 3 x − 1 , where x ≠ 1 and x ≠ − 2   Example 8: State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 + 7 x − 30 x 2 − 7 x + 12 . Solution: First, factor the numerator and denominator. Any value of x that results in a value of 0 in the denominator is a restriction. By inspection, we determine that the domain consists of all real numbers except 4 and 3. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: x + 10 x − 4 , where x ≠ 3 and x ≠ 4   It is important to remember that we can only cancel factors of a product. A common mistake is to cancel terms. For example,   Try this! State the restrictions and simplify: x 2 − 16 5 x 2 − 20 x . Answer: x + 4 5 x , where x ≠ 0 and x ≠ 4 Video Solution In some examples, we will make a broad assumption that the denominator is nonzero. When we make that assumption, we do not need to determine the restrictions.   Example 9: Simplify: x y + y 2 − 3 x − 3 y x 2 − y 2 . (Assume all denominators are nonzero.) Solution: Factor the numerator by grouping. Factor the denominator using the formula for a difference of squares. Next, cancel common factors. Answer: y − 3 x − y  || 
book2_chapter7_1_3	Opposite Binomial Factors Recall that the opposite of the real number a is −a. Similarly, we can define the opposite of a polynomial P to be −P. We first consider the opposite of the binomial a − b : This leads us to the opposite binomial property If given a binomial a − b , then the opposite is − ( a − b ) = b − a . : This is equivalent to factoring out a –1. If a ≠ b , then we can divide both sides by ( a − b ) and obtain the following:   Example 10: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 − x x − 3 . Solution: By inspection, we can see that the denominator is 0 if x = 3 . Therefore, 3 is the restriction to the domain. Apply the opposite binomial property to the numerator and then cancel. Answer: 3 − x x − 3 = − 1 , where x ≠ 3   Since addition is commutative, we have or Take care not to confuse this with the opposite binomial property. Also, it is important to recall that In other words, show a negative fraction by placing the negative sign in the numerator, in front of the fraction bar, or in the denominator. Generally, negative denominators are avoided.   Example 11: Simplify and state the restrictions: 4 − x 2 x 2 + 3 x − 10 . Solution: Begin by factoring the numerator and denominator. Answer: − x + 2 x + 5 , where x ≠ 2 and x ≠ − 5   Try this! Simplify and state the restrictions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 15 25 − x 2 . Answer: − 2 x + 3 x + 5 , where x ≠ ± 5 Video Solution Opposite Binomial Factors Recall that the opposite of the real number a is −a. Similarly, we can define the opposite of a polynomial P to be −P. We first consider the opposite of the binomial a − b : This leads us to the opposite binomial property If given a binomial a − b , then the opposite is − ( a − b ) = b − a . : This is equivalent to factoring out a –1. If a ≠ b , then we can divide both sides by ( a − b ) and obtain the following:   Example 10: State the restrictions and simplify: 3 − x x − 3 . Solution: By inspection, we can see that the denominator is 0 if x = 3 . Therefore, 3 is the restriction to the domain. Apply the opposite binomial property to the numerator and then cancel. Answer: 3 − x x − 3 = − 1 , where x ≠ 3   Since addition is commutative, we have or Take care not to confuse this with the opposite binomial property. Also, it is important to recall that In other words, show a negative fraction by placing the negative sign in the numerator, in front of the fraction bar, or in the denominator. Generally, negative denominators are avoided.   Example 11: Simplify and state the restrictions: 4 − x 2 x 2 + 3 x − 10 . Solution: Begin by factoring the numerator and denominator. Answer: − x + 2 x + 5 , where x ≠ 2 and x ≠ − 5   Try this! Simplify and state the restrictions: 2 x 2 − 7 x − 15 25 − x 2 . Answer: − 2 x + 3 x + 5 , where x ≠ ± 5 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_1_4	Rational Functions Rational functions have the form where p ( x ) and q ( x ) are polynomials and q ( x ) ≠ 0 . The domain of a rational function consists of all real numbers x such that the denominator q ( x ) ≠ 0 .   Example 12: a. Simplify: r ( x ) = 2 x 2 + 5 x − 3 6 x 2 + 18 x . b. State the domain. c. Calculate r ( − 2 ) . Solution: a. To simplify the rational function, first factor and then cancel. b. To determine the restrictions, set the denominator of the original function equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers x, where x ≠ 0 and x ≠ − 3 . c. Since −2 is not a restriction, substitute it for the variable x using the simplified form. Answers: a. r ( x ) = 2 x − 1 6 x b. The domain is all real numbers except 0 and −3. c. r ( − 2 ) = 5 12   If a cost function A function that represents the cost of producing a certain number of units. C ( x ) represents the cost of producing x units, then the average cost The total cost divided by the number of units produced, which can be represented by c ( x ) = C ( x ) x , where C ( x ) is a cost function. c ( x ) is the cost divided by the number of units produced.   Example 13: The cost in dollars of producing t-shirts with a company logo is given by C ( x ) = 7 x + 200 , where x represents the number of shirts produced. Determine the average cost of producing a. 40 t-shirts b. 250 t-shirts c. 1,000 t-shirts Solution: Set up a function representing the average cost. Next, calculate c ( 40 ) , c ( 250 ) , and c ( 1000 ) . Answers: a. If 40 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $12.00. b. If 250 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $7.80. c. If 1,000 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $7.20. Rational Functions Rational functions have the form where p ( x ) and q ( x ) are polynomials and q ( x ) ≠ 0 . The domain of a rational function consists of all real numbers x such that the denominator q ( x ) ≠ 0 .   Example 12: a. Simplify: r ( x ) = 2 x 2 + 5 x − 3 6 x 2 + 18 x . b. State the domain. c. Calculate r ( − 2 ) . Solution: a. To simplify the rational function, first factor and then cancel. b. To determine the restrictions, set the denominator of the original function equal to 0 and solve. The domain consists of all real numbers x, where x ≠ 0 and x ≠ − 3 . c. Since −2 is not a restriction, substitute it for the variable x using the simplified form. Answers: a. r ( x ) = 2 x − 1 6 x b. The domain is all real numbers except 0 and −3. c. r ( − 2 ) = 5 12   If a cost function A function that represents the cost of producing a certain number of units. C ( x ) represents the cost of producing x units, then the average cost The total cost divided by the number of units produced, which can be represented by c ( x ) = C ( x ) x , where C ( x ) is a cost function. c ( x ) is the cost divided by the number of units produced.   Example 13: The cost in dollars of producing t-shirts with a company logo is given by C ( x ) = 7 x + 200 , where x represents the number of shirts produced. Determine the average cost of producing a. 40 t-shirts b. 250 t-shirts c. 1,000 t-shirts Solution: Set up a function representing the average cost. Next, calculate c ( 40 ) , c ( 250 ) , and c ( 1000 ) . Answers: a. If 40 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $12.00. b. If 250 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $7.80. c. If 1,000 t-shirts are produced, then the average cost per t-shirt is $7.20.  || 
book2_chapter7_2	 || Multiplying Rational Expressions When multiplying fractions, we can multiply the numerators and denominators together and then reduce, as illustrated: Multiplying rational expressions is performed in a similar manner. For example, In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where Q ≠ 0 and S ≠ 0 , we have In this section, assume that all variable expressions in the denominator are nonzero unless otherwise stated.   Example 1: Multiply: 12 x 2 5 y 3 ⋅ 20 y 4 6 x 3 . Solution: Multiply numerators and denominators and then cancel common factors. Answer: 8 y x   Example 2: Multiply: x − 3 x + 5 ⋅ x + 5 x + 7 . Solution: Leave the product in factored form and cancel the common factors. Answer: x − 3 x + 7   Example 3: Multiply: 15 x 2 y 3 ( 2 x − 1 ) ⋅ x ( 2 x − 1 ) 3 x 2 y ( x + 3 ) . Solution: Leave the polynomials in the numerator and denominator factored so that we can cancel the factors. In other words, do not apply the distributive property. Answer: 5 x y 2 x + 3   Typically, rational expressions will not be given in factored form. In this case, first factor all numerators and denominators completely. Next, multiply and cancel any common factors, if there are any.   Example 4: Multiply: x + 5 x − 5 ⋅ x − 5 x 2 − 25 . Solution: Factor the denominator x 2 − 25 as a difference of squares. Then multiply and cancel. Keep in mind that 1 is always a factor; so when the entire numerator cancels out, make sure to write the factor 1. Answer: 1 x − 5   Example 5: Multiply: x 2 + 3 x + 2 x 2 − 5 x + 6 ⋅ x 2 − 7 x + 12 x 2 + 8 x + 7 . Solution: It is a best practice to leave the final answer in factored form. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x − 4 ) ( x − 2 ) ( x + 7 )   Example 6: Multiply: . Solution: The trinomial in the numerator has a negative leading coefficient. Recall that it is a best practice to first factor out a −1 and then factor the resulting trinomial. Answer:   Example 7: Multiply: . Solution: We replace with so that we can cancel this factor. Answer:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || Dividing Rational Expressions To divide two fractions, we multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor, as illustrated: Dividing rational expressions is performed in a similar manner. For example, In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where , , and , we have   Example 8: Divide: . Solution: First, multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor and then cancel. Answer:   Example 9: Divide: . Solution: After multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor, factor and cancel. Answer:   Example 10: Divide: . Solution: Begin by multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. After doing so, factor and cancel. Answer:   Example 11: Divide: . Solution: Just as we do with fractions, think of the divisor as an algebraic fraction over 1. Answer:   Try this! Divide: . Answer: Video Solution  || Multiplying and Dividing Rational Functions The product and quotient of two rational functions can be simplified using the techniques described in this section. The restrictions to the domain of a product consist of the restrictions of each function.   Example 12: Calculate and determine the restrictions to the domain. Solution: In this case, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 0, and the domain of consists of all real numbers except 1/4. Therefore, the domain of the product consists of all real numbers except 0 and 1/4. Multiply the functions and then simplify the result. Answer: , where   The restrictions to the domain of a quotient will consist of the restrictions of each function as well as the restrictions on the reciprocal of the divisor.   Example 13: Calculate and determine the restrictions. Solution: In this case, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 3 and 8, and the domain of consists all real numbers except 3. In addition, the reciprocal of has a restriction of −8. Therefore, the domain of this quotient consists of all real numbers except 3, 8, and −8. Answer: , where  || 
book2_chapter7_2_1	Multiplying Rational Expressions When multiplying fractions, we can multiply the numerators and denominators together and then reduce, as illustrated: Multiplying rational expressions is performed in a similar manner. For example, In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where Q ≠ 0 and S ≠ 0 , we have In this section, assume that all variable expressions in the denominator are nonzero unless otherwise stated.   Example 1: Multiply: 12 x 2 5 y 3 ⋅ 20 y 4 6 x 3 . Solution: Multiply numerators and denominators and then cancel common factors. Answer: 8 y x   Example 2: Multiply: x − 3 x + 5 ⋅ x + 5 x + 7 . Solution: Leave the product in factored form and cancel the common factors. Answer: x − 3 x + 7   Example 3: Multiply: 15 x 2 y 3 ( 2 x − 1 ) ⋅ x ( 2 x − 1 ) 3 x 2 y ( x + 3 ) . Solution: Leave the polynomials in the numerator and denominator factored so that we can cancel the factors. In other words, do not apply the distributive property. Answer: 5 x y 2 x + 3   Typically, rational expressions will not be given in factored form. In this case, first factor all numerators and denominators completely. Next, multiply and cancel any common factors, if there are any.   Example 4: Multiply: x + 5 x − 5 ⋅ x − 5 x 2 − 25 . Solution: Factor the denominator x 2 − 25 as a difference of squares. Then multiply and cancel. Keep in mind that 1 is always a factor; so when the entire numerator cancels out, make sure to write the factor 1. Answer: 1 x − 5   Example 5: Multiply: x 2 + 3 x + 2 x 2 − 5 x + 6 ⋅ x 2 − 7 x + 12 x 2 + 8 x + 7 . Solution: It is a best practice to leave the final answer in factored form. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x − 4 ) ( x − 2 ) ( x + 7 )   Example 6: Multiply: . Solution: The trinomial in the numerator has a negative leading coefficient. Recall that it is a best practice to first factor out a −1 and then factor the resulting trinomial. Answer:   Example 7: Multiply: . Solution: We replace with so that we can cancel this factor. Answer:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution Multiplying Rational Expressions When multiplying fractions, we can multiply the numerators and denominators together and then reduce, as illustrated: Multiplying rational expressions is performed in a similar manner. For example, In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where Q ≠ 0 and S ≠ 0 , we have In this section, assume that all variable expressions in the denominator are nonzero unless otherwise stated.   Example 1: Multiply: 12 x 2 5 y 3 ⋅ 20 y 4 6 x 3 . Solution: Multiply numerators and denominators and then cancel common factors. Answer: 8 y x   Example 2: Multiply: x − 3 x + 5 ⋅ x + 5 x + 7 . Solution: Leave the product in factored form and cancel the common factors. Answer: x − 3 x + 7   Example 3: Multiply: 15 x 2 y 3 ( 2 x − 1 ) ⋅ x ( 2 x − 1 ) 3 x 2 y ( x + 3 ) . Solution: Leave the polynomials in the numerator and denominator factored so that we can cancel the factors. In other words, do not apply the distributive property. Answer: 5 x y 2 x + 3   Typically, rational expressions will not be given in factored form. In this case, first factor all numerators and denominators completely. Next, multiply and cancel any common factors, if there are any.   Example 4: Multiply: x + 5 x − 5 ⋅ x − 5 x 2 − 25 . Solution: Factor the denominator x 2 − 25 as a difference of squares. Then multiply and cancel. Keep in mind that 1 is always a factor; so when the entire numerator cancels out, make sure to write the factor 1. Answer: 1 x − 5   Example 5: Multiply: x 2 + 3 x + 2 x 2 − 5 x + 6 ⋅ x 2 − 7 x + 12 x 2 + 8 x + 7 . Solution: It is a best practice to leave the final answer in factored form. Answer: ( x + 2 ) ( x − 4 ) ( x − 2 ) ( x + 7 )   Example 6: Multiply: . Solution: The trinomial in the numerator has a negative leading coefficient. Recall that it is a best practice to first factor out a −1 and then factor the resulting trinomial. Answer:   Example 7: Multiply: . Solution: We replace with so that we can cancel this factor. Answer:   Try this! Multiply: . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_2_2	Dividing Rational Expressions To divide two fractions, we multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor, as illustrated: Dividing rational expressions is performed in a similar manner. For example, In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where , , and , we have   Example 8: Divide: . Solution: First, multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor and then cancel. Answer:   Example 9: Divide: . Solution: After multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor, factor and cancel. Answer:   Example 10: Divide: . Solution: Begin by multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. After doing so, factor and cancel. Answer:   Example 11: Divide: . Solution: Just as we do with fractions, think of the divisor as an algebraic fraction over 1. Answer:   Try this! Divide: . Answer: Video Solution Dividing Rational Expressions To divide two fractions, we multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor, as illustrated: Dividing rational expressions is performed in a similar manner. For example, In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where , , and , we have   Example 8: Divide: . Solution: First, multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor and then cancel. Answer:   Example 9: Divide: . Solution: After multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor, factor and cancel. Answer:   Example 10: Divide: . Solution: Begin by multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. After doing so, factor and cancel. Answer:   Example 11: Divide: . Solution: Just as we do with fractions, think of the divisor as an algebraic fraction over 1. Answer:   Try this! Divide: . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_2_3	Multiplying and Dividing Rational Functions The product and quotient of two rational functions can be simplified using the techniques described in this section. The restrictions to the domain of a product consist of the restrictions of each function.   Example 12: Calculate and determine the restrictions to the domain. Solution: In this case, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 0, and the domain of consists of all real numbers except 1/4. Therefore, the domain of the product consists of all real numbers except 0 and 1/4. Multiply the functions and then simplify the result. Answer: , where   The restrictions to the domain of a quotient will consist of the restrictions of each function as well as the restrictions on the reciprocal of the divisor.   Example 13: Calculate and determine the restrictions. Solution: In this case, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 3 and 8, and the domain of consists all real numbers except 3. In addition, the reciprocal of has a restriction of −8. Therefore, the domain of this quotient consists of all real numbers except 3, 8, and −8. Answer: , where Multiplying and Dividing Rational Functions The product and quotient of two rational functions can be simplified using the techniques described in this section. The restrictions to the domain of a product consist of the restrictions of each function.   Example 12: Calculate and determine the restrictions to the domain. Solution: In this case, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 0, and the domain of consists of all real numbers except 1/4. Therefore, the domain of the product consists of all real numbers except 0 and 1/4. Multiply the functions and then simplify the result. Answer: , where   The restrictions to the domain of a quotient will consist of the restrictions of each function as well as the restrictions on the reciprocal of the divisor.   Example 13: Calculate and determine the restrictions. Solution: In this case, the domain of consists of all real numbers except 3 and 8, and the domain of consists all real numbers except 3. In addition, the reciprocal of has a restriction of −8. Therefore, the domain of this quotient consists of all real numbers except 3, 8, and −8. Answer: , where  || 
book2_chapter7_3	 || Adding and Subtracting with Common Denominators Adding and subtracting rational expressions is similar to adding and subtracting fractions. Recall that if the denominators are the same, we can add or subtract the numerators and write the result over the common denominator. When working with rational expressions, the common denominator will be a polynomial. In general, given polynomials P, Q, and R, where Q ≠ 0 , we have the following: In this section, assume that all variable factors in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 1: Add: 3 y + 7 y . Solution: Add the numerators 3 and 7, and write the result over the common denominator, y. Answer: 10 y   Example 2: Subtract: x − 5 2 x − 1 − 1 2 x − 1 . Solution: Subtract the numerators x − 5 and 1, and write the result over the common denominator, 2 x − 1 . Answer: x − 6 2 x − 1   Example 3: Subtract: 2 x + 7 ( x + 5 ) ( x − 3 ) − x + 10 ( x + 5 ) ( x − 3 ) . Solution: We use parentheses to remind us to subtract the entire numerator of the second rational expression. Answer: 1 x + 5   Example 4: Simplify: 2 x 2 + 10 x + 3 x 2 − 36 − x 2 + 6 x + 5 x 2 − 36 + x − 4 x 2 − 36 . Solution: Subtract and add the numerators. Make use of parentheses and write the result over the common denominator, x 2 − 36 . Answer: x − 1 x − 6   Try this! Subtract: x 2 + 1 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 − x 2 − 2 x 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 . Answer: 1 x − 4 Video Solution  || Adding and Subtracting with Unlike Denominators To add rational expressions with unlike denominators, first find equivalent expressions with common denominators. Do this just as you have with fractions. If the denominators of fractions are relatively prime, then the least common denominator (LCD) is their product. For example, Multiply each fraction by the appropriate form of 1 to obtain equivalent fractions with a common denominator. The process of adding and subtracting rational expressions is similar. In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where Q ≠ 0 and S ≠ 0 , we have the following: In this section, assume that all variable factors in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 5: Add: 1 x + 1 y . Solution: In this example, the L C D = x y . To obtain equivalent terms with this common denominator, multiply the first term by y y and the second term by x x . Answer: y + x x y   Example 6: Subtract: 1 y − 1 y − 3 . Solution: Since the L C D = y ( y − 3 ) , multiply the first term by 1 in the form of ( y − 3 ) ( y − 3 ) and the second term by y y . Answer: − 3 y ( y − 3 )   It is not always the case that the LCD is the product of the given denominators. Typically, the denominators are not relatively prime; thus determining the LCD requires some thought. Begin by factoring all denominators. The LCD is the product of all factors with the highest power. For example, given there are three base factors in the denominator: x , ( x + 2 ) , and ( x − 3 ) . The highest powers of these factors are x 3 , ( x + 2 ) 2 , and ( x − 3 ) 1 . Therefore, The general steps for adding or subtracting rational expressions are illustrated in the following example.   Example 7: Subtract: x x 2 + 4 x + 3 − 3 x 2 − 4 x − 5 . Solution: Step 1: Factor all denominators to determine the LCD. The LCD   is   ( x + 1 ) ( x + 3 ) ( x − 5 ) . Step 2: Multiply by the appropriate factors to obtain equivalent terms with a common denominator. To do this, multiply the first term by and the second term by . Step 3: Add or subtract the numerators and place the result over the common denominator. Step 4: Simplify the resulting algebraic fraction. Answer:   Example 8: Subtract: . Solution: It is best not to factor the numerator, , because we will most likely need to simplify after we subtract. Answer:   Example 9: Subtract: . Solution: First, factor the denominators and determine the LCD. Notice how the opposite binomial property is applied to obtain a more workable denominator. The LCD is . Multiply the second term by 1 in the form of . Now that we have equivalent terms with a common denominator, add the numerators and write the result over the common denominator. Answer:   Example 10: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by factoring the denominator. We can see that the . Find equivalent fractions with this denominator. Next, subtract and add the numerators and place the result over the common denominator. Finish by simplifying the resulting rational expression. Answer:   Try this! Simplify: . Answer: Video Solution Rational expressions are sometimes expressed using negative exponents. In this case, apply the rules for negative exponents before simplifying the expression.   Example 11: Simplify: . Solution: Recall that . We begin by rewriting the negative exponents as rational expressions. Answer:  || Adding and Subtracting Rational Functions We can simplify sums or differences of rational functions using the techniques learned in this section. The restrictions of the result consist of the restrictions to the domains of each function.   Example 12: Calculate , given and , and state the restrictions. Solution: Here the domain of f consists of all real numbers except −3, and the domain of g consists of all real numbers except 2. Therefore, the domain of f + g consists of all real numbers except −3 and 2. Answer: , where   Example 13: Calculate , given and , and state the restrictions to the domain. Solution: The domain of f consists of all real numbers except 5 and −5, and the domain of g consists of all real numbers except 5. Therefore, the domain of f − g consists of all real numbers except −5 and 5. Answer: , where  || 
book2_chapter7_3_1	Adding and Subtracting with Common Denominators Adding and subtracting rational expressions is similar to adding and subtracting fractions. Recall that if the denominators are the same, we can add or subtract the numerators and write the result over the common denominator. When working with rational expressions, the common denominator will be a polynomial. In general, given polynomials P, Q, and R, where Q ≠ 0 , we have the following: In this section, assume that all variable factors in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 1: Add: 3 y + 7 y . Solution: Add the numerators 3 and 7, and write the result over the common denominator, y. Answer: 10 y   Example 2: Subtract: x − 5 2 x − 1 − 1 2 x − 1 . Solution: Subtract the numerators x − 5 and 1, and write the result over the common denominator, 2 x − 1 . Answer: x − 6 2 x − 1   Example 3: Subtract: 2 x + 7 ( x + 5 ) ( x − 3 ) − x + 10 ( x + 5 ) ( x − 3 ) . Solution: We use parentheses to remind us to subtract the entire numerator of the second rational expression. Answer: 1 x + 5   Example 4: Simplify: 2 x 2 + 10 x + 3 x 2 − 36 − x 2 + 6 x + 5 x 2 − 36 + x − 4 x 2 − 36 . Solution: Subtract and add the numerators. Make use of parentheses and write the result over the common denominator, x 2 − 36 . Answer: x − 1 x − 6   Try this! Subtract: x 2 + 1 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 − x 2 − 2 x 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 . Answer: 1 x − 4 Video Solution Adding and Subtracting with Common Denominators Adding and subtracting rational expressions is similar to adding and subtracting fractions. Recall that if the denominators are the same, we can add or subtract the numerators and write the result over the common denominator. When working with rational expressions, the common denominator will be a polynomial. In general, given polynomials P, Q, and R, where Q ≠ 0 , we have the following: In this section, assume that all variable factors in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 1: Add: 3 y + 7 y . Solution: Add the numerators 3 and 7, and write the result over the common denominator, y. Answer: 10 y   Example 2: Subtract: x − 5 2 x − 1 − 1 2 x − 1 . Solution: Subtract the numerators x − 5 and 1, and write the result over the common denominator, 2 x − 1 . Answer: x − 6 2 x − 1   Example 3: Subtract: 2 x + 7 ( x + 5 ) ( x − 3 ) − x + 10 ( x + 5 ) ( x − 3 ) . Solution: We use parentheses to remind us to subtract the entire numerator of the second rational expression. Answer: 1 x + 5   Example 4: Simplify: 2 x 2 + 10 x + 3 x 2 − 36 − x 2 + 6 x + 5 x 2 − 36 + x − 4 x 2 − 36 . Solution: Subtract and add the numerators. Make use of parentheses and write the result over the common denominator, x 2 − 36 . Answer: x − 1 x − 6   Try this! Subtract: x 2 + 1 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 − x 2 − 2 x 2 x 2 − 7 x − 4 . Answer: 1 x − 4 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_3_2	Adding and Subtracting with Unlike Denominators To add rational expressions with unlike denominators, first find equivalent expressions with common denominators. Do this just as you have with fractions. If the denominators of fractions are relatively prime, then the least common denominator (LCD) is their product. For example, Multiply each fraction by the appropriate form of 1 to obtain equivalent fractions with a common denominator. The process of adding and subtracting rational expressions is similar. In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where Q ≠ 0 and S ≠ 0 , we have the following: In this section, assume that all variable factors in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 5: Add: 1 x + 1 y . Solution: In this example, the L C D = x y . To obtain equivalent terms with this common denominator, multiply the first term by y y and the second term by x x . Answer: y + x x y   Example 6: Subtract: 1 y − 1 y − 3 . Solution: Since the L C D = y ( y − 3 ) , multiply the first term by 1 in the form of ( y − 3 ) ( y − 3 ) and the second term by y y . Answer: − 3 y ( y − 3 )   It is not always the case that the LCD is the product of the given denominators. Typically, the denominators are not relatively prime; thus determining the LCD requires some thought. Begin by factoring all denominators. The LCD is the product of all factors with the highest power. For example, given there are three base factors in the denominator: x , ( x + 2 ) , and ( x − 3 ) . The highest powers of these factors are x 3 , ( x + 2 ) 2 , and ( x − 3 ) 1 . Therefore, The general steps for adding or subtracting rational expressions are illustrated in the following example.   Example 7: Subtract: x x 2 + 4 x + 3 − 3 x 2 − 4 x − 5 . Solution: Step 1: Factor all denominators to determine the LCD. The LCD   is   ( x + 1 ) ( x + 3 ) ( x − 5 ) . Step 2: Multiply by the appropriate factors to obtain equivalent terms with a common denominator. To do this, multiply the first term by and the second term by . Step 3: Add or subtract the numerators and place the result over the common denominator. Step 4: Simplify the resulting algebraic fraction. Answer:   Example 8: Subtract: . Solution: It is best not to factor the numerator, , because we will most likely need to simplify after we subtract. Answer:   Example 9: Subtract: . Solution: First, factor the denominators and determine the LCD. Notice how the opposite binomial property is applied to obtain a more workable denominator. The LCD is . Multiply the second term by 1 in the form of . Now that we have equivalent terms with a common denominator, add the numerators and write the result over the common denominator. Answer:   Example 10: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by factoring the denominator. We can see that the . Find equivalent fractions with this denominator. Next, subtract and add the numerators and place the result over the common denominator. Finish by simplifying the resulting rational expression. Answer:   Try this! Simplify: . Answer: Video Solution Rational expressions are sometimes expressed using negative exponents. In this case, apply the rules for negative exponents before simplifying the expression.   Example 11: Simplify: . Solution: Recall that . We begin by rewriting the negative exponents as rational expressions. Answer: Adding and Subtracting with Unlike Denominators To add rational expressions with unlike denominators, first find equivalent expressions with common denominators. Do this just as you have with fractions. If the denominators of fractions are relatively prime, then the least common denominator (LCD) is their product. For example, Multiply each fraction by the appropriate form of 1 to obtain equivalent fractions with a common denominator. The process of adding and subtracting rational expressions is similar. In general, given polynomials P, Q, R, and S, where Q ≠ 0 and S ≠ 0 , we have the following: In this section, assume that all variable factors in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 5: Add: 1 x + 1 y . Solution: In this example, the L C D = x y . To obtain equivalent terms with this common denominator, multiply the first term by y y and the second term by x x . Answer: y + x x y   Example 6: Subtract: 1 y − 1 y − 3 . Solution: Since the L C D = y ( y − 3 ) , multiply the first term by 1 in the form of ( y − 3 ) ( y − 3 ) and the second term by y y . Answer: − 3 y ( y − 3 )   It is not always the case that the LCD is the product of the given denominators. Typically, the denominators are not relatively prime; thus determining the LCD requires some thought. Begin by factoring all denominators. The LCD is the product of all factors with the highest power. For example, given there are three base factors in the denominator: x , ( x + 2 ) , and ( x − 3 ) . The highest powers of these factors are x 3 , ( x + 2 ) 2 , and ( x − 3 ) 1 . Therefore, The general steps for adding or subtracting rational expressions are illustrated in the following example.   Example 7: Subtract: x x 2 + 4 x + 3 − 3 x 2 − 4 x − 5 . Solution: Step 1: Factor all denominators to determine the LCD. The LCD   is   ( x + 1 ) ( x + 3 ) ( x − 5 ) . Step 2: Multiply by the appropriate factors to obtain equivalent terms with a common denominator. To do this, multiply the first term by and the second term by . Step 3: Add or subtract the numerators and place the result over the common denominator. Step 4: Simplify the resulting algebraic fraction. Answer:   Example 8: Subtract: . Solution: It is best not to factor the numerator, , because we will most likely need to simplify after we subtract. Answer:   Example 9: Subtract: . Solution: First, factor the denominators and determine the LCD. Notice how the opposite binomial property is applied to obtain a more workable denominator. The LCD is . Multiply the second term by 1 in the form of . Now that we have equivalent terms with a common denominator, add the numerators and write the result over the common denominator. Answer:   Example 10: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by factoring the denominator. We can see that the . Find equivalent fractions with this denominator. Next, subtract and add the numerators and place the result over the common denominator. Finish by simplifying the resulting rational expression. Answer:   Try this! Simplify: . Answer: Video Solution Rational expressions are sometimes expressed using negative exponents. In this case, apply the rules for negative exponents before simplifying the expression.   Example 11: Simplify: . Solution: Recall that . We begin by rewriting the negative exponents as rational expressions. Answer:  || 
book2_chapter7_3_3	Adding and Subtracting Rational Functions We can simplify sums or differences of rational functions using the techniques learned in this section. The restrictions of the result consist of the restrictions to the domains of each function.   Example 12: Calculate , given and , and state the restrictions. Solution: Here the domain of f consists of all real numbers except −3, and the domain of g consists of all real numbers except 2. Therefore, the domain of f + g consists of all real numbers except −3 and 2. Answer: , where   Example 13: Calculate , given and , and state the restrictions to the domain. Solution: The domain of f consists of all real numbers except 5 and −5, and the domain of g consists of all real numbers except 5. Therefore, the domain of f − g consists of all real numbers except −5 and 5. Answer: , where Adding and Subtracting Rational Functions We can simplify sums or differences of rational functions using the techniques learned in this section. The restrictions of the result consist of the restrictions to the domains of each function.   Example 12: Calculate , given and , and state the restrictions. Solution: Here the domain of f consists of all real numbers except −3, and the domain of g consists of all real numbers except 2. Therefore, the domain of f + g consists of all real numbers except −3 and 2. Answer: , where   Example 13: Calculate , given and , and state the restrictions to the domain. Solution: The domain of f consists of all real numbers except 5 and −5, and the domain of g consists of all real numbers except 5. Therefore, the domain of f − g consists of all real numbers except −5 and 5. Answer: , where  || 
book2_chapter7_4	 || Definitions A complex fraction A fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. is a fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. For example, Simplifying such a fraction requires us to find an equivalent fraction with integer numerator and denominator. One way to do this is to divide. Recall that dividing fractions involves multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. An alternative method for simplifying this complex fraction involves multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the LCD of all the given fractions. In this case, the LCD = 4. A complex rational expression A rational expression where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more rational expressions. is defined as a rational expression that contains one or more rational expressions in the numerator or denominator or both. For example, We simplify a complex rational expression by finding an equivalent fraction where the numerator and denominator are polynomials. As illustrated above, there are two methods for simplifying complex rational expressions, and we will outline the steps for both methods. For the sake of clarity, assume that variable expressions used as denominators are nonzero.  || Method 1: Simplify Using Division We begin our discussion on simplifying complex rational expressions using division. Before we can multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor, we must simplify the numerator and denominator separately. The goal is to first obtain single algebraic fractions in the numerator and the denominator. The steps for simplifying a complex algebraic fraction are illustrated in the following example.   Example 1: Simplify: 1 2 + 1 x 1 4 − 1 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Simplify the numerator and denominator. The goal is to obtain a single algebraic fraction divided by another single algebraic fraction. In this example, find equivalent terms with a common denominator in both the numerator and denominator before adding and subtracting. At this point we have a single algebraic fraction divided by a single algebraic fraction. Step 2: Multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the divisor. Step 3: Factor all numerators and denominators completely. Step 4: Cancel all common factors. Answer: 2 x x − 2   Example 2: Simplify: 1 x − 1 x − 2 4 x 2 − 2 x . Solution: Answer: − 1 2   Example 3: Simplify   1 − 4 x − 21 x 2   1 − 2 x − 15 x 2 . Solution: The LCD of the rational expressions in both the numerator and denominator is x 2 . Multiply by the appropriate factors to obtain equivalent terms with this as the denominator and then subtract. We now have a single rational expression divided by another single rational expression. Next, multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the divisor and then factor and cancel. Answer: x − 7 x − 5   Example 4: Simplify:     1 − 1 x 2     1 x − 1 . Solution: Answer: − x + 1 x   Try this! Simplify:   1 81 − 1 x 2   1 9 + 1 x . Answer: x − 9 9 x Video Solution  || Method 2: Simplify Using the LCD An alternative method for simplifying complex rational expressions involves clearing the fractions by multiplying the expression by a special form of 1. In this method, multiply the numerator and denominator by the least common denominator (LCD) of all given fractions.   Example 5: Simplify: 1 2 + 1 x 1 4 − 1 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Determine the LCD of all the fractions in the numerator and denominator. In this case, the denominators of the given fractions are 2, x , 4, and x 2 . Therefore, the L C D  is  4 x 2 . Step 2: Multiply the numerator and denominator by the LCD. This step should clear the fractions in both the numerator and denominator. This leaves us with a single algebraic fraction with a polynomial in the numerator and in the denominator. Step 3: Factor the numerator and denominator completely. Step 4: Cancel all common factors. Answer: 2 x x − 2 Note This was the same problem that we began this section with, and the results here are the same. It is worth taking the time to compare the steps involved using both methods on the same problem.   Example 6: Simplify:   1 − 2 x − 15 x 2     3 − 14 x − 5 x 2 . Solution: Considering all of the denominators, we find that the LCD is  x 2 . Therefore, multiply the numerator and denominator by x 2 : At this point, we have a rational expression that can be simplified by factoring and then canceling the common factors. Answer: x + 3 3 x + 1   It is important to point out that multiplying the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero factor is equivalent to multiplying by 1 and does not change the problem. Because x 2 x 2 = 1 , we can multiply the numerator and denominator by x 2 in the previous example and obtain an equivalent expression.   Example 7: Simplify:   1 x + 1 + 3 x − 3   2 x − 3 − 1 x + 1 . Solution: The LCM of all the denominators is ( x + 1 ) ( x − 3 ) . Begin by multiplying the numerator and denominator by these factors. Answer: 4 x x + 5   Try this! Simplify: 1 y − 1 4 1 16 − 1 y 2 . Answer: − 4 y y + 4 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_4_1	Definitions A complex fraction A fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. is a fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. For example, Simplifying such a fraction requires us to find an equivalent fraction with integer numerator and denominator. One way to do this is to divide. Recall that dividing fractions involves multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. An alternative method for simplifying this complex fraction involves multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the LCD of all the given fractions. In this case, the LCD = 4. A complex rational expression A rational expression where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more rational expressions. is defined as a rational expression that contains one or more rational expressions in the numerator or denominator or both. For example, We simplify a complex rational expression by finding an equivalent fraction where the numerator and denominator are polynomials. As illustrated above, there are two methods for simplifying complex rational expressions, and we will outline the steps for both methods. For the sake of clarity, assume that variable expressions used as denominators are nonzero. Definitions A complex fraction A fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. is a fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. For example, Simplifying such a fraction requires us to find an equivalent fraction with integer numerator and denominator. One way to do this is to divide. Recall that dividing fractions involves multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. An alternative method for simplifying this complex fraction involves multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the LCD of all the given fractions. In this case, the LCD = 4. A complex rational expression A rational expression where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more rational expressions. is defined as a rational expression that contains one or more rational expressions in the numerator or denominator or both. For example, We simplify a complex rational expression by finding an equivalent fraction where the numerator and denominator are polynomials. As illustrated above, there are two methods for simplifying complex rational expressions, and we will outline the steps for both methods. For the sake of clarity, assume that variable expressions used as denominators are nonzero.  || 
book2_chapter7_4_2	Method 1: Simplify Using Division We begin our discussion on simplifying complex rational expressions using division. Before we can multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor, we must simplify the numerator and denominator separately. The goal is to first obtain single algebraic fractions in the numerator and the denominator. The steps for simplifying a complex algebraic fraction are illustrated in the following example.   Example 1: Simplify: 1 2 + 1 x 1 4 − 1 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Simplify the numerator and denominator. The goal is to obtain a single algebraic fraction divided by another single algebraic fraction. In this example, find equivalent terms with a common denominator in both the numerator and denominator before adding and subtracting. At this point we have a single algebraic fraction divided by a single algebraic fraction. Step 2: Multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the divisor. Step 3: Factor all numerators and denominators completely. Step 4: Cancel all common factors. Answer: 2 x x − 2   Example 2: Simplify: 1 x − 1 x − 2 4 x 2 − 2 x . Solution: Answer: − 1 2   Example 3: Simplify   1 − 4 x − 21 x 2   1 − 2 x − 15 x 2 . Solution: The LCD of the rational expressions in both the numerator and denominator is x 2 . Multiply by the appropriate factors to obtain equivalent terms with this as the denominator and then subtract. We now have a single rational expression divided by another single rational expression. Next, multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the divisor and then factor and cancel. Answer: x − 7 x − 5   Example 4: Simplify:     1 − 1 x 2     1 x − 1 . Solution: Answer: − x + 1 x   Try this! Simplify:   1 81 − 1 x 2   1 9 + 1 x . Answer: x − 9 9 x Video Solution Method 1: Simplify Using Division We begin our discussion on simplifying complex rational expressions using division. Before we can multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor, we must simplify the numerator and denominator separately. The goal is to first obtain single algebraic fractions in the numerator and the denominator. The steps for simplifying a complex algebraic fraction are illustrated in the following example.   Example 1: Simplify: 1 2 + 1 x 1 4 − 1 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Simplify the numerator and denominator. The goal is to obtain a single algebraic fraction divided by another single algebraic fraction. In this example, find equivalent terms with a common denominator in both the numerator and denominator before adding and subtracting. At this point we have a single algebraic fraction divided by a single algebraic fraction. Step 2: Multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the divisor. Step 3: Factor all numerators and denominators completely. Step 4: Cancel all common factors. Answer: 2 x x − 2   Example 2: Simplify: 1 x − 1 x − 2 4 x 2 − 2 x . Solution: Answer: − 1 2   Example 3: Simplify   1 − 4 x − 21 x 2   1 − 2 x − 15 x 2 . Solution: The LCD of the rational expressions in both the numerator and denominator is x 2 . Multiply by the appropriate factors to obtain equivalent terms with this as the denominator and then subtract. We now have a single rational expression divided by another single rational expression. Next, multiply the numerator by the reciprocal of the divisor and then factor and cancel. Answer: x − 7 x − 5   Example 4: Simplify:     1 − 1 x 2     1 x − 1 . Solution: Answer: − x + 1 x   Try this! Simplify:   1 81 − 1 x 2   1 9 + 1 x . Answer: x − 9 9 x Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_4_3	Method 2: Simplify Using the LCD An alternative method for simplifying complex rational expressions involves clearing the fractions by multiplying the expression by a special form of 1. In this method, multiply the numerator and denominator by the least common denominator (LCD) of all given fractions.   Example 5: Simplify: 1 2 + 1 x 1 4 − 1 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Determine the LCD of all the fractions in the numerator and denominator. In this case, the denominators of the given fractions are 2, x , 4, and x 2 . Therefore, the L C D  is  4 x 2 . Step 2: Multiply the numerator and denominator by the LCD. This step should clear the fractions in both the numerator and denominator. This leaves us with a single algebraic fraction with a polynomial in the numerator and in the denominator. Step 3: Factor the numerator and denominator completely. Step 4: Cancel all common factors. Answer: 2 x x − 2 Note This was the same problem that we began this section with, and the results here are the same. It is worth taking the time to compare the steps involved using both methods on the same problem.   Example 6: Simplify:   1 − 2 x − 15 x 2     3 − 14 x − 5 x 2 . Solution: Considering all of the denominators, we find that the LCD is  x 2 . Therefore, multiply the numerator and denominator by x 2 : At this point, we have a rational expression that can be simplified by factoring and then canceling the common factors. Answer: x + 3 3 x + 1   It is important to point out that multiplying the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero factor is equivalent to multiplying by 1 and does not change the problem. Because x 2 x 2 = 1 , we can multiply the numerator and denominator by x 2 in the previous example and obtain an equivalent expression.   Example 7: Simplify:   1 x + 1 + 3 x − 3   2 x − 3 − 1 x + 1 . Solution: The LCM of all the denominators is ( x + 1 ) ( x − 3 ) . Begin by multiplying the numerator and denominator by these factors. Answer: 4 x x + 5   Try this! Simplify: 1 y − 1 4 1 16 − 1 y 2 . Answer: − 4 y y + 4 Video Solution Method 2: Simplify Using the LCD An alternative method for simplifying complex rational expressions involves clearing the fractions by multiplying the expression by a special form of 1. In this method, multiply the numerator and denominator by the least common denominator (LCD) of all given fractions.   Example 5: Simplify: 1 2 + 1 x 1 4 − 1 x 2 . Solution: Step 1: Determine the LCD of all the fractions in the numerator and denominator. In this case, the denominators of the given fractions are 2, x , 4, and x 2 . Therefore, the L C D  is  4 x 2 . Step 2: Multiply the numerator and denominator by the LCD. This step should clear the fractions in both the numerator and denominator. This leaves us with a single algebraic fraction with a polynomial in the numerator and in the denominator. Step 3: Factor the numerator and denominator completely. Step 4: Cancel all common factors. Answer: 2 x x − 2 Note This was the same problem that we began this section with, and the results here are the same. It is worth taking the time to compare the steps involved using both methods on the same problem.   Example 6: Simplify:   1 − 2 x − 15 x 2     3 − 14 x − 5 x 2 . Solution: Considering all of the denominators, we find that the LCD is  x 2 . Therefore, multiply the numerator and denominator by x 2 : At this point, we have a rational expression that can be simplified by factoring and then canceling the common factors. Answer: x + 3 3 x + 1   It is important to point out that multiplying the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero factor is equivalent to multiplying by 1 and does not change the problem. Because x 2 x 2 = 1 , we can multiply the numerator and denominator by x 2 in the previous example and obtain an equivalent expression.   Example 7: Simplify:   1 x + 1 + 3 x − 3   2 x − 3 − 1 x + 1 . Solution: The LCM of all the denominators is ( x + 1 ) ( x − 3 ) . Begin by multiplying the numerator and denominator by these factors. Answer: 4 x x + 5   Try this! Simplify: 1 y − 1 4 1 16 − 1 y 2 . Answer: − 4 y y + 4 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_5	 || Solving Rational Equations A rational equation An equation containing at least one rational expression. is an equation containing at least one rational expression. Rational expressions typically contain a variable in the denominator. For this reason, we will take care to ensure that the denominator is not 0 by making note of restrictions and checking our solutions. Solve rational equations by clearing the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD).   Example 1: Solve: 5 x − 1 3 = 1 x . Solution: We first make a note that x ≠ 0 and then multiply both sides by the LCD, 3x: Check your answer by substituting 12 for x to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is 12.   After multiplying both sides of the previous example by the LCD, we were left with a linear equation to solve. This is not always the case; sometimes we will be left with a quadratic equation.   Example 2: Solve: 2 − 1 x ( x + 1 ) = 3 x + 1 . Solution: In this example, there are two restrictions, x ≠ 0 and x ≠ − 1 . Begin by multiplying both sides by the LCD, x ( x + 1 ) . After distributing and dividing out the common factors, a quadratic equation remains. To solve it, rewrite it in standard form, factor, and then set each factor equal to 0. Check to see if these values solve the original equation. Answer: The solutions are −1/2 and 1.   Up to this point, all of the possible solutions have solved the original equation. However, this may not always be the case. Multiplying both sides of an equation by variable factors may lead to extraneous solutions A solution that does not solve the original equation. , which are solutions that do not solve the original equation. A complete list of steps for solving a rational equation is outlined in the following example.   Example 3: Solve: x x + 2 + 2 x 2 + 5 x + 6 = 5 x + 3 . Solution: Step 1: Factor all denominators and determine the LCD. The LCD is  ( x + 2 ) ( x + 3 ) . Step 2: Identify the restrictions. In this case, they are x ≠ − 2 and x ≠ − 3 . Step 3: Multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD. Distribute carefully and then simplify. Step 4: Solve the resulting equation. Here the result is a quadratic equation. Rewrite it in standard form, factor, and then set each factor equal to 0. Step 5: Check for extraneous solutions. Always substitute into the original equation, or the factored equivalent. In this case, choose the factored equivalent to check: Here −2 is an extraneous solution and is not included in the solution set. It is important to note that −2 is a restriction. Answer: The solution is 4.   If this process produces a solution that happens to be a restriction, then disregard it as an extraneous solution.   Try this! Solve: x x − 5 + 3 x + 2 = 7 x x 2 − 3 x − 10 . Answer: −3 Video Solution Sometimes all potential solutions are extraneous, in which case we say that there is no solution to the original equation. In the next two examples, we demonstrate two ways in which a rational equation can have no solutions.   Example 4: Solve: 3 x x 2 − 4 − 2 x + 2 = 1 x + 2 . Solution: To identify the LCD, first factor the denominators. Multiply both sides by the least common denonominator (LCD), ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 ) , distributing carefully. The equation is a contradiction and thus has no solution. Answer: No solution, ∅   Example 5: Solve: x x − 4 − 4 x + 5 = 36 x 2 + x − 20 . Solution: First, factor the denominators. Take note that the restrictions are x ≠ 4 and x ≠ − 5 . To clear the fractions, multiply by the LCD, ( x − 4 ) ( x + 5 ) . Both of these values are restrictions of the original equation; hence both are extraneous. Answer: No solution, ∅   Try this! Solve: 1 x + 1 + x x − 3 = 4 x x 2 − 2 x − 3 . Answer: ∅ Video Solution It is important to point out that this technique for clearing algebraic fractions only works for equations. Do not try to clear algebraic fractions when simplifying expressions. As a reminder, we have Expressions are to be simplified and equations are to be solved. If we multiply the expression by the LCD, x ( 2 x + 1 ) , we obtain another expression that is not equivalent.  || Literal Equations Literal equations, or formulas, are often rational equations. Hence the techniques described in this section can be used to solve for particular variables. Assume that all variable expressions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 6: Solve for x:    z = x − 5 y . Solution: The goal is to isolate x. Assuming that y is nonzero, multiply both sides by y and then add 5 to both sides. Answer: x = y z + 5   Example 7: Solve for c:    1 c = 1 a + 1 b . Solution: In this example, the goal is to isolate c. We begin by multiplying both sides by the LCD, a ⋅ b ⋅ c , distributing carefully. On the right side of the equation, factor out c. Next, divide both sides of the equation by the quantity . Answer:   Try this! Solve for y:    . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_5_1	Solving Rational Equations A rational equation An equation containing at least one rational expression. is an equation containing at least one rational expression. Rational expressions typically contain a variable in the denominator. For this reason, we will take care to ensure that the denominator is not 0 by making note of restrictions and checking our solutions. Solve rational equations by clearing the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD).   Example 1: Solve: 5 x − 1 3 = 1 x . Solution: We first make a note that x ≠ 0 and then multiply both sides by the LCD, 3x: Check your answer by substituting 12 for x to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is 12.   After multiplying both sides of the previous example by the LCD, we were left with a linear equation to solve. This is not always the case; sometimes we will be left with a quadratic equation.   Example 2: Solve: 2 − 1 x ( x + 1 ) = 3 x + 1 . Solution: In this example, there are two restrictions, x ≠ 0 and x ≠ − 1 . Begin by multiplying both sides by the LCD, x ( x + 1 ) . After distributing and dividing out the common factors, a quadratic equation remains. To solve it, rewrite it in standard form, factor, and then set each factor equal to 0. Check to see if these values solve the original equation. Answer: The solutions are −1/2 and 1.   Up to this point, all of the possible solutions have solved the original equation. However, this may not always be the case. Multiplying both sides of an equation by variable factors may lead to extraneous solutions A solution that does not solve the original equation. , which are solutions that do not solve the original equation. A complete list of steps for solving a rational equation is outlined in the following example.   Example 3: Solve: x x + 2 + 2 x 2 + 5 x + 6 = 5 x + 3 . Solution: Step 1: Factor all denominators and determine the LCD. The LCD is  ( x + 2 ) ( x + 3 ) . Step 2: Identify the restrictions. In this case, they are x ≠ − 2 and x ≠ − 3 . Step 3: Multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD. Distribute carefully and then simplify. Step 4: Solve the resulting equation. Here the result is a quadratic equation. Rewrite it in standard form, factor, and then set each factor equal to 0. Step 5: Check for extraneous solutions. Always substitute into the original equation, or the factored equivalent. In this case, choose the factored equivalent to check: Here −2 is an extraneous solution and is not included in the solution set. It is important to note that −2 is a restriction. Answer: The solution is 4.   If this process produces a solution that happens to be a restriction, then disregard it as an extraneous solution.   Try this! Solve: x x − 5 + 3 x + 2 = 7 x x 2 − 3 x − 10 . Answer: −3 Video Solution Sometimes all potential solutions are extraneous, in which case we say that there is no solution to the original equation. In the next two examples, we demonstrate two ways in which a rational equation can have no solutions.   Example 4: Solve: 3 x x 2 − 4 − 2 x + 2 = 1 x + 2 . Solution: To identify the LCD, first factor the denominators. Multiply both sides by the least common denonominator (LCD), ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 ) , distributing carefully. The equation is a contradiction and thus has no solution. Answer: No solution, ∅   Example 5: Solve: x x − 4 − 4 x + 5 = 36 x 2 + x − 20 . Solution: First, factor the denominators. Take note that the restrictions are x ≠ 4 and x ≠ − 5 . To clear the fractions, multiply by the LCD, ( x − 4 ) ( x + 5 ) . Both of these values are restrictions of the original equation; hence both are extraneous. Answer: No solution, ∅   Try this! Solve: 1 x + 1 + x x − 3 = 4 x x 2 − 2 x − 3 . Answer: ∅ Video Solution It is important to point out that this technique for clearing algebraic fractions only works for equations. Do not try to clear algebraic fractions when simplifying expressions. As a reminder, we have Expressions are to be simplified and equations are to be solved. If we multiply the expression by the LCD, x ( 2 x + 1 ) , we obtain another expression that is not equivalent. Solving Rational Equations A rational equation An equation containing at least one rational expression. is an equation containing at least one rational expression. Rational expressions typically contain a variable in the denominator. For this reason, we will take care to ensure that the denominator is not 0 by making note of restrictions and checking our solutions. Solve rational equations by clearing the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD).   Example 1: Solve: 5 x − 1 3 = 1 x . Solution: We first make a note that x ≠ 0 and then multiply both sides by the LCD, 3x: Check your answer by substituting 12 for x to see if you obtain a true statement. Answer: The solution is 12.   After multiplying both sides of the previous example by the LCD, we were left with a linear equation to solve. This is not always the case; sometimes we will be left with a quadratic equation.   Example 2: Solve: 2 − 1 x ( x + 1 ) = 3 x + 1 . Solution: In this example, there are two restrictions, x ≠ 0 and x ≠ − 1 . Begin by multiplying both sides by the LCD, x ( x + 1 ) . After distributing and dividing out the common factors, a quadratic equation remains. To solve it, rewrite it in standard form, factor, and then set each factor equal to 0. Check to see if these values solve the original equation. Answer: The solutions are −1/2 and 1.   Up to this point, all of the possible solutions have solved the original equation. However, this may not always be the case. Multiplying both sides of an equation by variable factors may lead to extraneous solutions A solution that does not solve the original equation. , which are solutions that do not solve the original equation. A complete list of steps for solving a rational equation is outlined in the following example.   Example 3: Solve: x x + 2 + 2 x 2 + 5 x + 6 = 5 x + 3 . Solution: Step 1: Factor all denominators and determine the LCD. The LCD is  ( x + 2 ) ( x + 3 ) . Step 2: Identify the restrictions. In this case, they are x ≠ − 2 and x ≠ − 3 . Step 3: Multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD. Distribute carefully and then simplify. Step 4: Solve the resulting equation. Here the result is a quadratic equation. Rewrite it in standard form, factor, and then set each factor equal to 0. Step 5: Check for extraneous solutions. Always substitute into the original equation, or the factored equivalent. In this case, choose the factored equivalent to check: Here −2 is an extraneous solution and is not included in the solution set. It is important to note that −2 is a restriction. Answer: The solution is 4.   If this process produces a solution that happens to be a restriction, then disregard it as an extraneous solution.   Try this! Solve: x x − 5 + 3 x + 2 = 7 x x 2 − 3 x − 10 . Answer: −3 Video Solution Sometimes all potential solutions are extraneous, in which case we say that there is no solution to the original equation. In the next two examples, we demonstrate two ways in which a rational equation can have no solutions.   Example 4: Solve: 3 x x 2 − 4 − 2 x + 2 = 1 x + 2 . Solution: To identify the LCD, first factor the denominators. Multiply both sides by the least common denonominator (LCD), ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 ) , distributing carefully. The equation is a contradiction and thus has no solution. Answer: No solution, ∅   Example 5: Solve: x x − 4 − 4 x + 5 = 36 x 2 + x − 20 . Solution: First, factor the denominators. Take note that the restrictions are x ≠ 4 and x ≠ − 5 . To clear the fractions, multiply by the LCD, ( x − 4 ) ( x + 5 ) . Both of these values are restrictions of the original equation; hence both are extraneous. Answer: No solution, ∅   Try this! Solve: 1 x + 1 + x x − 3 = 4 x x 2 − 2 x − 3 . Answer: ∅ Video Solution It is important to point out that this technique for clearing algebraic fractions only works for equations. Do not try to clear algebraic fractions when simplifying expressions. As a reminder, we have Expressions are to be simplified and equations are to be solved. If we multiply the expression by the LCD, x ( 2 x + 1 ) , we obtain another expression that is not equivalent.  || 
book2_chapter7_5_2	Literal Equations Literal equations, or formulas, are often rational equations. Hence the techniques described in this section can be used to solve for particular variables. Assume that all variable expressions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 6: Solve for x:    z = x − 5 y . Solution: The goal is to isolate x. Assuming that y is nonzero, multiply both sides by y and then add 5 to both sides. Answer: x = y z + 5   Example 7: Solve for c:    1 c = 1 a + 1 b . Solution: In this example, the goal is to isolate c. We begin by multiplying both sides by the LCD, a ⋅ b ⋅ c , distributing carefully. On the right side of the equation, factor out c. Next, divide both sides of the equation by the quantity . Answer:   Try this! Solve for y:    . Answer: Video Solution Literal Equations Literal equations, or formulas, are often rational equations. Hence the techniques described in this section can be used to solve for particular variables. Assume that all variable expressions in the denominator are nonzero.   Example 6: Solve for x:    z = x − 5 y . Solution: The goal is to isolate x. Assuming that y is nonzero, multiply both sides by y and then add 5 to both sides. Answer: x = y z + 5   Example 7: Solve for c:    1 c = 1 a + 1 b . Solution: In this example, the goal is to isolate c. We begin by multiplying both sides by the LCD, a ⋅ b ⋅ c , distributing carefully. On the right side of the equation, factor out c. Next, divide both sides of the equation by the quantity . Answer:   Try this! Solve for y:    . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_6	 || Number Problems Recall that the reciprocal The reciprocal of a nonzero number n is 1/n. of a nonzero number n is 1/n. For example, the reciprocal of 5 is 1/5 and 5 ⋅ 1/5 = 1. In this section, the applications will often involve the key word “reciprocal.” When this is the case, we will see that the algebraic setup results in a rational equation.   Example 1: A positive integer is 4 less than another. The sum of the reciprocals of the two positive integers is 10/21. Find the two integers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the unknowns. Next, use the reciprocals 1 n and 1 n − 4 to translate the sentences into an algebraic equation. We can solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD). In this case, the LCD is 21 n ( n − 4 ) . Solve the resulting quadratic equation. The question calls for integers and the only integer solution is n = 7 . Hence disregard 6/5. Use the expression n − 4 to find the smaller integer. Answer: The two positive integers are 3 and 7. The check is left to the reader.   Example 2: A positive integer is 4 less than another. If the reciprocal of the smaller integer is subtracted from twice the reciprocal of the larger, then the result is 1/30. Find the two integers. Solution: Set up an algebraic equation. Solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides by the LCD. The LCD is 30 n ( n − 4 ) . Here we have two viable possibilities for the larger integer. For this reason, we will we have two solutions to this problem. As a check, perform the operations indicated in the problem. Answer: Two sets of positive integers solve this problem: {6, 10} and {20, 24}.   Try this! The difference between the reciprocals of two consecutive positive odd integers is 2/15. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 3 and 5. Video Solution  || Uniform Motion Problems Uniform motion Described by the formula D = r t , where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. problems, also referred to as distance problems, involve the formula where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. If we divide both sides by the average rate, r, then we obtain the formula For this reason, when the unknown quantity is time, the algebraic setup for distance problems often results in a rational equation. Similarly, when the unknown quantity is the rate, the setup also may result in a rational equation. We begin any uniform motion problem by first organizing our data with a chart. Use this information to set up an algebraic equation that models the application.   Example 5: Mary spent the first 120 miles of her road trip in traffic. When the traffic cleared, she was able to drive twice as fast for the remaining 300 miles. If the total trip took 9 hours, then how fast was she moving in traffic? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. To avoid introducing two more variables for the time column, use the formula t = D r . Here the time for each leg of the trip is calculated as follows: Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 9 hours: We begin solving this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, 2x. Answer: Mary averaged 30 miles per hour in traffic.   Example 6: A passenger train can travel, on average, 20 miles per hour faster than a freight train. If the passenger train covers 390 miles in the same time it takes the freight train to cover 270 miles, then how fast is each train? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantities and organize the data. Next, organize the given data in a chart. Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each train. Because the trains travel the same amount of time, finish the algebraic setup by equating the expressions that represent the times: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, x ( x + 20 ) . Use x + 20 to find the speed of the passenger train. Answer: The speed of the passenger train is 65 miles per hour and the speed of the freight train is 45 miles per hour.   Example 7: Brett lives on the river 8 miles upstream from town. When the current is 2 miles per hour, he can row his boat downstream to town for supplies and back in 3 hours. What is his average rowing speed in still water? Solution: Rowing downstream, the current increases his speed, and his rate is x + 2 miles per hour. Rowing upstream, the current decreases his speed, and his rate is x − 2 miles per hour. Begin by organizing the data in the following chart: Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each leg of the trip. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 3 hours: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 ) . Next, solve the resulting quadratic equation. Use only the positive solution, x = 6 miles per hour. Answer: His rowing speed is 6 miles per hour.   Try this! Dwayne drove 18 miles to the airport to pick up his father and then returned home. On the return trip he was able to drive an average of 15 miles per hour faster than he did on the trip there. If the total driving time was 1 hour, then what was his average speed driving to the airport? Answer: His average speed driving to the airport was 30 miles per hour. Video Solution  || Work-Rate Problems The rate at which a task can be performed is called a work rate The rate at which a task can be performed. . For example, if a painter can paint a room in 8 hours, then the task is to paint the room, and we can write In other words, the painter can complete 1 8 of the task per hour. If he works for less than 8 hours, then he will perform a fraction of the task. For example, Obtain the amount of the task completed by multiplying the work rate by the amount of time the painter works. Typically, work-rate problems involve people working together to complete tasks. When this is the case, we can organize the data in a chart, just as we have done with distance problems. Suppose an apprentice painter can paint the same room by himself in 10 hours. Then we say that he can complete 1 10 of the task per hour. Let t represent the time it takes both of the painters, working together, to paint the room. To complete the chart, multiply the work rate by the time for each person. The portion of the room each can paint adds to a total of 1 task completed. This is represented by the equation obtained from the first column of the chart: This setup results in a rational equation that can be solved for t by multiplying both sides by the LCD, 40. Therefore, the two painters, working together, complete the task in 4 4 9 hours. In general, we have the following work-rate formula 1 t 1 ⋅ t + 1 t 2 ⋅ t = 1 , where 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete the task working together. : Here 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete one task working together. If we factor out the time, t, and then divide both sides by t, we obtain an equivalent work-rate formula: In summary, we have the following equivalent work-rate formulas:   Example 3: Working alone, Billy’s dad can complete the yard work in 3 hours. If Billy helps his dad, then the yard work takes 2 hours. How long would it take Billy working alone to complete the yard work? Solution: The given information tells us that Billy’s dad has an individual work rate of 1 3 task per hour. If we let x represent the time it takes Billy working alone to complete the yard work, then Billy’s individual work rate is 1 x , and we can write Working together, they can complete the task in 2 hours. Multiply the individual work rates by 2 hours to fill in the chart. The amount of the task each completes will total 1 completed task. To solve for x, we first multiply both sides by the LCD, 3x. Answer: It takes Billy 6 hours to complete the yard work alone.   Of course, the unit of time for the work rate need not always be in hours.   Example 4: Working together, two construction crews can build a shed in 5 days. Working separately, the less experienced crew takes twice as long to build a shed than the more experienced crew. Working separately, how long does it take each crew to build a shed? Solution: Working together, the job is completed in 5 days. This gives the following setup: The first column in the chart gives us an algebraic equation that models the problem: Solve the equation by multiplying both sides by 2x. To determine the time it takes the less experienced crew, we use 2x: Answer: Working separately, the experienced crew takes 7½ days to build a shed, and the less experienced crew takes 15 days to build a shed.   Try this! Joe’s garden hose fills the pool in 12 hours. His neighbor has a thinner hose that fills the pool in 15 hours. How long will it take to fill the pool using both hoses? Answer: It will take both hoses 6 2 3 hours to fill the pool. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_6_1	Number Problems Recall that the reciprocal The reciprocal of a nonzero number n is 1/n. of a nonzero number n is 1/n. For example, the reciprocal of 5 is 1/5 and 5 ⋅ 1/5 = 1. In this section, the applications will often involve the key word “reciprocal.” When this is the case, we will see that the algebraic setup results in a rational equation.   Example 1: A positive integer is 4 less than another. The sum of the reciprocals of the two positive integers is 10/21. Find the two integers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the unknowns. Next, use the reciprocals 1 n and 1 n − 4 to translate the sentences into an algebraic equation. We can solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD). In this case, the LCD is 21 n ( n − 4 ) . Solve the resulting quadratic equation. The question calls for integers and the only integer solution is n = 7 . Hence disregard 6/5. Use the expression n − 4 to find the smaller integer. Answer: The two positive integers are 3 and 7. The check is left to the reader.   Example 2: A positive integer is 4 less than another. If the reciprocal of the smaller integer is subtracted from twice the reciprocal of the larger, then the result is 1/30. Find the two integers. Solution: Set up an algebraic equation. Solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides by the LCD. The LCD is 30 n ( n − 4 ) . Here we have two viable possibilities for the larger integer. For this reason, we will we have two solutions to this problem. As a check, perform the operations indicated in the problem. Answer: Two sets of positive integers solve this problem: {6, 10} and {20, 24}.   Try this! The difference between the reciprocals of two consecutive positive odd integers is 2/15. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 3 and 5. Video Solution Number Problems Recall that the reciprocal The reciprocal of a nonzero number n is 1/n. of a nonzero number n is 1/n. For example, the reciprocal of 5 is 1/5 and 5 ⋅ 1/5 = 1. In this section, the applications will often involve the key word “reciprocal.” When this is the case, we will see that the algebraic setup results in a rational equation.   Example 1: A positive integer is 4 less than another. The sum of the reciprocals of the two positive integers is 10/21. Find the two integers. Solution: Begin by assigning variables to the unknowns. Next, use the reciprocals 1 n and 1 n − 4 to translate the sentences into an algebraic equation. We can solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD). In this case, the LCD is 21 n ( n − 4 ) . Solve the resulting quadratic equation. The question calls for integers and the only integer solution is n = 7 . Hence disregard 6/5. Use the expression n − 4 to find the smaller integer. Answer: The two positive integers are 3 and 7. The check is left to the reader.   Example 2: A positive integer is 4 less than another. If the reciprocal of the smaller integer is subtracted from twice the reciprocal of the larger, then the result is 1/30. Find the two integers. Solution: Set up an algebraic equation. Solve this rational expression by multiplying both sides by the LCD. The LCD is 30 n ( n − 4 ) . Here we have two viable possibilities for the larger integer. For this reason, we will we have two solutions to this problem. As a check, perform the operations indicated in the problem. Answer: Two sets of positive integers solve this problem: {6, 10} and {20, 24}.   Try this! The difference between the reciprocals of two consecutive positive odd integers is 2/15. Find the integers. Answer: The integers are 3 and 5. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_6_2	Uniform Motion Problems Uniform motion Described by the formula D = r t , where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. problems, also referred to as distance problems, involve the formula where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. If we divide both sides by the average rate, r, then we obtain the formula For this reason, when the unknown quantity is time, the algebraic setup for distance problems often results in a rational equation. Similarly, when the unknown quantity is the rate, the setup also may result in a rational equation. We begin any uniform motion problem by first organizing our data with a chart. Use this information to set up an algebraic equation that models the application.   Example 5: Mary spent the first 120 miles of her road trip in traffic. When the traffic cleared, she was able to drive twice as fast for the remaining 300 miles. If the total trip took 9 hours, then how fast was she moving in traffic? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. To avoid introducing two more variables for the time column, use the formula t = D r . Here the time for each leg of the trip is calculated as follows: Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 9 hours: We begin solving this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, 2x. Answer: Mary averaged 30 miles per hour in traffic.   Example 6: A passenger train can travel, on average, 20 miles per hour faster than a freight train. If the passenger train covers 390 miles in the same time it takes the freight train to cover 270 miles, then how fast is each train? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantities and organize the data. Next, organize the given data in a chart. Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each train. Because the trains travel the same amount of time, finish the algebraic setup by equating the expressions that represent the times: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, x ( x + 20 ) . Use x + 20 to find the speed of the passenger train. Answer: The speed of the passenger train is 65 miles per hour and the speed of the freight train is 45 miles per hour.   Example 7: Brett lives on the river 8 miles upstream from town. When the current is 2 miles per hour, he can row his boat downstream to town for supplies and back in 3 hours. What is his average rowing speed in still water? Solution: Rowing downstream, the current increases his speed, and his rate is x + 2 miles per hour. Rowing upstream, the current decreases his speed, and his rate is x − 2 miles per hour. Begin by organizing the data in the following chart: Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each leg of the trip. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 3 hours: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 ) . Next, solve the resulting quadratic equation. Use only the positive solution, x = 6 miles per hour. Answer: His rowing speed is 6 miles per hour.   Try this! Dwayne drove 18 miles to the airport to pick up his father and then returned home. On the return trip he was able to drive an average of 15 miles per hour faster than he did on the trip there. If the total driving time was 1 hour, then what was his average speed driving to the airport? Answer: His average speed driving to the airport was 30 miles per hour. Video Solution Uniform Motion Problems Uniform motion Described by the formula D = r t , where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. problems, also referred to as distance problems, involve the formula where the distance, D, is given as the product of the average rate, r, and the time, t, traveled at that rate. If we divide both sides by the average rate, r, then we obtain the formula For this reason, when the unknown quantity is time, the algebraic setup for distance problems often results in a rational equation. Similarly, when the unknown quantity is the rate, the setup also may result in a rational equation. We begin any uniform motion problem by first organizing our data with a chart. Use this information to set up an algebraic equation that models the application.   Example 5: Mary spent the first 120 miles of her road trip in traffic. When the traffic cleared, she was able to drive twice as fast for the remaining 300 miles. If the total trip took 9 hours, then how fast was she moving in traffic? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantity and organize the data. To avoid introducing two more variables for the time column, use the formula t = D r . Here the time for each leg of the trip is calculated as follows: Use these expressions to complete the chart. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 9 hours: We begin solving this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, 2x. Answer: Mary averaged 30 miles per hour in traffic.   Example 6: A passenger train can travel, on average, 20 miles per hour faster than a freight train. If the passenger train covers 390 miles in the same time it takes the freight train to cover 270 miles, then how fast is each train? Solution: First, identify the unknown quantities and organize the data. Next, organize the given data in a chart. Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each train. Because the trains travel the same amount of time, finish the algebraic setup by equating the expressions that represent the times: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, x ( x + 20 ) . Use x + 20 to find the speed of the passenger train. Answer: The speed of the passenger train is 65 miles per hour and the speed of the freight train is 45 miles per hour.   Example 7: Brett lives on the river 8 miles upstream from town. When the current is 2 miles per hour, he can row his boat downstream to town for supplies and back in 3 hours. What is his average rowing speed in still water? Solution: Rowing downstream, the current increases his speed, and his rate is x + 2 miles per hour. Rowing upstream, the current decreases his speed, and his rate is x − 2 miles per hour. Begin by organizing the data in the following chart: Use the formula t = D r to fill in the time column for each leg of the trip. The algebraic setup is defined by the time column. Add the times for each leg of the trip to obtain a total of 3 hours: Solve this equation by first multiplying both sides by the LCD, ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2 ) . Next, solve the resulting quadratic equation. Use only the positive solution, x = 6 miles per hour. Answer: His rowing speed is 6 miles per hour.   Try this! Dwayne drove 18 miles to the airport to pick up his father and then returned home. On the return trip he was able to drive an average of 15 miles per hour faster than he did on the trip there. If the total driving time was 1 hour, then what was his average speed driving to the airport? Answer: His average speed driving to the airport was 30 miles per hour. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_6_3	Work-Rate Problems The rate at which a task can be performed is called a work rate The rate at which a task can be performed. . For example, if a painter can paint a room in 8 hours, then the task is to paint the room, and we can write In other words, the painter can complete 1 8 of the task per hour. If he works for less than 8 hours, then he will perform a fraction of the task. For example, Obtain the amount of the task completed by multiplying the work rate by the amount of time the painter works. Typically, work-rate problems involve people working together to complete tasks. When this is the case, we can organize the data in a chart, just as we have done with distance problems. Suppose an apprentice painter can paint the same room by himself in 10 hours. Then we say that he can complete 1 10 of the task per hour. Let t represent the time it takes both of the painters, working together, to paint the room. To complete the chart, multiply the work rate by the time for each person. The portion of the room each can paint adds to a total of 1 task completed. This is represented by the equation obtained from the first column of the chart: This setup results in a rational equation that can be solved for t by multiplying both sides by the LCD, 40. Therefore, the two painters, working together, complete the task in 4 4 9 hours. In general, we have the following work-rate formula 1 t 1 ⋅ t + 1 t 2 ⋅ t = 1 , where 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete the task working together. : Here 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete one task working together. If we factor out the time, t, and then divide both sides by t, we obtain an equivalent work-rate formula: In summary, we have the following equivalent work-rate formulas:   Example 3: Working alone, Billy’s dad can complete the yard work in 3 hours. If Billy helps his dad, then the yard work takes 2 hours. How long would it take Billy working alone to complete the yard work? Solution: The given information tells us that Billy’s dad has an individual work rate of 1 3 task per hour. If we let x represent the time it takes Billy working alone to complete the yard work, then Billy’s individual work rate is 1 x , and we can write Working together, they can complete the task in 2 hours. Multiply the individual work rates by 2 hours to fill in the chart. The amount of the task each completes will total 1 completed task. To solve for x, we first multiply both sides by the LCD, 3x. Answer: It takes Billy 6 hours to complete the yard work alone.   Of course, the unit of time for the work rate need not always be in hours.   Example 4: Working together, two construction crews can build a shed in 5 days. Working separately, the less experienced crew takes twice as long to build a shed than the more experienced crew. Working separately, how long does it take each crew to build a shed? Solution: Working together, the job is completed in 5 days. This gives the following setup: The first column in the chart gives us an algebraic equation that models the problem: Solve the equation by multiplying both sides by 2x. To determine the time it takes the less experienced crew, we use 2x: Answer: Working separately, the experienced crew takes 7½ days to build a shed, and the less experienced crew takes 15 days to build a shed.   Try this! Joe’s garden hose fills the pool in 12 hours. His neighbor has a thinner hose that fills the pool in 15 hours. How long will it take to fill the pool using both hoses? Answer: It will take both hoses 6 2 3 hours to fill the pool. Video Solution Work-Rate Problems The rate at which a task can be performed is called a work rate The rate at which a task can be performed. . For example, if a painter can paint a room in 8 hours, then the task is to paint the room, and we can write In other words, the painter can complete 1 8 of the task per hour. If he works for less than 8 hours, then he will perform a fraction of the task. For example, Obtain the amount of the task completed by multiplying the work rate by the amount of time the painter works. Typically, work-rate problems involve people working together to complete tasks. When this is the case, we can organize the data in a chart, just as we have done with distance problems. Suppose an apprentice painter can paint the same room by himself in 10 hours. Then we say that he can complete 1 10 of the task per hour. Let t represent the time it takes both of the painters, working together, to paint the room. To complete the chart, multiply the work rate by the time for each person. The portion of the room each can paint adds to a total of 1 task completed. This is represented by the equation obtained from the first column of the chart: This setup results in a rational equation that can be solved for t by multiplying both sides by the LCD, 40. Therefore, the two painters, working together, complete the task in 4 4 9 hours. In general, we have the following work-rate formula 1 t 1 ⋅ t + 1 t 2 ⋅ t = 1 , where 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete the task working together. : Here 1 t 1 and 1 t 2 are the individual work rates and t is the time it takes to complete one task working together. If we factor out the time, t, and then divide both sides by t, we obtain an equivalent work-rate formula: In summary, we have the following equivalent work-rate formulas:   Example 3: Working alone, Billy’s dad can complete the yard work in 3 hours. If Billy helps his dad, then the yard work takes 2 hours. How long would it take Billy working alone to complete the yard work? Solution: The given information tells us that Billy’s dad has an individual work rate of 1 3 task per hour. If we let x represent the time it takes Billy working alone to complete the yard work, then Billy’s individual work rate is 1 x , and we can write Working together, they can complete the task in 2 hours. Multiply the individual work rates by 2 hours to fill in the chart. The amount of the task each completes will total 1 completed task. To solve for x, we first multiply both sides by the LCD, 3x. Answer: It takes Billy 6 hours to complete the yard work alone.   Of course, the unit of time for the work rate need not always be in hours.   Example 4: Working together, two construction crews can build a shed in 5 days. Working separately, the less experienced crew takes twice as long to build a shed than the more experienced crew. Working separately, how long does it take each crew to build a shed? Solution: Working together, the job is completed in 5 days. This gives the following setup: The first column in the chart gives us an algebraic equation that models the problem: Solve the equation by multiplying both sides by 2x. To determine the time it takes the less experienced crew, we use 2x: Answer: Working separately, the experienced crew takes 7½ days to build a shed, and the less experienced crew takes 15 days to build a shed.   Try this! Joe’s garden hose fills the pool in 12 hours. His neighbor has a thinner hose that fills the pool in 15 hours. How long will it take to fill the pool using both hoses? Answer: It will take both hoses 6 2 3 hours to fill the pool. Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_7	 || Direct Variation Consider a freight train moving at a constant speed of 30 miles per hour. The equation that expresses the distance traveled at that speed in terms of time is given by After 1 hour the train has traveled 30 miles, after 2 hours the train has traveled 60 miles, and so on. We can construct a chart and graph this relation. In this example, we can see that the distance varies over time as the product of the constant rate, 30 miles per hour, and the variable, t. This relationship is described as direct variation Describes two quantities x and y that are constant multiples of each other: y = k x . and 30 is called the variation constant. In addition, if we divide both sides of D = 30 t by t we have In this form, it is reasonable to say that D is proportional to t, where 30 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies directly as x” y = k x “y is directly proportional Used when referring to direct variation. to x” “y is proportional to x” Here k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation The nonzero multiple k, when quantities vary directly or inversely. or the constant of proportionality Used when referring to the constant of variation. .   Example 1: The circumference of a circle is directly proportional to its diameter, and the constant of proportionality is π . If the circumference is measured to be 20 inches, then what is the radius of the circle? Solution: Use the fact that “the circumference is directly proportional to the diameter” to write an equation that relates the two variables. We are given that “the constant of proportionality is π ,” or k = π . Therefore, we write Now use this formula to find d when the circumference is 20 inches. The radius of the circle, r, is one-half of its diameter. Answer: The radius is 10 π inches, or approximately 3.18 inches.   Typically, we will not be given the constant of variation. Instead, we will be given information from which it can be determined.   Example 2: An object’s weight on earth varies directly to its weight on the moon. If a man weighs 180 pounds on earth, then he will weigh 30 pounds on the moon. Set up an algebraic equation that expresses the weight on earth in terms of the weight on the moon and use it to determine the weight of a woman on the moon if she weighs 120 pounds on earth. Solution: We are given that the “weight on earth varies directly to the weight on the moon.” To find the constant of variation k, use the given information. A 180-pound man on earth weighs 30 pounds on the moon, or y = 180 when x = 30 . Solve for k. Next, set up a formula that models the given information. This implies that a person’s weight on earth is 6 times her weight on the moon. To answer the question, use the woman’s weight on earth, y = 120   pounds , and solve for x. Answer: The woman weighs 20 pounds on the moon.  || Inverse Variation Next, consider the relationship between time and rate, If we wish to travel a fixed distance, then we can determine the average speed required to travel that distance in a given amount of time. For example, if we wish to drive 240 miles in 4 hours, we can determine the required average speed as follows: The average speed required to drive 240 miles in 4 hours is 60 miles per hour. If we wish to drive the 240 miles in 5 hours, then determine the required speed using a similar equation: In this case, we would only have to average 48 miles per hour. We can make a chart and view this relationship on a graph. This is an example of an inverse relationship. We say that r is inversely proportional to the time t, where 240 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies inversely Describes two quantities x and y, where one variable is directly proportional to the reciprocal of the other: y = k x . as x” y = k x “y is inversely proportional Used when referring to inverse variation. to x” Again, k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation or the constant of proportionality.   Example 3: If y varies inversely as x and y = 5 when x = 2 , then find the constant of proportionality and an equation that relates the two variables. Solution: If we let k represent the constant of proportionality, then the statement “y varies inversely as x” can be written as follows: Use the given information, y = 5 when x = 2 , to find k. Solve for k. Therefore, the formula that models the problem is Answer: The constant of proportionality is 10, and the equation is y = 10 x .   Example 4: The weight of an object varies inversely as the square of its distance from the center of earth. If an object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth (approximately 4,000 miles from the center), then how much will it weigh at 1,000 miles above earth’s surface? Solution: Since “w varies inversely as the square of d,” we can write Use the given information to find k. An object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth, approximately 4,000 miles from the center. In other words, w = 100 when d = 4,000: Solve for k. Therefore, we can model the problem with the following formula: To use the formula to find the weight, we need the distance from the center of earth. Since the object is 1,000 miles above the surface, find the distance from the center of earth by adding 4,000 miles: To answer the question, use the formula with d = 5,000. Answer: The object will weigh 64 pounds at a distance 1,000 miles above the surface of earth.  || Joint Variation Lastly, we define relationships between multiple variables. In general, we have Vocabulary Translation “y varies jointly Describes a quantity y that varies directly as the product of two other quantities x and z: y = k x z . as x and z” y = k x z “y is jointly proportional Used when referring to joint variation. to x and z” Here k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation or the constant of proportionality.   Example 5: The area of an ellipse varies jointly as a, half of the ellipse’s major axis, and b, half of the ellipse’s minor axis. If the area of an ellipse is 300 π   cm 2 , where a = 10   cm and b = 30   cm , then what is the constant of proportionality? Give a formula for the area of an ellipse. Solution: If we let A represent the area of an ellipse, then we can use the statement “area varies jointly as a and b” to write To find the constant of variation, k, use the fact that the area is 300 π when a = 10 and b = 30 . Therefore, the formula for the area of an ellipse is Answer: The constant of proportionality is π , and the formula for the area is A = a b π .   Try this! Given that y varies directly as the square of x and inversely to z, where y = 2 when x = 3 and z = 27, find y when x = 2 and z = 16. Answer: 3/2 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter7_7_1	Direct Variation Consider a freight train moving at a constant speed of 30 miles per hour. The equation that expresses the distance traveled at that speed in terms of time is given by After 1 hour the train has traveled 30 miles, after 2 hours the train has traveled 60 miles, and so on. We can construct a chart and graph this relation. In this example, we can see that the distance varies over time as the product of the constant rate, 30 miles per hour, and the variable, t. This relationship is described as direct variation Describes two quantities x and y that are constant multiples of each other: y = k x . and 30 is called the variation constant. In addition, if we divide both sides of D = 30 t by t we have In this form, it is reasonable to say that D is proportional to t, where 30 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies directly as x” y = k x “y is directly proportional Used when referring to direct variation. to x” “y is proportional to x” Here k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation The nonzero multiple k, when quantities vary directly or inversely. or the constant of proportionality Used when referring to the constant of variation. .   Example 1: The circumference of a circle is directly proportional to its diameter, and the constant of proportionality is π . If the circumference is measured to be 20 inches, then what is the radius of the circle? Solution: Use the fact that “the circumference is directly proportional to the diameter” to write an equation that relates the two variables. We are given that “the constant of proportionality is π ,” or k = π . Therefore, we write Now use this formula to find d when the circumference is 20 inches. The radius of the circle, r, is one-half of its diameter. Answer: The radius is 10 π inches, or approximately 3.18 inches.   Typically, we will not be given the constant of variation. Instead, we will be given information from which it can be determined.   Example 2: An object’s weight on earth varies directly to its weight on the moon. If a man weighs 180 pounds on earth, then he will weigh 30 pounds on the moon. Set up an algebraic equation that expresses the weight on earth in terms of the weight on the moon and use it to determine the weight of a woman on the moon if she weighs 120 pounds on earth. Solution: We are given that the “weight on earth varies directly to the weight on the moon.” To find the constant of variation k, use the given information. A 180-pound man on earth weighs 30 pounds on the moon, or y = 180 when x = 30 . Solve for k. Next, set up a formula that models the given information. This implies that a person’s weight on earth is 6 times her weight on the moon. To answer the question, use the woman’s weight on earth, y = 120   pounds , and solve for x. Answer: The woman weighs 20 pounds on the moon. Direct Variation Consider a freight train moving at a constant speed of 30 miles per hour. The equation that expresses the distance traveled at that speed in terms of time is given by After 1 hour the train has traveled 30 miles, after 2 hours the train has traveled 60 miles, and so on. We can construct a chart and graph this relation. In this example, we can see that the distance varies over time as the product of the constant rate, 30 miles per hour, and the variable, t. This relationship is described as direct variation Describes two quantities x and y that are constant multiples of each other: y = k x . and 30 is called the variation constant. In addition, if we divide both sides of D = 30 t by t we have In this form, it is reasonable to say that D is proportional to t, where 30 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies directly as x” y = k x “y is directly proportional Used when referring to direct variation. to x” “y is proportional to x” Here k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation The nonzero multiple k, when quantities vary directly or inversely. or the constant of proportionality Used when referring to the constant of variation. .   Example 1: The circumference of a circle is directly proportional to its diameter, and the constant of proportionality is π . If the circumference is measured to be 20 inches, then what is the radius of the circle? Solution: Use the fact that “the circumference is directly proportional to the diameter” to write an equation that relates the two variables. We are given that “the constant of proportionality is π ,” or k = π . Therefore, we write Now use this formula to find d when the circumference is 20 inches. The radius of the circle, r, is one-half of its diameter. Answer: The radius is 10 π inches, or approximately 3.18 inches.   Typically, we will not be given the constant of variation. Instead, we will be given information from which it can be determined.   Example 2: An object’s weight on earth varies directly to its weight on the moon. If a man weighs 180 pounds on earth, then he will weigh 30 pounds on the moon. Set up an algebraic equation that expresses the weight on earth in terms of the weight on the moon and use it to determine the weight of a woman on the moon if she weighs 120 pounds on earth. Solution: We are given that the “weight on earth varies directly to the weight on the moon.” To find the constant of variation k, use the given information. A 180-pound man on earth weighs 30 pounds on the moon, or y = 180 when x = 30 . Solve for k. Next, set up a formula that models the given information. This implies that a person’s weight on earth is 6 times her weight on the moon. To answer the question, use the woman’s weight on earth, y = 120   pounds , and solve for x. Answer: The woman weighs 20 pounds on the moon.  || 
book2_chapter7_7_2	Inverse Variation Next, consider the relationship between time and rate, If we wish to travel a fixed distance, then we can determine the average speed required to travel that distance in a given amount of time. For example, if we wish to drive 240 miles in 4 hours, we can determine the required average speed as follows: The average speed required to drive 240 miles in 4 hours is 60 miles per hour. If we wish to drive the 240 miles in 5 hours, then determine the required speed using a similar equation: In this case, we would only have to average 48 miles per hour. We can make a chart and view this relationship on a graph. This is an example of an inverse relationship. We say that r is inversely proportional to the time t, where 240 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies inversely Describes two quantities x and y, where one variable is directly proportional to the reciprocal of the other: y = k x . as x” y = k x “y is inversely proportional Used when referring to inverse variation. to x” Again, k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation or the constant of proportionality.   Example 3: If y varies inversely as x and y = 5 when x = 2 , then find the constant of proportionality and an equation that relates the two variables. Solution: If we let k represent the constant of proportionality, then the statement “y varies inversely as x” can be written as follows: Use the given information, y = 5 when x = 2 , to find k. Solve for k. Therefore, the formula that models the problem is Answer: The constant of proportionality is 10, and the equation is y = 10 x .   Example 4: The weight of an object varies inversely as the square of its distance from the center of earth. If an object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth (approximately 4,000 miles from the center), then how much will it weigh at 1,000 miles above earth’s surface? Solution: Since “w varies inversely as the square of d,” we can write Use the given information to find k. An object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth, approximately 4,000 miles from the center. In other words, w = 100 when d = 4,000: Solve for k. Therefore, we can model the problem with the following formula: To use the formula to find the weight, we need the distance from the center of earth. Since the object is 1,000 miles above the surface, find the distance from the center of earth by adding 4,000 miles: To answer the question, use the formula with d = 5,000. Answer: The object will weigh 64 pounds at a distance 1,000 miles above the surface of earth. Inverse Variation Next, consider the relationship between time and rate, If we wish to travel a fixed distance, then we can determine the average speed required to travel that distance in a given amount of time. For example, if we wish to drive 240 miles in 4 hours, we can determine the required average speed as follows: The average speed required to drive 240 miles in 4 hours is 60 miles per hour. If we wish to drive the 240 miles in 5 hours, then determine the required speed using a similar equation: In this case, we would only have to average 48 miles per hour. We can make a chart and view this relationship on a graph. This is an example of an inverse relationship. We say that r is inversely proportional to the time t, where 240 is the constant of proportionality. In general, we have Key words Translation “y varies inversely Describes two quantities x and y, where one variable is directly proportional to the reciprocal of the other: y = k x . as x” y = k x “y is inversely proportional Used when referring to inverse variation. to x” Again, k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation or the constant of proportionality.   Example 3: If y varies inversely as x and y = 5 when x = 2 , then find the constant of proportionality and an equation that relates the two variables. Solution: If we let k represent the constant of proportionality, then the statement “y varies inversely as x” can be written as follows: Use the given information, y = 5 when x = 2 , to find k. Solve for k. Therefore, the formula that models the problem is Answer: The constant of proportionality is 10, and the equation is y = 10 x .   Example 4: The weight of an object varies inversely as the square of its distance from the center of earth. If an object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth (approximately 4,000 miles from the center), then how much will it weigh at 1,000 miles above earth’s surface? Solution: Since “w varies inversely as the square of d,” we can write Use the given information to find k. An object weighs 100 pounds on the surface of earth, approximately 4,000 miles from the center. In other words, w = 100 when d = 4,000: Solve for k. Therefore, we can model the problem with the following formula: To use the formula to find the weight, we need the distance from the center of earth. Since the object is 1,000 miles above the surface, find the distance from the center of earth by adding 4,000 miles: To answer the question, use the formula with d = 5,000. Answer: The object will weigh 64 pounds at a distance 1,000 miles above the surface of earth.  || 
book2_chapter7_7_3	Joint Variation Lastly, we define relationships between multiple variables. In general, we have Vocabulary Translation “y varies jointly Describes a quantity y that varies directly as the product of two other quantities x and z: y = k x z . as x and z” y = k x z “y is jointly proportional Used when referring to joint variation. to x and z” Here k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation or the constant of proportionality.   Example 5: The area of an ellipse varies jointly as a, half of the ellipse’s major axis, and b, half of the ellipse’s minor axis. If the area of an ellipse is 300 π   cm 2 , where a = 10   cm and b = 30   cm , then what is the constant of proportionality? Give a formula for the area of an ellipse. Solution: If we let A represent the area of an ellipse, then we can use the statement “area varies jointly as a and b” to write To find the constant of variation, k, use the fact that the area is 300 π when a = 10 and b = 30 . Therefore, the formula for the area of an ellipse is Answer: The constant of proportionality is π , and the formula for the area is A = a b π .   Try this! Given that y varies directly as the square of x and inversely to z, where y = 2 when x = 3 and z = 27, find y when x = 2 and z = 16. Answer: 3/2 Video Solution Joint Variation Lastly, we define relationships between multiple variables. In general, we have Vocabulary Translation “y varies jointly Describes a quantity y that varies directly as the product of two other quantities x and z: y = k x z . as x and z” y = k x z “y is jointly proportional Used when referring to joint variation. to x and z” Here k is nonzero and is called the constant of variation or the constant of proportionality.   Example 5: The area of an ellipse varies jointly as a, half of the ellipse’s major axis, and b, half of the ellipse’s minor axis. If the area of an ellipse is 300 π   cm 2 , where a = 10   cm and b = 30   cm , then what is the constant of proportionality? Give a formula for the area of an ellipse. Solution: If we let A represent the area of an ellipse, then we can use the statement “area varies jointly as a and b” to write To find the constant of variation, k, use the fact that the area is 300 π when a = 10 and b = 30 . Therefore, the formula for the area of an ellipse is Answer: The constant of proportionality is π , and the formula for the area is A = a b π .   Try this! Given that y varies directly as the square of x and inversely to z, where y = 2 when x = 3 and z = 27, find y when x = 2 and z = 16. Answer: 3/2 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter8	 ||  || Square Roots The square root The number that, when multiplied by itself, yields the original number. of a number is that number that when multiplied by itself yields the original number. For example, 4 is a square root of 16, because 4 2 = 16 . Since ( − 4 ) 2 = 16 , we can say that −4 is a square root of 16 as well. Every positive real number has two square roots, one positive and one negative. For this reason, we use the radical sign   √ to denote the principal (nonnegative) square root The positive square root of a real number, denoted with the symbol   √ . and a negative sign in front of the radical −   √ to denote the negative square root. Zero is the only real number with one square root. If the radicand The expression a within a radical sign, a √ n . , the number inside the radical sign, is nonnegative and can be factored as the square of another nonnegative number, then the square root of the number is apparent. In this case, we have the following property:   Example 1: Find the square root. a. 36 − − √ b. 144 − − − √ c. 0.04 − − − − √ d. 1 9 − − √ Solution: a. 36 − − √ = 6 2 − − √ = 6 b. 144 − − − √ = 12 2 − − − √ = 12 c. 0.04 − − − − √ = ( 0.2 ) 2 − − − − − √ = 0.2 d. 1 9 − − √ = ( 1 3 ) 2 − − − − √ = 1 3   Example 2: Find the negative square root. a. − 4 √ b. − 1 √ Solution: a. − 4 √ = − 2 2 − − √ = − 2 b. − 1 √ = − 1 2 − − √ = − 1 The radicand may not always be a perfect square. If a positive integer is not a perfect square, then its square root will be irrational. For example, 2 √ is an irrational number and can be approximated on most calculators using the square root button. Next, consider the square root of a negative number. To determine the square root of −9, you must find a number that when squared results in −9: However, any real number squared always results in a positive number: The square root of a negative number is currently left undefined. For now, we will state that − 9 − − − √ is not a real a number.  || Cube Roots The cube root The number that, when used as a factor with itself three times, yields the original number; it is denoted with the symbol   √ 3 . of a number is that number that when multiplied by itself three times yields the original number. Furthermore, we denote a cube root using the symbol   √ 3 , where 3 is called the index The positive integer n in the notation   √ n that is used to indicate an nth root. . For example, The product of three equal factors will be positive if the factor is positive and negative if the factor is negative. For this reason, any real number will have only one real cube root. Hence the technicalities associated with the principal root do not apply. For example, In general, given any real number a, we have the following property: When simplifying cube roots, look for factors that are perfect cubes.   Example 3: Find the cube root. a. 27 − − √ 3 b. 64 − − √ 3 c. 0 √ 3 d. 1 8 − − √ 3 Solution: a. 27 − − √ 3 = 3 3 − − √ 3 = 3 b. 64 − − √ 3 = 4 3 − − √ 3 = 4 c. 0 √ 3 = 0 3 − − √ 3 = 0 d. 1 8 − − √ 3 = ( 1 2 ) 3 − − − − √ 3 = 1 2   Example 4: Find the cube root. a. − 8 − − − √ 3 b. − 1 − − − √ 3 c. − 1 27 − − − − √ 3 Solution: a. − 8 − − − √ 3 = ( − 2 ) 3 − − − − − √ 3 = − 2 b. − 1 − − − √ 3 = ( − 1 ) 3 − − − − − √ 3 = − 1 c. − 1 27 − − − − √ 3 = ( − 1 3 ) 3 − − − − − − √ 3 = − 1 3 It may be the case that the radicand is not a perfect cube. If an integer is not a perfect cube, then its cube root will be irrational. For example, 2 √ 3 is an irrational number which can be approximated on most calculators using the root button. Depending on the calculator, we typically type in the index prior to pushing the button and then the radicand as follows: Therefore, we have  || nth Roots For any integer n ≥ 2 , we define the nth root The number that, when raised to the nth power, yields the original number. of a positive real number as that number that when raised to the nth power yields the original number. Given any nonnegative real number a, we have the following property: Here n is called the index and a n is called the radicand. Furthermore, we can refer to the entire expression a √ n as a radical Used when referring to an expression of the form a √ n . . When the index is an integer greater than 3, we say “fourth root”, “fifth root”, and so on. The nth root of any number is apparent if we can write the radicand with an exponent equal to the index.   Example 5: Find the nth root. a. 81 − − √ 4 b. 32 − − √ 5 c. 1 √ 7 d. 1 16 − − √ 4 Solution: a. 81 − − √ 4 = 3 4 − − √ 4 = 3 b. 32 − − √ 5 = 2 5 − − √ 5 = 2 c. 1 √ 7 = 1 7 − − √ 7 = 1 d. 1 16 − − √ 4 = ( 1 2 ) 4 − − − − √ 4 = 1 2 If the index is n = 2 , then the radical indicates a square root and it is customary to write the radical without the index, as illustrated below: We have already taken care to define the principal square root of a number. At this point, we extend this idea to nth roots when n is even. For example, 3 is a fourth root of 81, because 3 4 = 81 . And since ( − 3 ) 4 = 81 , we can say that −3 is a fourth root of 81 as well. Hence we use the radical sign   √ n to denote the principal (nonnegative) nth root The positive nth root when n is even. when n is even. In this case, for any real number a, we use the following property: For example, The negative nth root, when n is even, will be denoted using a negative sign in front of the radical −   √ n . We have seen that the square root of a negative number is not real because any real number, when squared, will result in a positive number. In fact, a similar problem arises for any even index: Here the fourth root of −81 is not a real number because the fourth power of any real number is always positive.   Example 6: Simplify. a. − 16 − − − − √ 4 b. − 16 − − √ 4 Solution: a. The radicand is negative and the index is even. Therefore, there is no real number that when raised to the fourth power is −16. b. Here the radicand is positive. Furthermore, 16 = 2 4 , and we can simplify as follows: When n is odd, the same problems do not occur. The product of an odd number of positive factors is positive and the product of an odd number of negative factors is negative. Hence when the index n is odd, there is only one real nth root for any real number a. And we have the following property:   Example 7: Find the nth root. a. − 32 − − − − √ 5 b. − 1 − − − √ 7 Solution: a. − 32 − − − − √ 5 = ( − 2 ) 5 − − − − − √ 5 = − 2 b. − 1 − − − √ 7 = ( − 1 ) 7 − − − − − √ 7 = − 1   Try this! Find the fourth root: 625 − − − √ 4 . Answer: 5 Video Solution Summary: When n is odd, the nth root is positive or negative depending on the sign of the radicand. When n is even, the nth root is positive or not real depending on the sign of the radicand.  || Simplifying Using the Product and Quotient Rule for Radicals It will not always be the case that the radicand is a perfect power of the given index. If not, we use the following two properties to simplify them. If a and b represent positive real numbers, then we have Product rule for radicals a ⋅ b − − − √ n = a √ n ⋅ b √ n , where a and b represent positive real numbers. : a ⋅ b − − − √ n = a √ n ⋅ b √ n Quotient rule for radicals a b − − √ n = a √ n b √ n , where a and b represent positive real numbers. : a b − − √ n = a √ n b √ n A radical is simplified A radical where the radicand does not consist of any factor that can be written as a perfect power of the index. if it does not contain any factor that can be written as a perfect power of the index.   Example 8: Simplify: 12 − − √ . Solution: Here 12 can be written as 4 ⋅ 3, where 4 is a perfect square. We can verify our answer on a calculator: Also, it is worth noting that Answer: 2 3 √   Example 9: Simplify: 135 − − − √ . Solution: Begin by finding the largest perfect square factor of 135. Therefore, Answer: 3 15 − − √   Example 10: Simplify: 50 121 − − − √ . Solution: Begin by finding the prime factorizations of both 50 and 121. This will enable us to easily determine the largest perfect square factors. Therefore, Answer: 5 2 √ 11   Example 11: Simplify: 162 − − − √ 3 . Solution: Use the prime factorization of 162 to find the largest perfect cube factor: Replace the radicand with this factorization and then apply the product rule for radicals. We can verify our answer on a calculator. Answer: 3   6 √ 3   Try this! Simplify: 2   96 − − √ 3 . Answer: 4   12 − − √ 3 Video Solution   Example 12: Simplify: − 96 − − − − √ 5 . Solution: Here we note that the index is odd and the radicand is negative; hence the result will be negative. We can factor the radicand as follows: Then simplify: Answer: − 2   3 √ 5   Example 13: Simplify: − 8 64 − − − − √ 3 . Solution: In this case, consider the equivalent fraction with − 8 = ( − 2 ) 3 in the numerator and then simplify. Answer: −1/2   Try this! Simplify − 108 − − − − √ 3 . Answer: − 3   4 √ 3 Video Solution  ||  || Simplifying Radical Expressions An algebraic expression that contains radicals is called a radical expression An algebraic expression that contains radicals. . We use the product and quotient rules to simplify them.   Example 1: Simplify: 8 y 3 − − − √ 3 . Solution: Use the fact that a n − − √ n = a when n is odd. Answer: 2 y   Example 2: Simplify: 9 x 2 − − − √ . Solution: The square root has index 2; use the fact that a n − − √ n = | a | when n is even. Since x is a variable, it may represent a negative number. Thus we need to ensure that the result is positive by including the absolute value operator. Answer: 3 | x | Important Note Typically, at this point beginning algebra texts note that all variables are assumed to be positive. If this is the case, then x in the previous example is positive and the absolute value operator is not needed. The example can be simplified as follows: In this section, we will assume that all variables are positive. This allows us to focus on calculating nth roots without the technicalities associated with the principal nth root problem. For this reason, we will use the following property for the rest of the section: When simplifying radical expressions, look for factors with powers that match the index.   Example 3: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the square factors of 18, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 4: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the square factors of 4, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 5: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the cubic factors of 80, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 6: Simplify . Solution: The coefficient and thus does not have any perfect cube factors. It will be left as the only remaining radicand because all of the other factors are cubes, as illustrated below: Replace the variables with these equivalents, apply the product and quotient rule for radicals, and then simplify. Answer:   Example 7: Simplify: . Solution: Determine all factors that can be written as perfect powers of 4. Here it is important to see that . Hence the factor will be left inside the radical. Answer:   Example 8: Simplify: . Solution: Notice that the variable factor x cannot be written as a power of 5 and thus will be left inside the radical. In addition, for ; the factor y will be left inside the radical as well. Answer:   Try this! Simplify: . (Assume all variables are positive.) Answer: Video Solution Tip To easily simplify an nth root, we can divide the powers by the index. If the index does not divide into the power evenly, then we can use the quotient and remainder to simplify. For example, The quotient is the exponent of the factor outside of the radical, and the remainder is the exponent of the factor left inside the radical.  || Formulas Involving Radicals We next review the distance formula. Given two points and , The distance, d, between them is given by the following formula: Distance formula Given two points and calculate the distance d between them using the formula d = : Recall that this formula was derived from the Pythagorean theorem.   Example 9: Calculate the distance between (−4, 7) and (2, 1). Solution: Use the distance formula with the following points. It is a good practice to include the formula in its general form before substituting values for the variables; this improves readability and reduces the probability of making errors. Answer: units   Example 10: The period, T, of a pendulum in seconds is given by the formula where L represents the length of the pendulum in feet. If the length of a pendulum measures 6 feet, then calculate the period rounded off to the nearest tenth of a second. Solution: Substitute 6 for L and then simplify. Answer: The period is approximately 2.7 seconds.  || Square Root and Cube Root Functions We begin with the square root function The function . : We know that the square root is not a real number when the radicand x is negative. Therefore, we conclude that the domain consists of all real numbers greater than or equal to 0. Here we choose 0 and some positive values for x, calculate the corresponding y-values, and plot the resulting ordered pairs. After plotting the points, we can then sketch the graph of the square root function.   Example 11: Given the function , find , , and . Solution: Replace x with each of the given values. Answer: , , and   Next, consider the cube root function The function . : Since the cube root could be either negative or positive, we conclude that the domain consists of all real numbers. For completeness, choose some positive and negative values for x, as well as 0, and then calculate the corresponding y-values. Plot the points and sketch the graph of the cube root function.   Example 12: Given the function , find , , and . Solution: Replace x with each of the given values. Answer: , , and  ||  || Adding and Subtracting Radical Expressions Adding and subtracting radical expressions is similar to adding and subtracting like terms. Radicals are considered to be like radicals Radicals that share the same index and radicand. , or similar radicals Term used when referring to like radicals. , when they share the same index and radicand. For example, the terms 3 5 √ and 4 5 √ contain like radicals and can be added using the distributive property as follows: Typically, we do not show the step involving the distributive property and simply write When adding terms with like radicals, add only the coefficients; the radical part remains the same.   Example 1: Add: 3 2 √ + 2 2 √ . Solution: The terms contain like radicals; therefore, add the coefficients. Answer: 5 2 √   Subtraction is performed in a similar manner.   Example 2: Subtract: 2 7 √ − 3 7 √ . Solution: Answer: − 7 √   If the radicand and the index are not exactly the same, then the radicals are not similar and we cannot combine them.   Example 3: Simplify: 10 5 √ + 6 2 √ − 9 5 √ − 7 2 √ . Solution: We cannot simplify any further because 5 √ and 2 √ are not like radicals; the radicands are not the same. Answer: 5 √ − 2 √ Caution It is important to point out that 5 √ − 2 √ ≠ 5 − 2 − − − − √ . We can verify this by calculating the value of each side with a calculator. In general, note that a √ n ± b √ n ≠ a ± b − − − − √ n . Example 4: Simplify: 3   6 √ 3 + 2 6 √ − 6 √ 3 − 3 6 √ . Solution: We cannot simplify any further because 6 √ 3 and 6 √ are not like radicals; the indices are not the same. Answer: 2   6 √ 3 − 6 √   Often we will have to simplify before we can identify the like radicals within the terms.   Example 5: Subtract: 12 − − √ − 48 − − √ . Solution: At first glance, the radicals do not appear to be similar. However, after simplifying completely, we will see that we can combine them. Answer: − 2 3 √   Example 6: Simplify: 20 − − √ + 27 − − √ − 3 5 √ − 2 12 − − √ . Solution: Answer: − 5 √ − 3 √   Try this! Subtract: 2 50 − − √ − 6 8 √ . Answer: − 2 2 √ Video Solution Next, we work with radical expressions involving variables. In this section, assume all radicands containing variable expressions are not negative.   Example 7: Simplify: − 6   2 x − − √ 3 − 3 x − − √ 3 + 7   2 x − − √ 3 . Solution: We cannot combine any further because the remaining radical expressions do not share the same radicand; they are not like radicals. Note that 2 x − − √ 3 − 3 x − − √ 3 ≠ 2 x − 3 x − − − − − − √ 3 . Answer: 2 x − − √ 3 − 3 x − − √ 3   We will often find the need to subtract a radical expression with multiple terms. If this is the case, remember to apply the distributive property before combining like terms.   Example 8: Simplify: ( 9 x √ − 2 y √ ) − ( 10 x √ + 7 y √ ) . Solution: Answer: − x √ − 9 y √   Until we simplify, it is often unclear which terms involving radicals are similar.   Example 9: Simplify: 5   2 y − − √ 3 − ( 54 y − − − √ 3 − 16 − − √ 3 ) . Solution: Answer: 2   2 y − − √ 3 + 2   2 √ 3     Example 10: Simplify: 2 a 125 a 2 b − − − − − − √ − a 2 80 b − − − √ + 4 20 a 4 b − − − − − √ . Solution: Answer: 14 a 2 5 b − − √   Try this! Simplify: 45 x 3 − − − − √ − ( 20 x 3 − − − − √ − 80 x − − − √ ) . Answer: x 5 x − − √ + 4 5 x − − √ Video Solution Tip Take careful note of the differences between products and sums within a radical. Products Sums x 2 y 2 − − − − √ = x y x 3 y 3 − − − − √ 3 = x y x 2 + y 2 − − − − − − √ ≠ x + y x 3 + y 3 − − − − − − √ 3 ≠ x + y The property a ⋅ b − − − √ n = a √ n ⋅ b √ n says that we can simplify radicals when the operation in the radicand is multiplication. There is no corresponding property for addition.  ||  || Multiplying Radical Expressions When multiplying radical expressions with the same index, we use the product rule for radicals. If a and b represent positive real numbers,   Example 1: Multiply: 2 √ ⋅ 6 √ . Solution: This problem is a product of two square roots. Apply the product rule for radicals and then simplify. Answer: 2 3 √   Example 2: Multiply: 9 √ 3 ⋅ 6 √ 3 . Solution: This problem is a product of cube roots. Apply the product rule for radicals and then simplify. Answer: 3   2 √ 3   Often there will be coefficients in front of the radicals.   Example 3: Multiply: 2 3 √ ⋅ 5 2 √ . Solution: Using the product rule for radicals and the fact that multiplication is commutative, we can multiply the coefficients and the radicands as follows. Typically, the first step involving the application of the commutative property is not shown. Answer: 10 6 √   Example 4: Multiply: − 2   5 x − − √ 3 ⋅ 3   25 x 2 − − − − √ 3 . Solution: Answer: − 30 x   Use the distributive property when multiplying rational expressions with more than one term.   Example 5: Multiply: 4 3 √ ( 2 3 √ − 3 6 √ ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and multiply each term by 4 3 √ . Answer: 24 − 36 2 √   Example 6: Multiply: 4 x 2 − − − √ 3 ( 2 x − − √ 3 − 5   4 x 2 − − − √ 3 ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and then simplify the result. Answer: 2 x − 10 x ⋅ 2 x − − √ 3   The process for multiplying radical expressions with multiple terms is the same process used when multiplying polynomials. Apply the distributive property, simplify each radical, and then combine like terms.   Example 7: Multiply: ( 5 √ + 2 ) ( 5 √ − 4 ) . Solution: Begin by applying the distributive property. Answer: − 3 − 2 5 √   Example 8: Multiply: ( 3 x √ − y √ ) 2 . Solution: Answer: 9 x − 6 x y − − √ + y   Try this! Multiply: ( 2 3 √ + 5 2 √ ) ( 3 √ − 2 6 √ ) . Answer: 6 − 12 2 √ + 5 6 √ − 20 3 √ Video Solution The expressions ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) are called conjugates The factors ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) are conjugates. . When multiplying conjugates, the sum of the products of the inner and outer terms results in 0.   Example 9: Multiply: ( 2 √ + 5 √ ) ( 2 √ − 5 √ ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and then combine like terms. Answer: −3   It is important to note that when multiplying conjugate radical expressions, we obtain a rational expression. This is true in general and is often used in our study of algebra. Therefore, for nonnegative real numbers a and b, we have the following property:  || Dividing Radical Expressions (Rationalizing the Denominator) To divide radical expressions with the same index, we use the quotient rule for radicals. If a and b represent nonnegative numbers, where b ≠ 0 , then we have   Example 10: Divide: 80 √ 10 √ . Solution: In this case, we can see that 10 and 80 have common factors. If we apply the quotient rule for radicals and write it as a single square root, we will be able to reduce the fractional radicand. Answer: 2 2 √   Example 11: Divide: 16 x 5 y 4 √ 2 x y √ . Solution: Answer: 2 x 2 y 2 y − − √   Example 12: Divide: 54 a 3 b 5 √ 3 16 a 2 b 2 √ 3 . Solution: Answer: 3 b ⋅ a √ 3 2   When the divisor of a radical expression contains a radical, it is a common practice to find an equivalent expression where the denominator is a rational number. Finding such an equivalent expression is called rationalizing the denominator The process of determining an equivalent radical expression with a rational denominator. . To do this, multiply the fraction by a special form of 1 so that the radicand in the denominator can be written with a power that matches the index. After doing this, simplify and eliminate the radical in the denominator. For example, Remember, to obtain an equivalent expression, you must multiply the numerator and denominator by the exact same nonzero factor.   Example 13: Rationalize the denominator: 3 √ 2 √ . Solution: The goal is to find an equivalent expression without a radical in the denominator. In this example, multiply by 1 in the form 2 √ 2 √ . Answer: 6 √ 2   Example 14: Rationalize the denominator: 1 2 3 x √ . Solution: The radicand in the denominator determines the factors that you need to use to rationalize it. In this example, multiply by 1 in the form 3 x √ 3 x √ . Answer: 3 x √ 6 x   Typically, we will find the need to reduce, or cancel, after rationalizing the denominator.   Example 15: Rationalize the denominator: 5 2 √ 5 a b √ . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form 5 a b √ 5 a b √ . Notice that a and b do not cancel in this example. Do not cancel factors inside a radical with those that are outside. Answer: 10 a b √ a b   Try this! Rationalize the denominator: 4 a 3 b − − √ . Answer: 2 3 a b √ 3 b Video Solution Up to this point, we have seen that multiplying a numerator and a denominator by a square root with the exact same radicand results in a rational denominator. In general, this is true only when the denominator contains a square root. However, this is not the case for a cube root. For example, Note that multiplying by the same factor in the denominator does not rationalize it. In this case, if we multiply by 1 in the form of x 2 √ 3 x 2 √ 3 , then we can write the radicand in the denominator as a power of 3. Simplifying the result then yields a rationalized denominator. For example, Therefore, to rationalize the denominator of radical expressions with one radical term in the denominator, begin by factoring the radicand of the denominator. The factors of this radicand and the index determine what we should multiply by. Multiply numerator and denominator by the nth root of factors that produce nth powers of all the factors in the radicand of the denominator.   Example 16: Rationalize the denominator: 1 25 √ 3 . Solution: The radical in the denominator is equivalent to 5 2 − − √ 3 . To rationalize the denominator, it should be 5 3 − − √ 3 . To obtain this, we need one more factor of 5. Therefore, multiply by 1 in the form of 5 √ 3 5 √ 3 . Answer: 5 √ 3 5   Example 17: Rationalize the denominator: 27 a 2 b 2 − − − √ 3 . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form 2 2 b √ 3 2 2 b √ 3 . Answer: 3 4 a b √ 3 2 b   Example 18: Rationalize the denominator: 1   4 x 3 √ 5 . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form 2 3 x 2 √ 5 2 3 x 2 √ 5 . Answer: 8 x 2 √ 5 2 x   When two terms involving square roots appear in the denominator, we can rationalize it using a very special technique. This technique involves multiplying the numerator and the denominator of the fraction by the conjugate of the denominator. Recall that multiplying a radical expression by its conjugate produces a rational number.   Example 19: Rationalize the denominator: 1 3 √ − 2 √ . Solution: In this example, the conjugate of the denominator is 3 √ + 2 √ . Therefore, multiply by 1 in the form ( 3 √ + 2 √ ) ( 3 √ + 2 √ ) . Answer: 3 √ + 2 √   Notice that the terms involving the square root in the denominator are eliminated by multiplying by the conjugate. We can use the property ( a √ + b √ ) ( a √ − b √ ) = a − b to expedite the process of multiplying the expressions in the denominator.   Example 20: Rationalize the denominator: 2 √ − 6 √ 2 √ + 6 √ . Solution: Multiply by 1 in the form 2 √ − 6 √ 2 √ − 6 √ . Answer: − 2 + 3 √   Example 21: Rationalize the denominator: x √ + y √ x √ − y √ . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form x √ − y √ x √ − y √ . Answer: x − 2 x y √ + y x − y   Try this! Rationalize the denominator: 3 5 √ + 5 2 5 √ − 3 . Answer: 19 5 √ + 45 11 Video Solution  ||  || Definition of Rational Exponents So far, exponents have been limited to integers. In this section, we will define what rational (or fractional) exponents The fractional exponent m/n that indicates a radical with index n and exponent m: a m / n = a m − − − √ n . mean and how to work with them. All of the rules for exponents developed up to this point apply. In particular, recall the product rule for exponents. Given any rational numbers m and n, then For example, if we have an exponent of 1 2 , then the product rule for exponents implies the following: Here 5 1 / 2 is one of two equal factors of 5; hence it is a square root of 5, and we can write Furthermore, we can see that 2 1 / 3 is one of three equal factors of 2. Therefore, 2 1 / 3 is the cube root of 2, and we can write This is true in general, given any nonzero real number a, In other words, the denominator of a fractional exponent determines the index of an nth root.   Example 1: Rewrite as a radical. a. 7 1 / 2 b. 7 1 / 3 Solution: a. 7 1 / 2 = 7 √ b. 7 1 / 3 = 7 √ 3   Example 2: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify. a. 81 1 / 2 b. 81 1 / 4 Solution: a. 81 1 / 2 = 81 − − √ = 9 b. 81 1 / 4 = 81 − − √ 4 = 3 4 − − √ 4 = 3   Example 3: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify. a. ( 125 x 3 ) 1 / 3 b. ( − 32 y 10 ) 1 / 5 Solution: a. b. Next, consider fractional exponents where the numerator is an integer other than 1. For example, consider the following: This shows that 5 2 / 3 is one of three equal factors of 5 2 . In other words, 5 2 / 3 is the cube root of 5 2 and we can write: In general, given any real number a, An expression with a rational exponent is equivalent to a radical where the denominator is the index and the numerator is the exponent. Any radical expression can be written with a rational exponent, which we call exponential form An equivalent expression written using a rational exponent. .   Example 4: Rewrite as a radical. a. 7 2 / 5 b. 2 3 / 4 Solution: a. 7 2 / 5 = 7 2 − − √ 5 = 49 − − √ 5 b. 2 3 / 4 = 2 3 − − √ 4 = 8 √ 4   Example 5: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify. a. 8 2 / 3 b. ( 32 ) 3 / 5 Solution: a. b. We can often avoid very large integers by working with their prime factorization. Given a radical expression, we will be asked to find the equivalent in exponential form. Assume all variables are positive.   Example 6: Rewrite using rational exponents: x 2 − − √ 3 . Solution: Here the index is 3 and the power is 2. We can write Answer: x 2 / 3   Example 7: Rewrite using rational exponents: y 3 − − √ 6 . Solution: Here the index is 6 and the power is 3. We can write Answer: y 1 / 2   It is important to note that the following are equivalent. In other words, it does not matter if we apply the power first or the root first. For example, we can apply the power before the root: Or we can apply the nth root before the power: The results are the same.   Example 8: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify: ( − 8 ) 2 / 3 . Solution: Here the index is 3 and the power is 2. We can write Answer: 4   Try this! Rewrite as a radical and then simplify: 25 3 / 2 . Answer: 125 Video Solution Some calculators have a caret button ˆ . If so, we can calculate approximations for radicals using it and rational exponents. For example, to calculate , we would type To calculate , we would type  || Operations Using the Rules of Exponents In this section, we review all of the rules of exponents, which extend to include rational exponents. If given any rational numbers m and n, then we have Product rule: Quotient rule: Power rule: Power rule for a product: Power rule for a quotient: Negative exponents: Zero exponent: These rules allow us to perform operations with rational exponents.   Example 9: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 10: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 11: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 12: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 13: Simplify: . Solution: Answer: 1/125   Try this! Simplify: . Answer: Video Solution  || Radical Expressions with Different Indices To apply the product or quotient rule for radicals, the indices of the radicals involved must be the same. If the indices are different, then first rewrite the radicals in exponential form and then apply the rules for exponents.   Example 14: Multiply: . Solution: In this example, the index of each radical factor is different. Hence the product rule for radicals does not apply. Begin by converting the radicals into an equivalent form using rational exponents. Then apply the product rule for exponents. Answer:   Example 15: Divide: . Solution: In this example, the index of the radical in the numerator is different from the index of the radical in the denominator. Hence the quotient rule for radicals does not apply. Begin by converting the radicals into an equivalent form using rational exponents and then apply the quotient rule for exponents. Answer:   Example 16: Simplify: . Solution: Here the radicand of the square root is a cube root. After rewriting this expression using rational exponents, we will see that the power rule for exponents applies. Answer:  ||  || Radical Equations A radical equation Any equation that contains one or more radicals with a variable in the radicand. is any equation that contains one or more radicals with a variable in the radicand. Following are some examples of radical equations, all of which will be solved in this section: We begin with the squaring property of equality Given real numbers a and b, where a = b , then a 2 = b 2 . ; given real numbers a and b, we have the following: In other words, equality is retained if we square both sides of an equation. The converse, on the other hand, is not necessarily true: This is important because we will use this property to solve radical equations. Consider a very simple radical equation that can be solved by inspection: Here we can see that x = 9 is a solution. To solve this equation algebraically, make use of the squaring property of equality and the fact that ( a √ ) 2 = a 2 − − √ = a when a is positive. Eliminate the square root by squaring both sides of the equation as follows: As a check, we can see that 9 √ = 3 as expected. Because the converse of the squaring property of equality is not necessarily true, solutions to the squared equation may not be solutions to the original. Hence squaring both sides of an equation introduces the possibility of extraneous solutions A solution that does not solve the original equation. , or solutions that do not solve the original equation. For this reason, we must check the answers that result from squaring both sides of an equation.   Example 1: Solve: x − 1 − − − − − √ = 5 . Solution: We can eliminate the square root by applying the squaring property of equality. Next, we must check. Answer: The solution is 26.   Example 2: Solve: 5 − 4 x − − − − − √ = x . Solution: Begin by squaring both sides of the equation. You are left with a quadratic equation that can be solved by factoring. Since you squared both sides, you must check your solutions. After checking, you can see that x = − 5 was extraneous; it did not solve the original radical equation. Disregard that answer. This leaves x = 1 as the only solution. Answer: The solution is x = 1 .   In the previous two examples, notice that the radical is isolated on one side of the equation. Typically, this is not the case. The steps for solving radical equations involving square roots are outlined in the following example.   Example 3: Solve: 2 x − 5 − − − − − √ + 4 = x . Solution: Step 1: Isolate the square root. Begin by subtracting 4 from both sides of the equation. Step 2: Square both sides. Squaring both sides eliminates the square root. Step 3: Solve the resulting equation. Here you are left with a quadratic equation that can be solved by factoring. Step 4: Check the solutions in the original equation. Squaring both sides introduces the possibility of extraneous solutions; hence the check is required. After checking, we can see that x = 3 is an extraneous root; it does not solve the original radical equation. This leaves x = 7 as the only solution. Answer: The solution is x = 7 .   Example 4: Solve: 3 x + 1 − − − − − √ − 2 x = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the term with the radical. Despite the fact that the term on the left side has a coefficient, it is still considered isolated. Recall that terms are separated by addition or subtraction operators. Solve the resulting quadratic equation. Since we squared both sides, we must check our solutions. After checking, we can see that x = − 3 4 was extraneous. Answer: The solution is 3.   Sometimes both of the possible solutions are extraneous.   Example 5: Solve: 4 − 11 x − − − − − − √ − x + 2 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the radical. Since we squared both sides, we must check our solutions. Since both possible solutions are extraneous, the equation has no solution. Answer: No solution, Ø   The squaring property of equality extends to any positive integer power n. Given real numbers a and b, we have the following: This is often referred to as the power property of equality Given any positive integer n and real numbers a and b, where a = b , then a n = b n . . Use this property, along with the fact that ( a √ n ) n = a n − − √ n = a , when a is positive, to solve radical equations with indices greater than 2.   Example 6: Solve: x 2 + 4 − − − − − √ 3 − 2 = 0 . Solution: Isolate the radical and then cube both sides of the equation. Check. Answer: The solutions are −2 and 2.   Try this! Solve: 2 x − 1 − − − − − √ + 2 = x . Answer: x = 5 ( x = 1 is extraneous) Video Solution It may be the case that the equation has two radical expressions.   Example 7: Solve: 3 x − 4 − − − − − √ = 2 x + 9 − − − − − √ . Solution: Both radicals are considered isolated on separate sides of the equation. Check x = 13 . Answer: The solution is 13.   Example 8: Solve: x 2 + x − 14 − − − − − − − − − √ 3 = x + 50 − − − − − √ 3 . Solution: Eliminate the radicals by cubing both sides. Check. Answer: The solutions are −8 and 8.   We will learn how to solve some of the more advanced radical equations in the next course, Intermediate Algebra.   Try this! Solve: 3 x + 1 − − − − − √ = 2 x − 3 − − − − − √ . Answer: 13 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter8_1	 || Square Roots The square root The number that, when multiplied by itself, yields the original number. of a number is that number that when multiplied by itself yields the original number. For example, 4 is a square root of 16, because 4 2 = 16 . Since ( − 4 ) 2 = 16 , we can say that −4 is a square root of 16 as well. Every positive real number has two square roots, one positive and one negative. For this reason, we use the radical sign   √ to denote the principal (nonnegative) square root The positive square root of a real number, denoted with the symbol   √ . and a negative sign in front of the radical −   √ to denote the negative square root. Zero is the only real number with one square root. If the radicand The expression a within a radical sign, a √ n . , the number inside the radical sign, is nonnegative and can be factored as the square of another nonnegative number, then the square root of the number is apparent. In this case, we have the following property:   Example 1: Find the square root. a. 36 − − √ b. 144 − − − √ c. 0.04 − − − − √ d. 1 9 − − √ Solution: a. 36 − − √ = 6 2 − − √ = 6 b. 144 − − − √ = 12 2 − − − √ = 12 c. 0.04 − − − − √ = ( 0.2 ) 2 − − − − − √ = 0.2 d. 1 9 − − √ = ( 1 3 ) 2 − − − − √ = 1 3   Example 2: Find the negative square root. a. − 4 √ b. − 1 √ Solution: a. − 4 √ = − 2 2 − − √ = − 2 b. − 1 √ = − 1 2 − − √ = − 1 The radicand may not always be a perfect square. If a positive integer is not a perfect square, then its square root will be irrational. For example, 2 √ is an irrational number and can be approximated on most calculators using the square root button. Next, consider the square root of a negative number. To determine the square root of −9, you must find a number that when squared results in −9: However, any real number squared always results in a positive number: The square root of a negative number is currently left undefined. For now, we will state that − 9 − − − √ is not a real a number.  || Cube Roots The cube root The number that, when used as a factor with itself three times, yields the original number; it is denoted with the symbol   √ 3 . of a number is that number that when multiplied by itself three times yields the original number. Furthermore, we denote a cube root using the symbol   √ 3 , where 3 is called the index The positive integer n in the notation   √ n that is used to indicate an nth root. . For example, The product of three equal factors will be positive if the factor is positive and negative if the factor is negative. For this reason, any real number will have only one real cube root. Hence the technicalities associated with the principal root do not apply. For example, In general, given any real number a, we have the following property: When simplifying cube roots, look for factors that are perfect cubes.   Example 3: Find the cube root. a. 27 − − √ 3 b. 64 − − √ 3 c. 0 √ 3 d. 1 8 − − √ 3 Solution: a. 27 − − √ 3 = 3 3 − − √ 3 = 3 b. 64 − − √ 3 = 4 3 − − √ 3 = 4 c. 0 √ 3 = 0 3 − − √ 3 = 0 d. 1 8 − − √ 3 = ( 1 2 ) 3 − − − − √ 3 = 1 2   Example 4: Find the cube root. a. − 8 − − − √ 3 b. − 1 − − − √ 3 c. − 1 27 − − − − √ 3 Solution: a. − 8 − − − √ 3 = ( − 2 ) 3 − − − − − √ 3 = − 2 b. − 1 − − − √ 3 = ( − 1 ) 3 − − − − − √ 3 = − 1 c. − 1 27 − − − − √ 3 = ( − 1 3 ) 3 − − − − − − √ 3 = − 1 3 It may be the case that the radicand is not a perfect cube. If an integer is not a perfect cube, then its cube root will be irrational. For example, 2 √ 3 is an irrational number which can be approximated on most calculators using the root button. Depending on the calculator, we typically type in the index prior to pushing the button and then the radicand as follows: Therefore, we have  || nth Roots For any integer n ≥ 2 , we define the nth root The number that, when raised to the nth power, yields the original number. of a positive real number as that number that when raised to the nth power yields the original number. Given any nonnegative real number a, we have the following property: Here n is called the index and a n is called the radicand. Furthermore, we can refer to the entire expression a √ n as a radical Used when referring to an expression of the form a √ n . . When the index is an integer greater than 3, we say “fourth root”, “fifth root”, and so on. The nth root of any number is apparent if we can write the radicand with an exponent equal to the index.   Example 5: Find the nth root. a. 81 − − √ 4 b. 32 − − √ 5 c. 1 √ 7 d. 1 16 − − √ 4 Solution: a. 81 − − √ 4 = 3 4 − − √ 4 = 3 b. 32 − − √ 5 = 2 5 − − √ 5 = 2 c. 1 √ 7 = 1 7 − − √ 7 = 1 d. 1 16 − − √ 4 = ( 1 2 ) 4 − − − − √ 4 = 1 2 If the index is n = 2 , then the radical indicates a square root and it is customary to write the radical without the index, as illustrated below: We have already taken care to define the principal square root of a number. At this point, we extend this idea to nth roots when n is even. For example, 3 is a fourth root of 81, because 3 4 = 81 . And since ( − 3 ) 4 = 81 , we can say that −3 is a fourth root of 81 as well. Hence we use the radical sign   √ n to denote the principal (nonnegative) nth root The positive nth root when n is even. when n is even. In this case, for any real number a, we use the following property: For example, The negative nth root, when n is even, will be denoted using a negative sign in front of the radical −   √ n . We have seen that the square root of a negative number is not real because any real number, when squared, will result in a positive number. In fact, a similar problem arises for any even index: Here the fourth root of −81 is not a real number because the fourth power of any real number is always positive.   Example 6: Simplify. a. − 16 − − − − √ 4 b. − 16 − − √ 4 Solution: a. The radicand is negative and the index is even. Therefore, there is no real number that when raised to the fourth power is −16. b. Here the radicand is positive. Furthermore, 16 = 2 4 , and we can simplify as follows: When n is odd, the same problems do not occur. The product of an odd number of positive factors is positive and the product of an odd number of negative factors is negative. Hence when the index n is odd, there is only one real nth root for any real number a. And we have the following property:   Example 7: Find the nth root. a. − 32 − − − − √ 5 b. − 1 − − − √ 7 Solution: a. − 32 − − − − √ 5 = ( − 2 ) 5 − − − − − √ 5 = − 2 b. − 1 − − − √ 7 = ( − 1 ) 7 − − − − − √ 7 = − 1   Try this! Find the fourth root: 625 − − − √ 4 . Answer: 5 Video Solution Summary: When n is odd, the nth root is positive or negative depending on the sign of the radicand. When n is even, the nth root is positive or not real depending on the sign of the radicand.  || Simplifying Using the Product and Quotient Rule for Radicals It will not always be the case that the radicand is a perfect power of the given index. If not, we use the following two properties to simplify them. If a and b represent positive real numbers, then we have Product rule for radicals a ⋅ b − − − √ n = a √ n ⋅ b √ n , where a and b represent positive real numbers. : a ⋅ b − − − √ n = a √ n ⋅ b √ n Quotient rule for radicals a b − − √ n = a √ n b √ n , where a and b represent positive real numbers. : a b − − √ n = a √ n b √ n A radical is simplified A radical where the radicand does not consist of any factor that can be written as a perfect power of the index. if it does not contain any factor that can be written as a perfect power of the index.   Example 8: Simplify: 12 − − √ . Solution: Here 12 can be written as 4 ⋅ 3, where 4 is a perfect square. We can verify our answer on a calculator: Also, it is worth noting that Answer: 2 3 √   Example 9: Simplify: 135 − − − √ . Solution: Begin by finding the largest perfect square factor of 135. Therefore, Answer: 3 15 − − √   Example 10: Simplify: 50 121 − − − √ . Solution: Begin by finding the prime factorizations of both 50 and 121. This will enable us to easily determine the largest perfect square factors. Therefore, Answer: 5 2 √ 11   Example 11: Simplify: 162 − − − √ 3 . Solution: Use the prime factorization of 162 to find the largest perfect cube factor: Replace the radicand with this factorization and then apply the product rule for radicals. We can verify our answer on a calculator. Answer: 3   6 √ 3   Try this! Simplify: 2   96 − − √ 3 . Answer: 4   12 − − √ 3 Video Solution   Example 12: Simplify: − 96 − − − − √ 5 . Solution: Here we note that the index is odd and the radicand is negative; hence the result will be negative. We can factor the radicand as follows: Then simplify: Answer: − 2   3 √ 5   Example 13: Simplify: − 8 64 − − − − √ 3 . Solution: In this case, consider the equivalent fraction with − 8 = ( − 2 ) 3 in the numerator and then simplify. Answer: −1/2   Try this! Simplify − 108 − − − − √ 3 . Answer: − 3   4 √ 3 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter8_1_1	Square Roots The square root The number that, when multiplied by itself, yields the original number. of a number is that number that when multiplied by itself yields the original number. For example, 4 is a square root of 16, because 4 2 = 16 . Since ( − 4 ) 2 = 16 , we can say that −4 is a square root of 16 as well. Every positive real number has two square roots, one positive and one negative. For this reason, we use the radical sign   √ to denote the principal (nonnegative) square root The positive square root of a real number, denoted with the symbol   √ . and a negative sign in front of the radical −   √ to denote the negative square root. Zero is the only real number with one square root. If the radicand The expression a within a radical sign, a √ n . , the number inside the radical sign, is nonnegative and can be factored as the square of another nonnegative number, then the square root of the number is apparent. In this case, we have the following property:   Example 1: Find the square root. a. 36 − − √ b. 144 − − − √ c. 0.04 − − − − √ d. 1 9 − − √ Solution: a. 36 − − √ = 6 2 − − √ = 6 b. 144 − − − √ = 12 2 − − − √ = 12 c. 0.04 − − − − √ = ( 0.2 ) 2 − − − − − √ = 0.2 d. 1 9 − − √ = ( 1 3 ) 2 − − − − √ = 1 3   Example 2: Find the negative square root. a. − 4 √ b. − 1 √ Solution: a. − 4 √ = − 2 2 − − √ = − 2 b. − 1 √ = − 1 2 − − √ = − 1 The radicand may not always be a perfect square. If a positive integer is not a perfect square, then its square root will be irrational. For example, 2 √ is an irrational number and can be approximated on most calculators using the square root button. Next, consider the square root of a negative number. To determine the square root of −9, you must find a number that when squared results in −9: However, any real number squared always results in a positive number: The square root of a negative number is currently left undefined. For now, we will state that − 9 − − − √ is not a real a number. Square Roots The square root The number that, when multiplied by itself, yields the original number. of a number is that number that when multiplied by itself yields the original number. For example, 4 is a square root of 16, because 4 2 = 16 . Since ( − 4 ) 2 = 16 , we can say that −4 is a square root of 16 as well. Every positive real number has two square roots, one positive and one negative. For this reason, we use the radical sign   √ to denote the principal (nonnegative) square root The positive square root of a real number, denoted with the symbol   √ . and a negative sign in front of the radical −   √ to denote the negative square root. Zero is the only real number with one square root. If the radicand The expression a within a radical sign, a √ n . , the number inside the radical sign, is nonnegative and can be factored as the square of another nonnegative number, then the square root of the number is apparent. In this case, we have the following property:   Example 1: Find the square root. a. 36 − − √ b. 144 − − − √ c. 0.04 − − − − √ d. 1 9 − − √ Solution: a. 36 − − √ = 6 2 − − √ = 6 b. 144 − − − √ = 12 2 − − − √ = 12 c. 0.04 − − − − √ = ( 0.2 ) 2 − − − − − √ = 0.2 d. 1 9 − − √ = ( 1 3 ) 2 − − − − √ = 1 3   Example 2: Find the negative square root. a. − 4 √ b. − 1 √ Solution: a. − 4 √ = − 2 2 − − √ = − 2 b. − 1 √ = − 1 2 − − √ = − 1 The radicand may not always be a perfect square. If a positive integer is not a perfect square, then its square root will be irrational. For example, 2 √ is an irrational number and can be approximated on most calculators using the square root button. Next, consider the square root of a negative number. To determine the square root of −9, you must find a number that when squared results in −9: However, any real number squared always results in a positive number: The square root of a negative number is currently left undefined. For now, we will state that − 9 − − − √ is not a real a number.  || 
book2_chapter8_1_2	Cube Roots The cube root The number that, when used as a factor with itself three times, yields the original number; it is denoted with the symbol   √ 3 . of a number is that number that when multiplied by itself three times yields the original number. Furthermore, we denote a cube root using the symbol   √ 3 , where 3 is called the index The positive integer n in the notation   √ n that is used to indicate an nth root. . For example, The product of three equal factors will be positive if the factor is positive and negative if the factor is negative. For this reason, any real number will have only one real cube root. Hence the technicalities associated with the principal root do not apply. For example, In general, given any real number a, we have the following property: When simplifying cube roots, look for factors that are perfect cubes.   Example 3: Find the cube root. a. 27 − − √ 3 b. 64 − − √ 3 c. 0 √ 3 d. 1 8 − − √ 3 Solution: a. 27 − − √ 3 = 3 3 − − √ 3 = 3 b. 64 − − √ 3 = 4 3 − − √ 3 = 4 c. 0 √ 3 = 0 3 − − √ 3 = 0 d. 1 8 − − √ 3 = ( 1 2 ) 3 − − − − √ 3 = 1 2   Example 4: Find the cube root. a. − 8 − − − √ 3 b. − 1 − − − √ 3 c. − 1 27 − − − − √ 3 Solution: a. − 8 − − − √ 3 = ( − 2 ) 3 − − − − − √ 3 = − 2 b. − 1 − − − √ 3 = ( − 1 ) 3 − − − − − √ 3 = − 1 c. − 1 27 − − − − √ 3 = ( − 1 3 ) 3 − − − − − − √ 3 = − 1 3 It may be the case that the radicand is not a perfect cube. If an integer is not a perfect cube, then its cube root will be irrational. For example, 2 √ 3 is an irrational number which can be approximated on most calculators using the root button. Depending on the calculator, we typically type in the index prior to pushing the button and then the radicand as follows: Therefore, we have Cube Roots The cube root The number that, when used as a factor with itself three times, yields the original number; it is denoted with the symbol   √ 3 . of a number is that number that when multiplied by itself three times yields the original number. Furthermore, we denote a cube root using the symbol   √ 3 , where 3 is called the index The positive integer n in the notation   √ n that is used to indicate an nth root. . For example, The product of three equal factors will be positive if the factor is positive and negative if the factor is negative. For this reason, any real number will have only one real cube root. Hence the technicalities associated with the principal root do not apply. For example, In general, given any real number a, we have the following property: When simplifying cube roots, look for factors that are perfect cubes.   Example 3: Find the cube root. a. 27 − − √ 3 b. 64 − − √ 3 c. 0 √ 3 d. 1 8 − − √ 3 Solution: a. 27 − − √ 3 = 3 3 − − √ 3 = 3 b. 64 − − √ 3 = 4 3 − − √ 3 = 4 c. 0 √ 3 = 0 3 − − √ 3 = 0 d. 1 8 − − √ 3 = ( 1 2 ) 3 − − − − √ 3 = 1 2   Example 4: Find the cube root. a. − 8 − − − √ 3 b. − 1 − − − √ 3 c. − 1 27 − − − − √ 3 Solution: a. − 8 − − − √ 3 = ( − 2 ) 3 − − − − − √ 3 = − 2 b. − 1 − − − √ 3 = ( − 1 ) 3 − − − − − √ 3 = − 1 c. − 1 27 − − − − √ 3 = ( − 1 3 ) 3 − − − − − − √ 3 = − 1 3 It may be the case that the radicand is not a perfect cube. If an integer is not a perfect cube, then its cube root will be irrational. For example, 2 √ 3 is an irrational number which can be approximated on most calculators using the root button. Depending on the calculator, we typically type in the index prior to pushing the button and then the radicand as follows: Therefore, we have  || 
book2_chapter8_1_3	nth Roots For any integer n ≥ 2 , we define the nth root The number that, when raised to the nth power, yields the original number. of a positive real number as that number that when raised to the nth power yields the original number. Given any nonnegative real number a, we have the following property: Here n is called the index and a n is called the radicand. Furthermore, we can refer to the entire expression a √ n as a radical Used when referring to an expression of the form a √ n . . When the index is an integer greater than 3, we say “fourth root”, “fifth root”, and so on. The nth root of any number is apparent if we can write the radicand with an exponent equal to the index.   Example 5: Find the nth root. a. 81 − − √ 4 b. 32 − − √ 5 c. 1 √ 7 d. 1 16 − − √ 4 Solution: a. 81 − − √ 4 = 3 4 − − √ 4 = 3 b. 32 − − √ 5 = 2 5 − − √ 5 = 2 c. 1 √ 7 = 1 7 − − √ 7 = 1 d. 1 16 − − √ 4 = ( 1 2 ) 4 − − − − √ 4 = 1 2 If the index is n = 2 , then the radical indicates a square root and it is customary to write the radical without the index, as illustrated below: We have already taken care to define the principal square root of a number. At this point, we extend this idea to nth roots when n is even. For example, 3 is a fourth root of 81, because 3 4 = 81 . And since ( − 3 ) 4 = 81 , we can say that −3 is a fourth root of 81 as well. Hence we use the radical sign   √ n to denote the principal (nonnegative) nth root The positive nth root when n is even. when n is even. In this case, for any real number a, we use the following property: For example, The negative nth root, when n is even, will be denoted using a negative sign in front of the radical −   √ n . We have seen that the square root of a negative number is not real because any real number, when squared, will result in a positive number. In fact, a similar problem arises for any even index: Here the fourth root of −81 is not a real number because the fourth power of any real number is always positive.   Example 6: Simplify. a. − 16 − − − − √ 4 b. − 16 − − √ 4 Solution: a. The radicand is negative and the index is even. Therefore, there is no real number that when raised to the fourth power is −16. b. Here the radicand is positive. Furthermore, 16 = 2 4 , and we can simplify as follows: When n is odd, the same problems do not occur. The product of an odd number of positive factors is positive and the product of an odd number of negative factors is negative. Hence when the index n is odd, there is only one real nth root for any real number a. And we have the following property:   Example 7: Find the nth root. a. − 32 − − − − √ 5 b. − 1 − − − √ 7 Solution: a. − 32 − − − − √ 5 = ( − 2 ) 5 − − − − − √ 5 = − 2 b. − 1 − − − √ 7 = ( − 1 ) 7 − − − − − √ 7 = − 1   Try this! Find the fourth root: 625 − − − √ 4 . Answer: 5 Video Solution Summary: When n is odd, the nth root is positive or negative depending on the sign of the radicand. When n is even, the nth root is positive or not real depending on the sign of the radicand. nth Roots For any integer n ≥ 2 , we define the nth root The number that, when raised to the nth power, yields the original number. of a positive real number as that number that when raised to the nth power yields the original number. Given any nonnegative real number a, we have the following property: Here n is called the index and a n is called the radicand. Furthermore, we can refer to the entire expression a √ n as a radical Used when referring to an expression of the form a √ n . . When the index is an integer greater than 3, we say “fourth root”, “fifth root”, and so on. The nth root of any number is apparent if we can write the radicand with an exponent equal to the index.   Example 5: Find the nth root. a. 81 − − √ 4 b. 32 − − √ 5 c. 1 √ 7 d. 1 16 − − √ 4 Solution: a. 81 − − √ 4 = 3 4 − − √ 4 = 3 b. 32 − − √ 5 = 2 5 − − √ 5 = 2 c. 1 √ 7 = 1 7 − − √ 7 = 1 d. 1 16 − − √ 4 = ( 1 2 ) 4 − − − − √ 4 = 1 2 If the index is n = 2 , then the radical indicates a square root and it is customary to write the radical without the index, as illustrated below: We have already taken care to define the principal square root of a number. At this point, we extend this idea to nth roots when n is even. For example, 3 is a fourth root of 81, because 3 4 = 81 . And since ( − 3 ) 4 = 81 , we can say that −3 is a fourth root of 81 as well. Hence we use the radical sign   √ n to denote the principal (nonnegative) nth root The positive nth root when n is even. when n is even. In this case, for any real number a, we use the following property: For example, The negative nth root, when n is even, will be denoted using a negative sign in front of the radical −   √ n . We have seen that the square root of a negative number is not real because any real number, when squared, will result in a positive number. In fact, a similar problem arises for any even index: Here the fourth root of −81 is not a real number because the fourth power of any real number is always positive.   Example 6: Simplify. a. − 16 − − − − √ 4 b. − 16 − − √ 4 Solution: a. The radicand is negative and the index is even. Therefore, there is no real number that when raised to the fourth power is −16. b. Here the radicand is positive. Furthermore, 16 = 2 4 , and we can simplify as follows: When n is odd, the same problems do not occur. The product of an odd number of positive factors is positive and the product of an odd number of negative factors is negative. Hence when the index n is odd, there is only one real nth root for any real number a. And we have the following property:   Example 7: Find the nth root. a. − 32 − − − − √ 5 b. − 1 − − − √ 7 Solution: a. − 32 − − − − √ 5 = ( − 2 ) 5 − − − − − √ 5 = − 2 b. − 1 − − − √ 7 = ( − 1 ) 7 − − − − − √ 7 = − 1   Try this! Find the fourth root: 625 − − − √ 4 . Answer: 5 Video Solution Summary: When n is odd, the nth root is positive or negative depending on the sign of the radicand. When n is even, the nth root is positive or not real depending on the sign of the radicand.  || 
book2_chapter8_1_4	Simplifying Using the Product and Quotient Rule for Radicals It will not always be the case that the radicand is a perfect power of the given index. If not, we use the following two properties to simplify them. If a and b represent positive real numbers, then we have Product rule for radicals a ⋅ b − − − √ n = a √ n ⋅ b √ n , where a and b represent positive real numbers. : a ⋅ b − − − √ n = a √ n ⋅ b √ n Quotient rule for radicals a b − − √ n = a √ n b √ n , where a and b represent positive real numbers. : a b − − √ n = a √ n b √ n A radical is simplified A radical where the radicand does not consist of any factor that can be written as a perfect power of the index. if it does not contain any factor that can be written as a perfect power of the index.   Example 8: Simplify: 12 − − √ . Solution: Here 12 can be written as 4 ⋅ 3, where 4 is a perfect square. We can verify our answer on a calculator: Also, it is worth noting that Answer: 2 3 √   Example 9: Simplify: 135 − − − √ . Solution: Begin by finding the largest perfect square factor of 135. Therefore, Answer: 3 15 − − √   Example 10: Simplify: 50 121 − − − √ . Solution: Begin by finding the prime factorizations of both 50 and 121. This will enable us to easily determine the largest perfect square factors. Therefore, Answer: 5 2 √ 11   Example 11: Simplify: 162 − − − √ 3 . Solution: Use the prime factorization of 162 to find the largest perfect cube factor: Replace the radicand with this factorization and then apply the product rule for radicals. We can verify our answer on a calculator. Answer: 3   6 √ 3   Try this! Simplify: 2   96 − − √ 3 . Answer: 4   12 − − √ 3 Video Solution   Example 12: Simplify: − 96 − − − − √ 5 . Solution: Here we note that the index is odd and the radicand is negative; hence the result will be negative. We can factor the radicand as follows: Then simplify: Answer: − 2   3 √ 5   Example 13: Simplify: − 8 64 − − − − √ 3 . Solution: In this case, consider the equivalent fraction with − 8 = ( − 2 ) 3 in the numerator and then simplify. Answer: −1/2   Try this! Simplify − 108 − − − − √ 3 . Answer: − 3   4 √ 3 Video Solution Simplifying Using the Product and Quotient Rule for Radicals It will not always be the case that the radicand is a perfect power of the given index. If not, we use the following two properties to simplify them. If a and b represent positive real numbers, then we have Product rule for radicals a ⋅ b − − − √ n = a √ n ⋅ b √ n , where a and b represent positive real numbers. : a ⋅ b − − − √ n = a √ n ⋅ b √ n Quotient rule for radicals a b − − √ n = a √ n b √ n , where a and b represent positive real numbers. : a b − − √ n = a √ n b √ n A radical is simplified A radical where the radicand does not consist of any factor that can be written as a perfect power of the index. if it does not contain any factor that can be written as a perfect power of the index.   Example 8: Simplify: 12 − − √ . Solution: Here 12 can be written as 4 ⋅ 3, where 4 is a perfect square. We can verify our answer on a calculator: Also, it is worth noting that Answer: 2 3 √   Example 9: Simplify: 135 − − − √ . Solution: Begin by finding the largest perfect square factor of 135. Therefore, Answer: 3 15 − − √   Example 10: Simplify: 50 121 − − − √ . Solution: Begin by finding the prime factorizations of both 50 and 121. This will enable us to easily determine the largest perfect square factors. Therefore, Answer: 5 2 √ 11   Example 11: Simplify: 162 − − − √ 3 . Solution: Use the prime factorization of 162 to find the largest perfect cube factor: Replace the radicand with this factorization and then apply the product rule for radicals. We can verify our answer on a calculator. Answer: 3   6 √ 3   Try this! Simplify: 2   96 − − √ 3 . Answer: 4   12 − − √ 3 Video Solution   Example 12: Simplify: − 96 − − − − √ 5 . Solution: Here we note that the index is odd and the radicand is negative; hence the result will be negative. We can factor the radicand as follows: Then simplify: Answer: − 2   3 √ 5   Example 13: Simplify: − 8 64 − − − − √ 3 . Solution: In this case, consider the equivalent fraction with − 8 = ( − 2 ) 3 in the numerator and then simplify. Answer: −1/2   Try this! Simplify − 108 − − − − √ 3 . Answer: − 3   4 √ 3 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter8_2	 || Simplifying Radical Expressions An algebraic expression that contains radicals is called a radical expression An algebraic expression that contains radicals. . We use the product and quotient rules to simplify them.   Example 1: Simplify: 8 y 3 − − − √ 3 . Solution: Use the fact that a n − − √ n = a when n is odd. Answer: 2 y   Example 2: Simplify: 9 x 2 − − − √ . Solution: The square root has index 2; use the fact that a n − − √ n = | a | when n is even. Since x is a variable, it may represent a negative number. Thus we need to ensure that the result is positive by including the absolute value operator. Answer: 3 | x | Important Note Typically, at this point beginning algebra texts note that all variables are assumed to be positive. If this is the case, then x in the previous example is positive and the absolute value operator is not needed. The example can be simplified as follows: In this section, we will assume that all variables are positive. This allows us to focus on calculating nth roots without the technicalities associated with the principal nth root problem. For this reason, we will use the following property for the rest of the section: When simplifying radical expressions, look for factors with powers that match the index.   Example 3: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the square factors of 18, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 4: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the square factors of 4, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 5: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the cubic factors of 80, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 6: Simplify . Solution: The coefficient and thus does not have any perfect cube factors. It will be left as the only remaining radicand because all of the other factors are cubes, as illustrated below: Replace the variables with these equivalents, apply the product and quotient rule for radicals, and then simplify. Answer:   Example 7: Simplify: . Solution: Determine all factors that can be written as perfect powers of 4. Here it is important to see that . Hence the factor will be left inside the radical. Answer:   Example 8: Simplify: . Solution: Notice that the variable factor x cannot be written as a power of 5 and thus will be left inside the radical. In addition, for ; the factor y will be left inside the radical as well. Answer:   Try this! Simplify: . (Assume all variables are positive.) Answer: Video Solution Tip To easily simplify an nth root, we can divide the powers by the index. If the index does not divide into the power evenly, then we can use the quotient and remainder to simplify. For example, The quotient is the exponent of the factor outside of the radical, and the remainder is the exponent of the factor left inside the radical.  || Formulas Involving Radicals We next review the distance formula. Given two points and , The distance, d, between them is given by the following formula: Distance formula Given two points and calculate the distance d between them using the formula d = : Recall that this formula was derived from the Pythagorean theorem.   Example 9: Calculate the distance between (−4, 7) and (2, 1). Solution: Use the distance formula with the following points. It is a good practice to include the formula in its general form before substituting values for the variables; this improves readability and reduces the probability of making errors. Answer: units   Example 10: The period, T, of a pendulum in seconds is given by the formula where L represents the length of the pendulum in feet. If the length of a pendulum measures 6 feet, then calculate the period rounded off to the nearest tenth of a second. Solution: Substitute 6 for L and then simplify. Answer: The period is approximately 2.7 seconds.  || Square Root and Cube Root Functions We begin with the square root function The function . : We know that the square root is not a real number when the radicand x is negative. Therefore, we conclude that the domain consists of all real numbers greater than or equal to 0. Here we choose 0 and some positive values for x, calculate the corresponding y-values, and plot the resulting ordered pairs. After plotting the points, we can then sketch the graph of the square root function.   Example 11: Given the function , find , , and . Solution: Replace x with each of the given values. Answer: , , and   Next, consider the cube root function The function . : Since the cube root could be either negative or positive, we conclude that the domain consists of all real numbers. For completeness, choose some positive and negative values for x, as well as 0, and then calculate the corresponding y-values. Plot the points and sketch the graph of the cube root function.   Example 12: Given the function , find , , and . Solution: Replace x with each of the given values. Answer: , , and  || 
book2_chapter8_2_1	Simplifying Radical Expressions An algebraic expression that contains radicals is called a radical expression An algebraic expression that contains radicals. . We use the product and quotient rules to simplify them.   Example 1: Simplify: 8 y 3 − − − √ 3 . Solution: Use the fact that a n − − √ n = a when n is odd. Answer: 2 y   Example 2: Simplify: 9 x 2 − − − √ . Solution: The square root has index 2; use the fact that a n − − √ n = | a | when n is even. Since x is a variable, it may represent a negative number. Thus we need to ensure that the result is positive by including the absolute value operator. Answer: 3 | x | Important Note Typically, at this point beginning algebra texts note that all variables are assumed to be positive. If this is the case, then x in the previous example is positive and the absolute value operator is not needed. The example can be simplified as follows: In this section, we will assume that all variables are positive. This allows us to focus on calculating nth roots without the technicalities associated with the principal nth root problem. For this reason, we will use the following property for the rest of the section: When simplifying radical expressions, look for factors with powers that match the index.   Example 3: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the square factors of 18, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 4: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the square factors of 4, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 5: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the cubic factors of 80, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 6: Simplify . Solution: The coefficient and thus does not have any perfect cube factors. It will be left as the only remaining radicand because all of the other factors are cubes, as illustrated below: Replace the variables with these equivalents, apply the product and quotient rule for radicals, and then simplify. Answer:   Example 7: Simplify: . Solution: Determine all factors that can be written as perfect powers of 4. Here it is important to see that . Hence the factor will be left inside the radical. Answer:   Example 8: Simplify: . Solution: Notice that the variable factor x cannot be written as a power of 5 and thus will be left inside the radical. In addition, for ; the factor y will be left inside the radical as well. Answer:   Try this! Simplify: . (Assume all variables are positive.) Answer: Video Solution Tip To easily simplify an nth root, we can divide the powers by the index. If the index does not divide into the power evenly, then we can use the quotient and remainder to simplify. For example, The quotient is the exponent of the factor outside of the radical, and the remainder is the exponent of the factor left inside the radical. Simplifying Radical Expressions An algebraic expression that contains radicals is called a radical expression An algebraic expression that contains radicals. . We use the product and quotient rules to simplify them.   Example 1: Simplify: 8 y 3 − − − √ 3 . Solution: Use the fact that a n − − √ n = a when n is odd. Answer: 2 y   Example 2: Simplify: 9 x 2 − − − √ . Solution: The square root has index 2; use the fact that a n − − √ n = | a | when n is even. Since x is a variable, it may represent a negative number. Thus we need to ensure that the result is positive by including the absolute value operator. Answer: 3 | x | Important Note Typically, at this point beginning algebra texts note that all variables are assumed to be positive. If this is the case, then x in the previous example is positive and the absolute value operator is not needed. The example can be simplified as follows: In this section, we will assume that all variables are positive. This allows us to focus on calculating nth roots without the technicalities associated with the principal nth root problem. For this reason, we will use the following property for the rest of the section: When simplifying radical expressions, look for factors with powers that match the index.   Example 3: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the square factors of 18, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 4: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the square factors of 4, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 5: Simplify: . Solution: Begin by determining the cubic factors of 80, , and . Make these substitutions and then apply the product rule for radicals and simplify. Answer:   Example 6: Simplify . Solution: The coefficient and thus does not have any perfect cube factors. It will be left as the only remaining radicand because all of the other factors are cubes, as illustrated below: Replace the variables with these equivalents, apply the product and quotient rule for radicals, and then simplify. Answer:   Example 7: Simplify: . Solution: Determine all factors that can be written as perfect powers of 4. Here it is important to see that . Hence the factor will be left inside the radical. Answer:   Example 8: Simplify: . Solution: Notice that the variable factor x cannot be written as a power of 5 and thus will be left inside the radical. In addition, for ; the factor y will be left inside the radical as well. Answer:   Try this! Simplify: . (Assume all variables are positive.) Answer: Video Solution Tip To easily simplify an nth root, we can divide the powers by the index. If the index does not divide into the power evenly, then we can use the quotient and remainder to simplify. For example, The quotient is the exponent of the factor outside of the radical, and the remainder is the exponent of the factor left inside the radical.  || 
book2_chapter8_2_2	Formulas Involving Radicals We next review the distance formula. Given two points and , The distance, d, between them is given by the following formula: Distance formula Given two points and calculate the distance d between them using the formula d = : Recall that this formula was derived from the Pythagorean theorem.   Example 9: Calculate the distance between (−4, 7) and (2, 1). Solution: Use the distance formula with the following points. It is a good practice to include the formula in its general form before substituting values for the variables; this improves readability and reduces the probability of making errors. Answer: units   Example 10: The period, T, of a pendulum in seconds is given by the formula where L represents the length of the pendulum in feet. If the length of a pendulum measures 6 feet, then calculate the period rounded off to the nearest tenth of a second. Solution: Substitute 6 for L and then simplify. Answer: The period is approximately 2.7 seconds. Formulas Involving Radicals We next review the distance formula. Given two points and , The distance, d, between them is given by the following formula: Distance formula Given two points and calculate the distance d between them using the formula d = : Recall that this formula was derived from the Pythagorean theorem.   Example 9: Calculate the distance between (−4, 7) and (2, 1). Solution: Use the distance formula with the following points. It is a good practice to include the formula in its general form before substituting values for the variables; this improves readability and reduces the probability of making errors. Answer: units   Example 10: The period, T, of a pendulum in seconds is given by the formula where L represents the length of the pendulum in feet. If the length of a pendulum measures 6 feet, then calculate the period rounded off to the nearest tenth of a second. Solution: Substitute 6 for L and then simplify. Answer: The period is approximately 2.7 seconds.  || 
book2_chapter8_2_3	Square Root and Cube Root Functions We begin with the square root function The function . : We know that the square root is not a real number when the radicand x is negative. Therefore, we conclude that the domain consists of all real numbers greater than or equal to 0. Here we choose 0 and some positive values for x, calculate the corresponding y-values, and plot the resulting ordered pairs. After plotting the points, we can then sketch the graph of the square root function.   Example 11: Given the function , find , , and . Solution: Replace x with each of the given values. Answer: , , and   Next, consider the cube root function The function . : Since the cube root could be either negative or positive, we conclude that the domain consists of all real numbers. For completeness, choose some positive and negative values for x, as well as 0, and then calculate the corresponding y-values. Plot the points and sketch the graph of the cube root function.   Example 12: Given the function , find , , and . Solution: Replace x with each of the given values. Answer: , , and Square Root and Cube Root Functions We begin with the square root function The function . : We know that the square root is not a real number when the radicand x is negative. Therefore, we conclude that the domain consists of all real numbers greater than or equal to 0. Here we choose 0 and some positive values for x, calculate the corresponding y-values, and plot the resulting ordered pairs. After plotting the points, we can then sketch the graph of the square root function.   Example 11: Given the function , find , , and . Solution: Replace x with each of the given values. Answer: , , and   Next, consider the cube root function The function . : Since the cube root could be either negative or positive, we conclude that the domain consists of all real numbers. For completeness, choose some positive and negative values for x, as well as 0, and then calculate the corresponding y-values. Plot the points and sketch the graph of the cube root function.   Example 12: Given the function , find , , and . Solution: Replace x with each of the given values. Answer: , , and  || 
book2_chapter8_3	 || Adding and Subtracting Radical Expressions Adding and subtracting radical expressions is similar to adding and subtracting like terms. Radicals are considered to be like radicals Radicals that share the same index and radicand. , or similar radicals Term used when referring to like radicals. , when they share the same index and radicand. For example, the terms 3 5 √ and 4 5 √ contain like radicals and can be added using the distributive property as follows: Typically, we do not show the step involving the distributive property and simply write When adding terms with like radicals, add only the coefficients; the radical part remains the same.   Example 1: Add: 3 2 √ + 2 2 √ . Solution: The terms contain like radicals; therefore, add the coefficients. Answer: 5 2 √   Subtraction is performed in a similar manner.   Example 2: Subtract: 2 7 √ − 3 7 √ . Solution: Answer: − 7 √   If the radicand and the index are not exactly the same, then the radicals are not similar and we cannot combine them.   Example 3: Simplify: 10 5 √ + 6 2 √ − 9 5 √ − 7 2 √ . Solution: We cannot simplify any further because 5 √ and 2 √ are not like radicals; the radicands are not the same. Answer: 5 √ − 2 √ Caution It is important to point out that 5 √ − 2 √ ≠ 5 − 2 − − − − √ . We can verify this by calculating the value of each side with a calculator. In general, note that a √ n ± b √ n ≠ a ± b − − − − √ n . Example 4: Simplify: 3   6 √ 3 + 2 6 √ − 6 √ 3 − 3 6 √ . Solution: We cannot simplify any further because 6 √ 3 and 6 √ are not like radicals; the indices are not the same. Answer: 2   6 √ 3 − 6 √   Often we will have to simplify before we can identify the like radicals within the terms.   Example 5: Subtract: 12 − − √ − 48 − − √ . Solution: At first glance, the radicals do not appear to be similar. However, after simplifying completely, we will see that we can combine them. Answer: − 2 3 √   Example 6: Simplify: 20 − − √ + 27 − − √ − 3 5 √ − 2 12 − − √ . Solution: Answer: − 5 √ − 3 √   Try this! Subtract: 2 50 − − √ − 6 8 √ . Answer: − 2 2 √ Video Solution Next, we work with radical expressions involving variables. In this section, assume all radicands containing variable expressions are not negative.   Example 7: Simplify: − 6   2 x − − √ 3 − 3 x − − √ 3 + 7   2 x − − √ 3 . Solution: We cannot combine any further because the remaining radical expressions do not share the same radicand; they are not like radicals. Note that 2 x − − √ 3 − 3 x − − √ 3 ≠ 2 x − 3 x − − − − − − √ 3 . Answer: 2 x − − √ 3 − 3 x − − √ 3   We will often find the need to subtract a radical expression with multiple terms. If this is the case, remember to apply the distributive property before combining like terms.   Example 8: Simplify: ( 9 x √ − 2 y √ ) − ( 10 x √ + 7 y √ ) . Solution: Answer: − x √ − 9 y √   Until we simplify, it is often unclear which terms involving radicals are similar.   Example 9: Simplify: 5   2 y − − √ 3 − ( 54 y − − − √ 3 − 16 − − √ 3 ) . Solution: Answer: 2   2 y − − √ 3 + 2   2 √ 3     Example 10: Simplify: 2 a 125 a 2 b − − − − − − √ − a 2 80 b − − − √ + 4 20 a 4 b − − − − − √ . Solution: Answer: 14 a 2 5 b − − √   Try this! Simplify: 45 x 3 − − − − √ − ( 20 x 3 − − − − √ − 80 x − − − √ ) . Answer: x 5 x − − √ + 4 5 x − − √ Video Solution Tip Take careful note of the differences between products and sums within a radical. Products Sums x 2 y 2 − − − − √ = x y x 3 y 3 − − − − √ 3 = x y x 2 + y 2 − − − − − − √ ≠ x + y x 3 + y 3 − − − − − − √ 3 ≠ x + y The property a ⋅ b − − − √ n = a √ n ⋅ b √ n says that we can simplify radicals when the operation in the radicand is multiplication. There is no corresponding property for addition.  || 
book2_chapter8_3_1	Adding and Subtracting Radical Expressions Adding and subtracting radical expressions is similar to adding and subtracting like terms. Radicals are considered to be like radicals Radicals that share the same index and radicand. , or similar radicals Term used when referring to like radicals. , when they share the same index and radicand. For example, the terms 3 5 √ and 4 5 √ contain like radicals and can be added using the distributive property as follows: Typically, we do not show the step involving the distributive property and simply write When adding terms with like radicals, add only the coefficients; the radical part remains the same.   Example 1: Add: 3 2 √ + 2 2 √ . Solution: The terms contain like radicals; therefore, add the coefficients. Answer: 5 2 √   Subtraction is performed in a similar manner.   Example 2: Subtract: 2 7 √ − 3 7 √ . Solution: Answer: − 7 √   If the radicand and the index are not exactly the same, then the radicals are not similar and we cannot combine them.   Example 3: Simplify: 10 5 √ + 6 2 √ − 9 5 √ − 7 2 √ . Solution: We cannot simplify any further because 5 √ and 2 √ are not like radicals; the radicands are not the same. Answer: 5 √ − 2 √ Caution It is important to point out that 5 √ − 2 √ ≠ 5 − 2 − − − − √ . We can verify this by calculating the value of each side with a calculator. In general, note that a √ n ± b √ n ≠ a ± b − − − − √ n . Example 4: Simplify: 3   6 √ 3 + 2 6 √ − 6 √ 3 − 3 6 √ . Solution: We cannot simplify any further because 6 √ 3 and 6 √ are not like radicals; the indices are not the same. Answer: 2   6 √ 3 − 6 √   Often we will have to simplify before we can identify the like radicals within the terms.   Example 5: Subtract: 12 − − √ − 48 − − √ . Solution: At first glance, the radicals do not appear to be similar. However, after simplifying completely, we will see that we can combine them. Answer: − 2 3 √   Example 6: Simplify: 20 − − √ + 27 − − √ − 3 5 √ − 2 12 − − √ . Solution: Answer: − 5 √ − 3 √   Try this! Subtract: 2 50 − − √ − 6 8 √ . Answer: − 2 2 √ Video Solution Next, we work with radical expressions involving variables. In this section, assume all radicands containing variable expressions are not negative.   Example 7: Simplify: − 6   2 x − − √ 3 − 3 x − − √ 3 + 7   2 x − − √ 3 . Solution: We cannot combine any further because the remaining radical expressions do not share the same radicand; they are not like radicals. Note that 2 x − − √ 3 − 3 x − − √ 3 ≠ 2 x − 3 x − − − − − − √ 3 . Answer: 2 x − − √ 3 − 3 x − − √ 3   We will often find the need to subtract a radical expression with multiple terms. If this is the case, remember to apply the distributive property before combining like terms.   Example 8: Simplify: ( 9 x √ − 2 y √ ) − ( 10 x √ + 7 y √ ) . Solution: Answer: − x √ − 9 y √   Until we simplify, it is often unclear which terms involving radicals are similar.   Example 9: Simplify: 5   2 y − − √ 3 − ( 54 y − − − √ 3 − 16 − − √ 3 ) . Solution: Answer: 2   2 y − − √ 3 + 2   2 √ 3     Example 10: Simplify: 2 a 125 a 2 b − − − − − − √ − a 2 80 b − − − √ + 4 20 a 4 b − − − − − √ . Solution: Answer: 14 a 2 5 b − − √   Try this! Simplify: 45 x 3 − − − − √ − ( 20 x 3 − − − − √ − 80 x − − − √ ) . Answer: x 5 x − − √ + 4 5 x − − √ Video Solution Tip Take careful note of the differences between products and sums within a radical. Products Sums x 2 y 2 − − − − √ = x y x 3 y 3 − − − − √ 3 = x y x 2 + y 2 − − − − − − √ ≠ x + y x 3 + y 3 − − − − − − √ 3 ≠ x + y The property a ⋅ b − − − √ n = a √ n ⋅ b √ n says that we can simplify radicals when the operation in the radicand is multiplication. There is no corresponding property for addition. Adding and Subtracting Radical Expressions Adding and subtracting radical expressions is similar to adding and subtracting like terms. Radicals are considered to be like radicals Radicals that share the same index and radicand. , or similar radicals Term used when referring to like radicals. , when they share the same index and radicand. For example, the terms 3 5 √ and 4 5 √ contain like radicals and can be added using the distributive property as follows: Typically, we do not show the step involving the distributive property and simply write When adding terms with like radicals, add only the coefficients; the radical part remains the same.   Example 1: Add: 3 2 √ + 2 2 √ . Solution: The terms contain like radicals; therefore, add the coefficients. Answer: 5 2 √   Subtraction is performed in a similar manner.   Example 2: Subtract: 2 7 √ − 3 7 √ . Solution: Answer: − 7 √   If the radicand and the index are not exactly the same, then the radicals are not similar and we cannot combine them.   Example 3: Simplify: 10 5 √ + 6 2 √ − 9 5 √ − 7 2 √ . Solution: We cannot simplify any further because 5 √ and 2 √ are not like radicals; the radicands are not the same. Answer: 5 √ − 2 √ Caution It is important to point out that 5 √ − 2 √ ≠ 5 − 2 − − − − √ . We can verify this by calculating the value of each side with a calculator. In general, note that a √ n ± b √ n ≠ a ± b − − − − √ n . Example 4: Simplify: 3   6 √ 3 + 2 6 √ − 6 √ 3 − 3 6 √ . Solution: We cannot simplify any further because 6 √ 3 and 6 √ are not like radicals; the indices are not the same. Answer: 2   6 √ 3 − 6 √   Often we will have to simplify before we can identify the like radicals within the terms.   Example 5: Subtract: 12 − − √ − 48 − − √ . Solution: At first glance, the radicals do not appear to be similar. However, after simplifying completely, we will see that we can combine them. Answer: − 2 3 √   Example 6: Simplify: 20 − − √ + 27 − − √ − 3 5 √ − 2 12 − − √ . Solution: Answer: − 5 √ − 3 √   Try this! Subtract: 2 50 − − √ − 6 8 √ . Answer: − 2 2 √ Video Solution Next, we work with radical expressions involving variables. In this section, assume all radicands containing variable expressions are not negative.   Example 7: Simplify: − 6   2 x − − √ 3 − 3 x − − √ 3 + 7   2 x − − √ 3 . Solution: We cannot combine any further because the remaining radical expressions do not share the same radicand; they are not like radicals. Note that 2 x − − √ 3 − 3 x − − √ 3 ≠ 2 x − 3 x − − − − − − √ 3 . Answer: 2 x − − √ 3 − 3 x − − √ 3   We will often find the need to subtract a radical expression with multiple terms. If this is the case, remember to apply the distributive property before combining like terms.   Example 8: Simplify: ( 9 x √ − 2 y √ ) − ( 10 x √ + 7 y √ ) . Solution: Answer: − x √ − 9 y √   Until we simplify, it is often unclear which terms involving radicals are similar.   Example 9: Simplify: 5   2 y − − √ 3 − ( 54 y − − − √ 3 − 16 − − √ 3 ) . Solution: Answer: 2   2 y − − √ 3 + 2   2 √ 3     Example 10: Simplify: 2 a 125 a 2 b − − − − − − √ − a 2 80 b − − − √ + 4 20 a 4 b − − − − − √ . Solution: Answer: 14 a 2 5 b − − √   Try this! Simplify: 45 x 3 − − − − √ − ( 20 x 3 − − − − √ − 80 x − − − √ ) . Answer: x 5 x − − √ + 4 5 x − − √ Video Solution Tip Take careful note of the differences between products and sums within a radical. Products Sums x 2 y 2 − − − − √ = x y x 3 y 3 − − − − √ 3 = x y x 2 + y 2 − − − − − − √ ≠ x + y x 3 + y 3 − − − − − − √ 3 ≠ x + y The property a ⋅ b − − − √ n = a √ n ⋅ b √ n says that we can simplify radicals when the operation in the radicand is multiplication. There is no corresponding property for addition.  || 
book2_chapter8_4	 || Multiplying Radical Expressions When multiplying radical expressions with the same index, we use the product rule for radicals. If a and b represent positive real numbers,   Example 1: Multiply: 2 √ ⋅ 6 √ . Solution: This problem is a product of two square roots. Apply the product rule for radicals and then simplify. Answer: 2 3 √   Example 2: Multiply: 9 √ 3 ⋅ 6 √ 3 . Solution: This problem is a product of cube roots. Apply the product rule for radicals and then simplify. Answer: 3   2 √ 3   Often there will be coefficients in front of the radicals.   Example 3: Multiply: 2 3 √ ⋅ 5 2 √ . Solution: Using the product rule for radicals and the fact that multiplication is commutative, we can multiply the coefficients and the radicands as follows. Typically, the first step involving the application of the commutative property is not shown. Answer: 10 6 √   Example 4: Multiply: − 2   5 x − − √ 3 ⋅ 3   25 x 2 − − − − √ 3 . Solution: Answer: − 30 x   Use the distributive property when multiplying rational expressions with more than one term.   Example 5: Multiply: 4 3 √ ( 2 3 √ − 3 6 √ ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and multiply each term by 4 3 √ . Answer: 24 − 36 2 √   Example 6: Multiply: 4 x 2 − − − √ 3 ( 2 x − − √ 3 − 5   4 x 2 − − − √ 3 ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and then simplify the result. Answer: 2 x − 10 x ⋅ 2 x − − √ 3   The process for multiplying radical expressions with multiple terms is the same process used when multiplying polynomials. Apply the distributive property, simplify each radical, and then combine like terms.   Example 7: Multiply: ( 5 √ + 2 ) ( 5 √ − 4 ) . Solution: Begin by applying the distributive property. Answer: − 3 − 2 5 √   Example 8: Multiply: ( 3 x √ − y √ ) 2 . Solution: Answer: 9 x − 6 x y − − √ + y   Try this! Multiply: ( 2 3 √ + 5 2 √ ) ( 3 √ − 2 6 √ ) . Answer: 6 − 12 2 √ + 5 6 √ − 20 3 √ Video Solution The expressions ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) are called conjugates The factors ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) are conjugates. . When multiplying conjugates, the sum of the products of the inner and outer terms results in 0.   Example 9: Multiply: ( 2 √ + 5 √ ) ( 2 √ − 5 √ ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and then combine like terms. Answer: −3   It is important to note that when multiplying conjugate radical expressions, we obtain a rational expression. This is true in general and is often used in our study of algebra. Therefore, for nonnegative real numbers a and b, we have the following property:  || Dividing Radical Expressions (Rationalizing the Denominator) To divide radical expressions with the same index, we use the quotient rule for radicals. If a and b represent nonnegative numbers, where b ≠ 0 , then we have   Example 10: Divide: 80 √ 10 √ . Solution: In this case, we can see that 10 and 80 have common factors. If we apply the quotient rule for radicals and write it as a single square root, we will be able to reduce the fractional radicand. Answer: 2 2 √   Example 11: Divide: 16 x 5 y 4 √ 2 x y √ . Solution: Answer: 2 x 2 y 2 y − − √   Example 12: Divide: 54 a 3 b 5 √ 3 16 a 2 b 2 √ 3 . Solution: Answer: 3 b ⋅ a √ 3 2   When the divisor of a radical expression contains a radical, it is a common practice to find an equivalent expression where the denominator is a rational number. Finding such an equivalent expression is called rationalizing the denominator The process of determining an equivalent radical expression with a rational denominator. . To do this, multiply the fraction by a special form of 1 so that the radicand in the denominator can be written with a power that matches the index. After doing this, simplify and eliminate the radical in the denominator. For example, Remember, to obtain an equivalent expression, you must multiply the numerator and denominator by the exact same nonzero factor.   Example 13: Rationalize the denominator: 3 √ 2 √ . Solution: The goal is to find an equivalent expression without a radical in the denominator. In this example, multiply by 1 in the form 2 √ 2 √ . Answer: 6 √ 2   Example 14: Rationalize the denominator: 1 2 3 x √ . Solution: The radicand in the denominator determines the factors that you need to use to rationalize it. In this example, multiply by 1 in the form 3 x √ 3 x √ . Answer: 3 x √ 6 x   Typically, we will find the need to reduce, or cancel, after rationalizing the denominator.   Example 15: Rationalize the denominator: 5 2 √ 5 a b √ . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form 5 a b √ 5 a b √ . Notice that a and b do not cancel in this example. Do not cancel factors inside a radical with those that are outside. Answer: 10 a b √ a b   Try this! Rationalize the denominator: 4 a 3 b − − √ . Answer: 2 3 a b √ 3 b Video Solution Up to this point, we have seen that multiplying a numerator and a denominator by a square root with the exact same radicand results in a rational denominator. In general, this is true only when the denominator contains a square root. However, this is not the case for a cube root. For example, Note that multiplying by the same factor in the denominator does not rationalize it. In this case, if we multiply by 1 in the form of x 2 √ 3 x 2 √ 3 , then we can write the radicand in the denominator as a power of 3. Simplifying the result then yields a rationalized denominator. For example, Therefore, to rationalize the denominator of radical expressions with one radical term in the denominator, begin by factoring the radicand of the denominator. The factors of this radicand and the index determine what we should multiply by. Multiply numerator and denominator by the nth root of factors that produce nth powers of all the factors in the radicand of the denominator.   Example 16: Rationalize the denominator: 1 25 √ 3 . Solution: The radical in the denominator is equivalent to 5 2 − − √ 3 . To rationalize the denominator, it should be 5 3 − − √ 3 . To obtain this, we need one more factor of 5. Therefore, multiply by 1 in the form of 5 √ 3 5 √ 3 . Answer: 5 √ 3 5   Example 17: Rationalize the denominator: 27 a 2 b 2 − − − √ 3 . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form 2 2 b √ 3 2 2 b √ 3 . Answer: 3 4 a b √ 3 2 b   Example 18: Rationalize the denominator: 1   4 x 3 √ 5 . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form 2 3 x 2 √ 5 2 3 x 2 √ 5 . Answer: 8 x 2 √ 5 2 x   When two terms involving square roots appear in the denominator, we can rationalize it using a very special technique. This technique involves multiplying the numerator and the denominator of the fraction by the conjugate of the denominator. Recall that multiplying a radical expression by its conjugate produces a rational number.   Example 19: Rationalize the denominator: 1 3 √ − 2 √ . Solution: In this example, the conjugate of the denominator is 3 √ + 2 √ . Therefore, multiply by 1 in the form ( 3 √ + 2 √ ) ( 3 √ + 2 √ ) . Answer: 3 √ + 2 √   Notice that the terms involving the square root in the denominator are eliminated by multiplying by the conjugate. We can use the property ( a √ + b √ ) ( a √ − b √ ) = a − b to expedite the process of multiplying the expressions in the denominator.   Example 20: Rationalize the denominator: 2 √ − 6 √ 2 √ + 6 √ . Solution: Multiply by 1 in the form 2 √ − 6 √ 2 √ − 6 √ . Answer: − 2 + 3 √   Example 21: Rationalize the denominator: x √ + y √ x √ − y √ . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form x √ − y √ x √ − y √ . Answer: x − 2 x y √ + y x − y   Try this! Rationalize the denominator: 3 5 √ + 5 2 5 √ − 3 . Answer: 19 5 √ + 45 11 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter8_4_1	Multiplying Radical Expressions When multiplying radical expressions with the same index, we use the product rule for radicals. If a and b represent positive real numbers,   Example 1: Multiply: 2 √ ⋅ 6 √ . Solution: This problem is a product of two square roots. Apply the product rule for radicals and then simplify. Answer: 2 3 √   Example 2: Multiply: 9 √ 3 ⋅ 6 √ 3 . Solution: This problem is a product of cube roots. Apply the product rule for radicals and then simplify. Answer: 3   2 √ 3   Often there will be coefficients in front of the radicals.   Example 3: Multiply: 2 3 √ ⋅ 5 2 √ . Solution: Using the product rule for radicals and the fact that multiplication is commutative, we can multiply the coefficients and the radicands as follows. Typically, the first step involving the application of the commutative property is not shown. Answer: 10 6 √   Example 4: Multiply: − 2   5 x − − √ 3 ⋅ 3   25 x 2 − − − − √ 3 . Solution: Answer: − 30 x   Use the distributive property when multiplying rational expressions with more than one term.   Example 5: Multiply: 4 3 √ ( 2 3 √ − 3 6 √ ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and multiply each term by 4 3 √ . Answer: 24 − 36 2 √   Example 6: Multiply: 4 x 2 − − − √ 3 ( 2 x − − √ 3 − 5   4 x 2 − − − √ 3 ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and then simplify the result. Answer: 2 x − 10 x ⋅ 2 x − − √ 3   The process for multiplying radical expressions with multiple terms is the same process used when multiplying polynomials. Apply the distributive property, simplify each radical, and then combine like terms.   Example 7: Multiply: ( 5 √ + 2 ) ( 5 √ − 4 ) . Solution: Begin by applying the distributive property. Answer: − 3 − 2 5 √   Example 8: Multiply: ( 3 x √ − y √ ) 2 . Solution: Answer: 9 x − 6 x y − − √ + y   Try this! Multiply: ( 2 3 √ + 5 2 √ ) ( 3 √ − 2 6 √ ) . Answer: 6 − 12 2 √ + 5 6 √ − 20 3 √ Video Solution The expressions ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) are called conjugates The factors ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) are conjugates. . When multiplying conjugates, the sum of the products of the inner and outer terms results in 0.   Example 9: Multiply: ( 2 √ + 5 √ ) ( 2 √ − 5 √ ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and then combine like terms. Answer: −3   It is important to note that when multiplying conjugate radical expressions, we obtain a rational expression. This is true in general and is often used in our study of algebra. Therefore, for nonnegative real numbers a and b, we have the following property: Multiplying Radical Expressions When multiplying radical expressions with the same index, we use the product rule for radicals. If a and b represent positive real numbers,   Example 1: Multiply: 2 √ ⋅ 6 √ . Solution: This problem is a product of two square roots. Apply the product rule for radicals and then simplify. Answer: 2 3 √   Example 2: Multiply: 9 √ 3 ⋅ 6 √ 3 . Solution: This problem is a product of cube roots. Apply the product rule for radicals and then simplify. Answer: 3   2 √ 3   Often there will be coefficients in front of the radicals.   Example 3: Multiply: 2 3 √ ⋅ 5 2 √ . Solution: Using the product rule for radicals and the fact that multiplication is commutative, we can multiply the coefficients and the radicands as follows. Typically, the first step involving the application of the commutative property is not shown. Answer: 10 6 √   Example 4: Multiply: − 2   5 x − − √ 3 ⋅ 3   25 x 2 − − − − √ 3 . Solution: Answer: − 30 x   Use the distributive property when multiplying rational expressions with more than one term.   Example 5: Multiply: 4 3 √ ( 2 3 √ − 3 6 √ ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and multiply each term by 4 3 √ . Answer: 24 − 36 2 √   Example 6: Multiply: 4 x 2 − − − √ 3 ( 2 x − − √ 3 − 5   4 x 2 − − − √ 3 ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and then simplify the result. Answer: 2 x − 10 x ⋅ 2 x − − √ 3   The process for multiplying radical expressions with multiple terms is the same process used when multiplying polynomials. Apply the distributive property, simplify each radical, and then combine like terms.   Example 7: Multiply: ( 5 √ + 2 ) ( 5 √ − 4 ) . Solution: Begin by applying the distributive property. Answer: − 3 − 2 5 √   Example 8: Multiply: ( 3 x √ − y √ ) 2 . Solution: Answer: 9 x − 6 x y − − √ + y   Try this! Multiply: ( 2 3 √ + 5 2 √ ) ( 3 √ − 2 6 √ ) . Answer: 6 − 12 2 √ + 5 6 √ − 20 3 √ Video Solution The expressions ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) are called conjugates The factors ( a + b ) and ( a − b ) are conjugates. . When multiplying conjugates, the sum of the products of the inner and outer terms results in 0.   Example 9: Multiply: ( 2 √ + 5 √ ) ( 2 √ − 5 √ ) . Solution: Apply the distributive property and then combine like terms. Answer: −3   It is important to note that when multiplying conjugate radical expressions, we obtain a rational expression. This is true in general and is often used in our study of algebra. Therefore, for nonnegative real numbers a and b, we have the following property:  || 
book2_chapter8_4_2	Dividing Radical Expressions (Rationalizing the Denominator) To divide radical expressions with the same index, we use the quotient rule for radicals. If a and b represent nonnegative numbers, where b ≠ 0 , then we have   Example 10: Divide: 80 √ 10 √ . Solution: In this case, we can see that 10 and 80 have common factors. If we apply the quotient rule for radicals and write it as a single square root, we will be able to reduce the fractional radicand. Answer: 2 2 √   Example 11: Divide: 16 x 5 y 4 √ 2 x y √ . Solution: Answer: 2 x 2 y 2 y − − √   Example 12: Divide: 54 a 3 b 5 √ 3 16 a 2 b 2 √ 3 . Solution: Answer: 3 b ⋅ a √ 3 2   When the divisor of a radical expression contains a radical, it is a common practice to find an equivalent expression where the denominator is a rational number. Finding such an equivalent expression is called rationalizing the denominator The process of determining an equivalent radical expression with a rational denominator. . To do this, multiply the fraction by a special form of 1 so that the radicand in the denominator can be written with a power that matches the index. After doing this, simplify and eliminate the radical in the denominator. For example, Remember, to obtain an equivalent expression, you must multiply the numerator and denominator by the exact same nonzero factor.   Example 13: Rationalize the denominator: 3 √ 2 √ . Solution: The goal is to find an equivalent expression without a radical in the denominator. In this example, multiply by 1 in the form 2 √ 2 √ . Answer: 6 √ 2   Example 14: Rationalize the denominator: 1 2 3 x √ . Solution: The radicand in the denominator determines the factors that you need to use to rationalize it. In this example, multiply by 1 in the form 3 x √ 3 x √ . Answer: 3 x √ 6 x   Typically, we will find the need to reduce, or cancel, after rationalizing the denominator.   Example 15: Rationalize the denominator: 5 2 √ 5 a b √ . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form 5 a b √ 5 a b √ . Notice that a and b do not cancel in this example. Do not cancel factors inside a radical with those that are outside. Answer: 10 a b √ a b   Try this! Rationalize the denominator: 4 a 3 b − − √ . Answer: 2 3 a b √ 3 b Video Solution Up to this point, we have seen that multiplying a numerator and a denominator by a square root with the exact same radicand results in a rational denominator. In general, this is true only when the denominator contains a square root. However, this is not the case for a cube root. For example, Note that multiplying by the same factor in the denominator does not rationalize it. In this case, if we multiply by 1 in the form of x 2 √ 3 x 2 √ 3 , then we can write the radicand in the denominator as a power of 3. Simplifying the result then yields a rationalized denominator. For example, Therefore, to rationalize the denominator of radical expressions with one radical term in the denominator, begin by factoring the radicand of the denominator. The factors of this radicand and the index determine what we should multiply by. Multiply numerator and denominator by the nth root of factors that produce nth powers of all the factors in the radicand of the denominator.   Example 16: Rationalize the denominator: 1 25 √ 3 . Solution: The radical in the denominator is equivalent to 5 2 − − √ 3 . To rationalize the denominator, it should be 5 3 − − √ 3 . To obtain this, we need one more factor of 5. Therefore, multiply by 1 in the form of 5 √ 3 5 √ 3 . Answer: 5 √ 3 5   Example 17: Rationalize the denominator: 27 a 2 b 2 − − − √ 3 . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form 2 2 b √ 3 2 2 b √ 3 . Answer: 3 4 a b √ 3 2 b   Example 18: Rationalize the denominator: 1   4 x 3 √ 5 . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form 2 3 x 2 √ 5 2 3 x 2 √ 5 . Answer: 8 x 2 √ 5 2 x   When two terms involving square roots appear in the denominator, we can rationalize it using a very special technique. This technique involves multiplying the numerator and the denominator of the fraction by the conjugate of the denominator. Recall that multiplying a radical expression by its conjugate produces a rational number.   Example 19: Rationalize the denominator: 1 3 √ − 2 √ . Solution: In this example, the conjugate of the denominator is 3 √ + 2 √ . Therefore, multiply by 1 in the form ( 3 √ + 2 √ ) ( 3 √ + 2 √ ) . Answer: 3 √ + 2 √   Notice that the terms involving the square root in the denominator are eliminated by multiplying by the conjugate. We can use the property ( a √ + b √ ) ( a √ − b √ ) = a − b to expedite the process of multiplying the expressions in the denominator.   Example 20: Rationalize the denominator: 2 √ − 6 √ 2 √ + 6 √ . Solution: Multiply by 1 in the form 2 √ − 6 √ 2 √ − 6 √ . Answer: − 2 + 3 √   Example 21: Rationalize the denominator: x √ + y √ x √ − y √ . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form x √ − y √ x √ − y √ . Answer: x − 2 x y √ + y x − y   Try this! Rationalize the denominator: 3 5 √ + 5 2 5 √ − 3 . Answer: 19 5 √ + 45 11 Video Solution Dividing Radical Expressions (Rationalizing the Denominator) To divide radical expressions with the same index, we use the quotient rule for radicals. If a and b represent nonnegative numbers, where b ≠ 0 , then we have   Example 10: Divide: 80 √ 10 √ . Solution: In this case, we can see that 10 and 80 have common factors. If we apply the quotient rule for radicals and write it as a single square root, we will be able to reduce the fractional radicand. Answer: 2 2 √   Example 11: Divide: 16 x 5 y 4 √ 2 x y √ . Solution: Answer: 2 x 2 y 2 y − − √   Example 12: Divide: 54 a 3 b 5 √ 3 16 a 2 b 2 √ 3 . Solution: Answer: 3 b ⋅ a √ 3 2   When the divisor of a radical expression contains a radical, it is a common practice to find an equivalent expression where the denominator is a rational number. Finding such an equivalent expression is called rationalizing the denominator The process of determining an equivalent radical expression with a rational denominator. . To do this, multiply the fraction by a special form of 1 so that the radicand in the denominator can be written with a power that matches the index. After doing this, simplify and eliminate the radical in the denominator. For example, Remember, to obtain an equivalent expression, you must multiply the numerator and denominator by the exact same nonzero factor.   Example 13: Rationalize the denominator: 3 √ 2 √ . Solution: The goal is to find an equivalent expression without a radical in the denominator. In this example, multiply by 1 in the form 2 √ 2 √ . Answer: 6 √ 2   Example 14: Rationalize the denominator: 1 2 3 x √ . Solution: The radicand in the denominator determines the factors that you need to use to rationalize it. In this example, multiply by 1 in the form 3 x √ 3 x √ . Answer: 3 x √ 6 x   Typically, we will find the need to reduce, or cancel, after rationalizing the denominator.   Example 15: Rationalize the denominator: 5 2 √ 5 a b √ . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form 5 a b √ 5 a b √ . Notice that a and b do not cancel in this example. Do not cancel factors inside a radical with those that are outside. Answer: 10 a b √ a b   Try this! Rationalize the denominator: 4 a 3 b − − √ . Answer: 2 3 a b √ 3 b Video Solution Up to this point, we have seen that multiplying a numerator and a denominator by a square root with the exact same radicand results in a rational denominator. In general, this is true only when the denominator contains a square root. However, this is not the case for a cube root. For example, Note that multiplying by the same factor in the denominator does not rationalize it. In this case, if we multiply by 1 in the form of x 2 √ 3 x 2 √ 3 , then we can write the radicand in the denominator as a power of 3. Simplifying the result then yields a rationalized denominator. For example, Therefore, to rationalize the denominator of radical expressions with one radical term in the denominator, begin by factoring the radicand of the denominator. The factors of this radicand and the index determine what we should multiply by. Multiply numerator and denominator by the nth root of factors that produce nth powers of all the factors in the radicand of the denominator.   Example 16: Rationalize the denominator: 1 25 √ 3 . Solution: The radical in the denominator is equivalent to 5 2 − − √ 3 . To rationalize the denominator, it should be 5 3 − − √ 3 . To obtain this, we need one more factor of 5. Therefore, multiply by 1 in the form of 5 √ 3 5 √ 3 . Answer: 5 √ 3 5   Example 17: Rationalize the denominator: 27 a 2 b 2 − − − √ 3 . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form 2 2 b √ 3 2 2 b √ 3 . Answer: 3 4 a b √ 3 2 b   Example 18: Rationalize the denominator: 1   4 x 3 √ 5 . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form 2 3 x 2 √ 5 2 3 x 2 √ 5 . Answer: 8 x 2 √ 5 2 x   When two terms involving square roots appear in the denominator, we can rationalize it using a very special technique. This technique involves multiplying the numerator and the denominator of the fraction by the conjugate of the denominator. Recall that multiplying a radical expression by its conjugate produces a rational number.   Example 19: Rationalize the denominator: 1 3 √ − 2 √ . Solution: In this example, the conjugate of the denominator is 3 √ + 2 √ . Therefore, multiply by 1 in the form ( 3 √ + 2 √ ) ( 3 √ + 2 √ ) . Answer: 3 √ + 2 √   Notice that the terms involving the square root in the denominator are eliminated by multiplying by the conjugate. We can use the property ( a √ + b √ ) ( a √ − b √ ) = a − b to expedite the process of multiplying the expressions in the denominator.   Example 20: Rationalize the denominator: 2 √ − 6 √ 2 √ + 6 √ . Solution: Multiply by 1 in the form 2 √ − 6 √ 2 √ − 6 √ . Answer: − 2 + 3 √   Example 21: Rationalize the denominator: x √ + y √ x √ − y √ . Solution: In this example, we will multiply by 1 in the form x √ − y √ x √ − y √ . Answer: x − 2 x y √ + y x − y   Try this! Rationalize the denominator: 3 5 √ + 5 2 5 √ − 3 . Answer: 19 5 √ + 45 11 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter8_5	 || Definition of Rational Exponents So far, exponents have been limited to integers. In this section, we will define what rational (or fractional) exponents The fractional exponent m/n that indicates a radical with index n and exponent m: a m / n = a m − − − √ n . mean and how to work with them. All of the rules for exponents developed up to this point apply. In particular, recall the product rule for exponents. Given any rational numbers m and n, then For example, if we have an exponent of 1 2 , then the product rule for exponents implies the following: Here 5 1 / 2 is one of two equal factors of 5; hence it is a square root of 5, and we can write Furthermore, we can see that 2 1 / 3 is one of three equal factors of 2. Therefore, 2 1 / 3 is the cube root of 2, and we can write This is true in general, given any nonzero real number a, In other words, the denominator of a fractional exponent determines the index of an nth root.   Example 1: Rewrite as a radical. a. 7 1 / 2 b. 7 1 / 3 Solution: a. 7 1 / 2 = 7 √ b. 7 1 / 3 = 7 √ 3   Example 2: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify. a. 81 1 / 2 b. 81 1 / 4 Solution: a. 81 1 / 2 = 81 − − √ = 9 b. 81 1 / 4 = 81 − − √ 4 = 3 4 − − √ 4 = 3   Example 3: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify. a. ( 125 x 3 ) 1 / 3 b. ( − 32 y 10 ) 1 / 5 Solution: a. b. Next, consider fractional exponents where the numerator is an integer other than 1. For example, consider the following: This shows that 5 2 / 3 is one of three equal factors of 5 2 . In other words, 5 2 / 3 is the cube root of 5 2 and we can write: In general, given any real number a, An expression with a rational exponent is equivalent to a radical where the denominator is the index and the numerator is the exponent. Any radical expression can be written with a rational exponent, which we call exponential form An equivalent expression written using a rational exponent. .   Example 4: Rewrite as a radical. a. 7 2 / 5 b. 2 3 / 4 Solution: a. 7 2 / 5 = 7 2 − − √ 5 = 49 − − √ 5 b. 2 3 / 4 = 2 3 − − √ 4 = 8 √ 4   Example 5: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify. a. 8 2 / 3 b. ( 32 ) 3 / 5 Solution: a. b. We can often avoid very large integers by working with their prime factorization. Given a radical expression, we will be asked to find the equivalent in exponential form. Assume all variables are positive.   Example 6: Rewrite using rational exponents: x 2 − − √ 3 . Solution: Here the index is 3 and the power is 2. We can write Answer: x 2 / 3   Example 7: Rewrite using rational exponents: y 3 − − √ 6 . Solution: Here the index is 6 and the power is 3. We can write Answer: y 1 / 2   It is important to note that the following are equivalent. In other words, it does not matter if we apply the power first or the root first. For example, we can apply the power before the root: Or we can apply the nth root before the power: The results are the same.   Example 8: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify: ( − 8 ) 2 / 3 . Solution: Here the index is 3 and the power is 2. We can write Answer: 4   Try this! Rewrite as a radical and then simplify: 25 3 / 2 . Answer: 125 Video Solution Some calculators have a caret button ˆ . If so, we can calculate approximations for radicals using it and rational exponents. For example, to calculate , we would type To calculate , we would type  || Operations Using the Rules of Exponents In this section, we review all of the rules of exponents, which extend to include rational exponents. If given any rational numbers m and n, then we have Product rule: Quotient rule: Power rule: Power rule for a product: Power rule for a quotient: Negative exponents: Zero exponent: These rules allow us to perform operations with rational exponents.   Example 9: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 10: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 11: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 12: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 13: Simplify: . Solution: Answer: 1/125   Try this! Simplify: . Answer: Video Solution  || Radical Expressions with Different Indices To apply the product or quotient rule for radicals, the indices of the radicals involved must be the same. If the indices are different, then first rewrite the radicals in exponential form and then apply the rules for exponents.   Example 14: Multiply: . Solution: In this example, the index of each radical factor is different. Hence the product rule for radicals does not apply. Begin by converting the radicals into an equivalent form using rational exponents. Then apply the product rule for exponents. Answer:   Example 15: Divide: . Solution: In this example, the index of the radical in the numerator is different from the index of the radical in the denominator. Hence the quotient rule for radicals does not apply. Begin by converting the radicals into an equivalent form using rational exponents and then apply the quotient rule for exponents. Answer:   Example 16: Simplify: . Solution: Here the radicand of the square root is a cube root. After rewriting this expression using rational exponents, we will see that the power rule for exponents applies. Answer:  || 
book2_chapter8_5_1	Definition of Rational Exponents So far, exponents have been limited to integers. In this section, we will define what rational (or fractional) exponents The fractional exponent m/n that indicates a radical with index n and exponent m: a m / n = a m − − − √ n . mean and how to work with them. All of the rules for exponents developed up to this point apply. In particular, recall the product rule for exponents. Given any rational numbers m and n, then For example, if we have an exponent of 1 2 , then the product rule for exponents implies the following: Here 5 1 / 2 is one of two equal factors of 5; hence it is a square root of 5, and we can write Furthermore, we can see that 2 1 / 3 is one of three equal factors of 2. Therefore, 2 1 / 3 is the cube root of 2, and we can write This is true in general, given any nonzero real number a, In other words, the denominator of a fractional exponent determines the index of an nth root.   Example 1: Rewrite as a radical. a. 7 1 / 2 b. 7 1 / 3 Solution: a. 7 1 / 2 = 7 √ b. 7 1 / 3 = 7 √ 3   Example 2: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify. a. 81 1 / 2 b. 81 1 / 4 Solution: a. 81 1 / 2 = 81 − − √ = 9 b. 81 1 / 4 = 81 − − √ 4 = 3 4 − − √ 4 = 3   Example 3: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify. a. ( 125 x 3 ) 1 / 3 b. ( − 32 y 10 ) 1 / 5 Solution: a. b. Next, consider fractional exponents where the numerator is an integer other than 1. For example, consider the following: This shows that 5 2 / 3 is one of three equal factors of 5 2 . In other words, 5 2 / 3 is the cube root of 5 2 and we can write: In general, given any real number a, An expression with a rational exponent is equivalent to a radical where the denominator is the index and the numerator is the exponent. Any radical expression can be written with a rational exponent, which we call exponential form An equivalent expression written using a rational exponent. .   Example 4: Rewrite as a radical. a. 7 2 / 5 b. 2 3 / 4 Solution: a. 7 2 / 5 = 7 2 − − √ 5 = 49 − − √ 5 b. 2 3 / 4 = 2 3 − − √ 4 = 8 √ 4   Example 5: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify. a. 8 2 / 3 b. ( 32 ) 3 / 5 Solution: a. b. We can often avoid very large integers by working with their prime factorization. Given a radical expression, we will be asked to find the equivalent in exponential form. Assume all variables are positive.   Example 6: Rewrite using rational exponents: x 2 − − √ 3 . Solution: Here the index is 3 and the power is 2. We can write Answer: x 2 / 3   Example 7: Rewrite using rational exponents: y 3 − − √ 6 . Solution: Here the index is 6 and the power is 3. We can write Answer: y 1 / 2   It is important to note that the following are equivalent. In other words, it does not matter if we apply the power first or the root first. For example, we can apply the power before the root: Or we can apply the nth root before the power: The results are the same.   Example 8: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify: ( − 8 ) 2 / 3 . Solution: Here the index is 3 and the power is 2. We can write Answer: 4   Try this! Rewrite as a radical and then simplify: 25 3 / 2 . Answer: 125 Video Solution Some calculators have a caret button ˆ . If so, we can calculate approximations for radicals using it and rational exponents. For example, to calculate , we would type To calculate , we would type Definition of Rational Exponents So far, exponents have been limited to integers. In this section, we will define what rational (or fractional) exponents The fractional exponent m/n that indicates a radical with index n and exponent m: a m / n = a m − − − √ n . mean and how to work with them. All of the rules for exponents developed up to this point apply. In particular, recall the product rule for exponents. Given any rational numbers m and n, then For example, if we have an exponent of 1 2 , then the product rule for exponents implies the following: Here 5 1 / 2 is one of two equal factors of 5; hence it is a square root of 5, and we can write Furthermore, we can see that 2 1 / 3 is one of three equal factors of 2. Therefore, 2 1 / 3 is the cube root of 2, and we can write This is true in general, given any nonzero real number a, In other words, the denominator of a fractional exponent determines the index of an nth root.   Example 1: Rewrite as a radical. a. 7 1 / 2 b. 7 1 / 3 Solution: a. 7 1 / 2 = 7 √ b. 7 1 / 3 = 7 √ 3   Example 2: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify. a. 81 1 / 2 b. 81 1 / 4 Solution: a. 81 1 / 2 = 81 − − √ = 9 b. 81 1 / 4 = 81 − − √ 4 = 3 4 − − √ 4 = 3   Example 3: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify. a. ( 125 x 3 ) 1 / 3 b. ( − 32 y 10 ) 1 / 5 Solution: a. b. Next, consider fractional exponents where the numerator is an integer other than 1. For example, consider the following: This shows that 5 2 / 3 is one of three equal factors of 5 2 . In other words, 5 2 / 3 is the cube root of 5 2 and we can write: In general, given any real number a, An expression with a rational exponent is equivalent to a radical where the denominator is the index and the numerator is the exponent. Any radical expression can be written with a rational exponent, which we call exponential form An equivalent expression written using a rational exponent. .   Example 4: Rewrite as a radical. a. 7 2 / 5 b. 2 3 / 4 Solution: a. 7 2 / 5 = 7 2 − − √ 5 = 49 − − √ 5 b. 2 3 / 4 = 2 3 − − √ 4 = 8 √ 4   Example 5: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify. a. 8 2 / 3 b. ( 32 ) 3 / 5 Solution: a. b. We can often avoid very large integers by working with their prime factorization. Given a radical expression, we will be asked to find the equivalent in exponential form. Assume all variables are positive.   Example 6: Rewrite using rational exponents: x 2 − − √ 3 . Solution: Here the index is 3 and the power is 2. We can write Answer: x 2 / 3   Example 7: Rewrite using rational exponents: y 3 − − √ 6 . Solution: Here the index is 6 and the power is 3. We can write Answer: y 1 / 2   It is important to note that the following are equivalent. In other words, it does not matter if we apply the power first or the root first. For example, we can apply the power before the root: Or we can apply the nth root before the power: The results are the same.   Example 8: Rewrite as a radical and then simplify: ( − 8 ) 2 / 3 . Solution: Here the index is 3 and the power is 2. We can write Answer: 4   Try this! Rewrite as a radical and then simplify: 25 3 / 2 . Answer: 125 Video Solution Some calculators have a caret button ˆ . If so, we can calculate approximations for radicals using it and rational exponents. For example, to calculate , we would type To calculate , we would type  || 
book2_chapter8_5_2	Operations Using the Rules of Exponents In this section, we review all of the rules of exponents, which extend to include rational exponents. If given any rational numbers m and n, then we have Product rule: Quotient rule: Power rule: Power rule for a product: Power rule for a quotient: Negative exponents: Zero exponent: These rules allow us to perform operations with rational exponents.   Example 9: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 10: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 11: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 12: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 13: Simplify: . Solution: Answer: 1/125   Try this! Simplify: . Answer: Video Solution Operations Using the Rules of Exponents In this section, we review all of the rules of exponents, which extend to include rational exponents. If given any rational numbers m and n, then we have Product rule: Quotient rule: Power rule: Power rule for a product: Power rule for a quotient: Negative exponents: Zero exponent: These rules allow us to perform operations with rational exponents.   Example 9: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 10: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 11: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 12: Simplify: . Solution: Answer:   Example 13: Simplify: . Solution: Answer: 1/125   Try this! Simplify: . Answer: Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter8_5_3	Radical Expressions with Different Indices To apply the product or quotient rule for radicals, the indices of the radicals involved must be the same. If the indices are different, then first rewrite the radicals in exponential form and then apply the rules for exponents.   Example 14: Multiply: . Solution: In this example, the index of each radical factor is different. Hence the product rule for radicals does not apply. Begin by converting the radicals into an equivalent form using rational exponents. Then apply the product rule for exponents. Answer:   Example 15: Divide: . Solution: In this example, the index of the radical in the numerator is different from the index of the radical in the denominator. Hence the quotient rule for radicals does not apply. Begin by converting the radicals into an equivalent form using rational exponents and then apply the quotient rule for exponents. Answer:   Example 16: Simplify: . Solution: Here the radicand of the square root is a cube root. After rewriting this expression using rational exponents, we will see that the power rule for exponents applies. Answer: Radical Expressions with Different Indices To apply the product or quotient rule for radicals, the indices of the radicals involved must be the same. If the indices are different, then first rewrite the radicals in exponential form and then apply the rules for exponents.   Example 14: Multiply: . Solution: In this example, the index of each radical factor is different. Hence the product rule for radicals does not apply. Begin by converting the radicals into an equivalent form using rational exponents. Then apply the product rule for exponents. Answer:   Example 15: Divide: . Solution: In this example, the index of the radical in the numerator is different from the index of the radical in the denominator. Hence the quotient rule for radicals does not apply. Begin by converting the radicals into an equivalent form using rational exponents and then apply the quotient rule for exponents. Answer:   Example 16: Simplify: . Solution: Here the radicand of the square root is a cube root. After rewriting this expression using rational exponents, we will see that the power rule for exponents applies. Answer:  || 
book2_chapter8_6	 || Radical Equations A radical equation Any equation that contains one or more radicals with a variable in the radicand. is any equation that contains one or more radicals with a variable in the radicand. Following are some examples of radical equations, all of which will be solved in this section: We begin with the squaring property of equality Given real numbers a and b, where a = b , then a 2 = b 2 . ; given real numbers a and b, we have the following: In other words, equality is retained if we square both sides of an equation. The converse, on the other hand, is not necessarily true: This is important because we will use this property to solve radical equations. Consider a very simple radical equation that can be solved by inspection: Here we can see that x = 9 is a solution. To solve this equation algebraically, make use of the squaring property of equality and the fact that ( a √ ) 2 = a 2 − − √ = a when a is positive. Eliminate the square root by squaring both sides of the equation as follows: As a check, we can see that 9 √ = 3 as expected. Because the converse of the squaring property of equality is not necessarily true, solutions to the squared equation may not be solutions to the original. Hence squaring both sides of an equation introduces the possibility of extraneous solutions A solution that does not solve the original equation. , or solutions that do not solve the original equation. For this reason, we must check the answers that result from squaring both sides of an equation.   Example 1: Solve: x − 1 − − − − − √ = 5 . Solution: We can eliminate the square root by applying the squaring property of equality. Next, we must check. Answer: The solution is 26.   Example 2: Solve: 5 − 4 x − − − − − √ = x . Solution: Begin by squaring both sides of the equation. You are left with a quadratic equation that can be solved by factoring. Since you squared both sides, you must check your solutions. After checking, you can see that x = − 5 was extraneous; it did not solve the original radical equation. Disregard that answer. This leaves x = 1 as the only solution. Answer: The solution is x = 1 .   In the previous two examples, notice that the radical is isolated on one side of the equation. Typically, this is not the case. The steps for solving radical equations involving square roots are outlined in the following example.   Example 3: Solve: 2 x − 5 − − − − − √ + 4 = x . Solution: Step 1: Isolate the square root. Begin by subtracting 4 from both sides of the equation. Step 2: Square both sides. Squaring both sides eliminates the square root. Step 3: Solve the resulting equation. Here you are left with a quadratic equation that can be solved by factoring. Step 4: Check the solutions in the original equation. Squaring both sides introduces the possibility of extraneous solutions; hence the check is required. After checking, we can see that x = 3 is an extraneous root; it does not solve the original radical equation. This leaves x = 7 as the only solution. Answer: The solution is x = 7 .   Example 4: Solve: 3 x + 1 − − − − − √ − 2 x = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the term with the radical. Despite the fact that the term on the left side has a coefficient, it is still considered isolated. Recall that terms are separated by addition or subtraction operators. Solve the resulting quadratic equation. Since we squared both sides, we must check our solutions. After checking, we can see that x = − 3 4 was extraneous. Answer: The solution is 3.   Sometimes both of the possible solutions are extraneous.   Example 5: Solve: 4 − 11 x − − − − − − √ − x + 2 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the radical. Since we squared both sides, we must check our solutions. Since both possible solutions are extraneous, the equation has no solution. Answer: No solution, Ø   The squaring property of equality extends to any positive integer power n. Given real numbers a and b, we have the following: This is often referred to as the power property of equality Given any positive integer n and real numbers a and b, where a = b , then a n = b n . . Use this property, along with the fact that ( a √ n ) n = a n − − √ n = a , when a is positive, to solve radical equations with indices greater than 2.   Example 6: Solve: x 2 + 4 − − − − − √ 3 − 2 = 0 . Solution: Isolate the radical and then cube both sides of the equation. Check. Answer: The solutions are −2 and 2.   Try this! Solve: 2 x − 1 − − − − − √ + 2 = x . Answer: x = 5 ( x = 1 is extraneous) Video Solution It may be the case that the equation has two radical expressions.   Example 7: Solve: 3 x − 4 − − − − − √ = 2 x + 9 − − − − − √ . Solution: Both radicals are considered isolated on separate sides of the equation. Check x = 13 . Answer: The solution is 13.   Example 8: Solve: x 2 + x − 14 − − − − − − − − − √ 3 = x + 50 − − − − − √ 3 . Solution: Eliminate the radicals by cubing both sides. Check. Answer: The solutions are −8 and 8.   We will learn how to solve some of the more advanced radical equations in the next course, Intermediate Algebra.   Try this! Solve: 3 x + 1 − − − − − √ = 2 x − 3 − − − − − √ . Answer: 13 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter8_6_1	Radical Equations A radical equation Any equation that contains one or more radicals with a variable in the radicand. is any equation that contains one or more radicals with a variable in the radicand. Following are some examples of radical equations, all of which will be solved in this section: We begin with the squaring property of equality Given real numbers a and b, where a = b , then a 2 = b 2 . ; given real numbers a and b, we have the following: In other words, equality is retained if we square both sides of an equation. The converse, on the other hand, is not necessarily true: This is important because we will use this property to solve radical equations. Consider a very simple radical equation that can be solved by inspection: Here we can see that x = 9 is a solution. To solve this equation algebraically, make use of the squaring property of equality and the fact that ( a √ ) 2 = a 2 − − √ = a when a is positive. Eliminate the square root by squaring both sides of the equation as follows: As a check, we can see that 9 √ = 3 as expected. Because the converse of the squaring property of equality is not necessarily true, solutions to the squared equation may not be solutions to the original. Hence squaring both sides of an equation introduces the possibility of extraneous solutions A solution that does not solve the original equation. , or solutions that do not solve the original equation. For this reason, we must check the answers that result from squaring both sides of an equation.   Example 1: Solve: x − 1 − − − − − √ = 5 . Solution: We can eliminate the square root by applying the squaring property of equality. Next, we must check. Answer: The solution is 26.   Example 2: Solve: 5 − 4 x − − − − − √ = x . Solution: Begin by squaring both sides of the equation. You are left with a quadratic equation that can be solved by factoring. Since you squared both sides, you must check your solutions. After checking, you can see that x = − 5 was extraneous; it did not solve the original radical equation. Disregard that answer. This leaves x = 1 as the only solution. Answer: The solution is x = 1 .   In the previous two examples, notice that the radical is isolated on one side of the equation. Typically, this is not the case. The steps for solving radical equations involving square roots are outlined in the following example.   Example 3: Solve: 2 x − 5 − − − − − √ + 4 = x . Solution: Step 1: Isolate the square root. Begin by subtracting 4 from both sides of the equation. Step 2: Square both sides. Squaring both sides eliminates the square root. Step 3: Solve the resulting equation. Here you are left with a quadratic equation that can be solved by factoring. Step 4: Check the solutions in the original equation. Squaring both sides introduces the possibility of extraneous solutions; hence the check is required. After checking, we can see that x = 3 is an extraneous root; it does not solve the original radical equation. This leaves x = 7 as the only solution. Answer: The solution is x = 7 .   Example 4: Solve: 3 x + 1 − − − − − √ − 2 x = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the term with the radical. Despite the fact that the term on the left side has a coefficient, it is still considered isolated. Recall that terms are separated by addition or subtraction operators. Solve the resulting quadratic equation. Since we squared both sides, we must check our solutions. After checking, we can see that x = − 3 4 was extraneous. Answer: The solution is 3.   Sometimes both of the possible solutions are extraneous.   Example 5: Solve: 4 − 11 x − − − − − − √ − x + 2 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the radical. Since we squared both sides, we must check our solutions. Since both possible solutions are extraneous, the equation has no solution. Answer: No solution, Ø   The squaring property of equality extends to any positive integer power n. Given real numbers a and b, we have the following: This is often referred to as the power property of equality Given any positive integer n and real numbers a and b, where a = b , then a n = b n . . Use this property, along with the fact that ( a √ n ) n = a n − − √ n = a , when a is positive, to solve radical equations with indices greater than 2.   Example 6: Solve: x 2 + 4 − − − − − √ 3 − 2 = 0 . Solution: Isolate the radical and then cube both sides of the equation. Check. Answer: The solutions are −2 and 2.   Try this! Solve: 2 x − 1 − − − − − √ + 2 = x . Answer: x = 5 ( x = 1 is extraneous) Video Solution It may be the case that the equation has two radical expressions.   Example 7: Solve: 3 x − 4 − − − − − √ = 2 x + 9 − − − − − √ . Solution: Both radicals are considered isolated on separate sides of the equation. Check x = 13 . Answer: The solution is 13.   Example 8: Solve: x 2 + x − 14 − − − − − − − − − √ 3 = x + 50 − − − − − √ 3 . Solution: Eliminate the radicals by cubing both sides. Check. Answer: The solutions are −8 and 8.   We will learn how to solve some of the more advanced radical equations in the next course, Intermediate Algebra.   Try this! Solve: 3 x + 1 − − − − − √ = 2 x − 3 − − − − − √ . Answer: 13 Video Solution Radical Equations A radical equation Any equation that contains one or more radicals with a variable in the radicand. is any equation that contains one or more radicals with a variable in the radicand. Following are some examples of radical equations, all of which will be solved in this section: We begin with the squaring property of equality Given real numbers a and b, where a = b , then a 2 = b 2 . ; given real numbers a and b, we have the following: In other words, equality is retained if we square both sides of an equation. The converse, on the other hand, is not necessarily true: This is important because we will use this property to solve radical equations. Consider a very simple radical equation that can be solved by inspection: Here we can see that x = 9 is a solution. To solve this equation algebraically, make use of the squaring property of equality and the fact that ( a √ ) 2 = a 2 − − √ = a when a is positive. Eliminate the square root by squaring both sides of the equation as follows: As a check, we can see that 9 √ = 3 as expected. Because the converse of the squaring property of equality is not necessarily true, solutions to the squared equation may not be solutions to the original. Hence squaring both sides of an equation introduces the possibility of extraneous solutions A solution that does not solve the original equation. , or solutions that do not solve the original equation. For this reason, we must check the answers that result from squaring both sides of an equation.   Example 1: Solve: x − 1 − − − − − √ = 5 . Solution: We can eliminate the square root by applying the squaring property of equality. Next, we must check. Answer: The solution is 26.   Example 2: Solve: 5 − 4 x − − − − − √ = x . Solution: Begin by squaring both sides of the equation. You are left with a quadratic equation that can be solved by factoring. Since you squared both sides, you must check your solutions. After checking, you can see that x = − 5 was extraneous; it did not solve the original radical equation. Disregard that answer. This leaves x = 1 as the only solution. Answer: The solution is x = 1 .   In the previous two examples, notice that the radical is isolated on one side of the equation. Typically, this is not the case. The steps for solving radical equations involving square roots are outlined in the following example.   Example 3: Solve: 2 x − 5 − − − − − √ + 4 = x . Solution: Step 1: Isolate the square root. Begin by subtracting 4 from both sides of the equation. Step 2: Square both sides. Squaring both sides eliminates the square root. Step 3: Solve the resulting equation. Here you are left with a quadratic equation that can be solved by factoring. Step 4: Check the solutions in the original equation. Squaring both sides introduces the possibility of extraneous solutions; hence the check is required. After checking, we can see that x = 3 is an extraneous root; it does not solve the original radical equation. This leaves x = 7 as the only solution. Answer: The solution is x = 7 .   Example 4: Solve: 3 x + 1 − − − − − √ − 2 x = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the term with the radical. Despite the fact that the term on the left side has a coefficient, it is still considered isolated. Recall that terms are separated by addition or subtraction operators. Solve the resulting quadratic equation. Since we squared both sides, we must check our solutions. After checking, we can see that x = − 3 4 was extraneous. Answer: The solution is 3.   Sometimes both of the possible solutions are extraneous.   Example 5: Solve: 4 − 11 x − − − − − − √ − x + 2 = 0 . Solution: Begin by isolating the radical. Since we squared both sides, we must check our solutions. Since both possible solutions are extraneous, the equation has no solution. Answer: No solution, Ø   The squaring property of equality extends to any positive integer power n. Given real numbers a and b, we have the following: This is often referred to as the power property of equality Given any positive integer n and real numbers a and b, where a = b , then a n = b n . . Use this property, along with the fact that ( a √ n ) n = a n − − √ n = a , when a is positive, to solve radical equations with indices greater than 2.   Example 6: Solve: x 2 + 4 − − − − − √ 3 − 2 = 0 . Solution: Isolate the radical and then cube both sides of the equation. Check. Answer: The solutions are −2 and 2.   Try this! Solve: 2 x − 1 − − − − − √ + 2 = x . Answer: x = 5 ( x = 1 is extraneous) Video Solution It may be the case that the equation has two radical expressions.   Example 7: Solve: 3 x − 4 − − − − − √ = 2 x + 9 − − − − − √ . Solution: Both radicals are considered isolated on separate sides of the equation. Check x = 13 . Answer: The solution is 13.   Example 8: Solve: x 2 + x − 14 − − − − − − − − − √ 3 = x + 50 − − − − − √ 3 . Solution: Eliminate the radicals by cubing both sides. Check. Answer: The solutions are −8 and 8.   We will learn how to solve some of the more advanced radical equations in the next course, Intermediate Algebra.   Try this! Solve: 3 x + 1 − − − − − √ = 2 x − 3 − − − − − √ . Answer: 13 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter1	 ||  || Definitions A set Any collection of objects. is a collection of objects, typically grouped within braces { }, where each object is called an element An object within a set. . For example, {red, green, blue} is a set of colors. A subset A set consisting of elements that belong to a given set. is a set consisting of elements that belong to a given set. For example, {green, blue} is a subset of the color set above. A set with no elements is called the empty set A subset with no elements, denoted ∅ or { }. and has its own special notation, { } or ∅. When studying mathematics, we focus on special sets of numbers. The set of natural (or counting) numbers The set of counting numbers {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, …}. , denoted N, is The three periods (…) is called an ellipsis and indicates that the numbers continue without bound. The set of whole numbers The set of natural numbers combined with zero {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, …}. , denoted W , is the set of natural numbers combined with zero. The set of integers The set of positive and negative whole numbers combined with zero {…, −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, …}. , denoted Z, consists of both positive and negative whole numbers, as well as zero. Notice that the sets of natural and whole numbers are both subsets of the set of integers. Rational numbers Numbers of the form a b , where a and b are integers and b is nonzero. , denoted Q, are defined as any number of the form a b , where a and b are integers and b is nonzero. Decimals that repeat or terminate are rational. For example, The set of integers is a subset of the set of rational numbers because every integer can be expressed as a ratio of the integer and 1. In other words, any integer can be written over 1 and can be considered a rational number. For example, Irrational numbers Numbers that cannot be written as a ratio of two integers. are defined as any number that cannot be written as a ratio of two integers. Nonterminating decimals that do not repeat are irrational. For example, The set of real numbers The set of all rational and irrational numbers. , denoted R, is defined as the set of all rational numbers combined with the set of all irrational numbers. Therefore, all the numbers defined so far are subsets of the set of real numbers. In summary,  || Number Line A real number line A line that allows us to visually represent real numbers by associating them with points on the line. , or simply number line, allows us to visually display real numbers by associating them with unique points on a line. The real number associated with a point is called a coordinate The real number associated with a point on a number line. . A point on the real number line that is associated with a coordinate is called its graph A point on the number line associated with a coordinate. . To construct a number line, draw a horizontal line with arrows on both ends to indicate that it continues without bound. Next, choose any point to represent the number zero; this point is called the origin The point on the number line that represtents zero. . Mark off consistent lengths on both sides of the origin and label each tick mark to define the scale. Positive real numbers lie to the right of the origin and negative real numbers lie to the left. The number zero (0) is neither positive nor negative. Typically, each tick represents one unit. As illustrated below, the scale need not always be one unit. In the first number line, each tick mark represents two units. In the second, each tick mark represents 1 7 . The graph of each real number is shown as a dot at the appropriate point on the number line. A partial graph of the set of integers Z follows:   Example 1: Graph the following set of real numbers: { − 1 ,   − 1 3 ,   0 ,   5 3 } . Solution: Graph the numbers on a number line with a scale where each tick mark represents 1 3 unit.  || Ordering Real Numbers When comparing real numbers on a number line, the larger number will always lie to the right of the smaller one. It is clear that 15 is greater than 5, but it may not be so clear to see that −1 is greater than −5 until we graph each number on a number line. We use symbols to help us efficiently communicate relationships between numbers on the number line. The symbols used to describe an equality relationship Express equality with the symbol =. If two quantities are not equal, use the symbol ≠ . between numbers follow: These symbols are used and interpreted in the following manner: We next define symbols that denote an order relationship between real numbers. These symbols allow us to compare two numbers. For example, Since the graph of −120 is to the left of the graph of –10 on the number line, that number is less than −10. We could write an equivalent statement as follows: Similarly, since the graph of zero is to the right of the graph of any negative number on the number line, zero is greater than any negative number. The symbols < and > are used to denote strict inequalities Express ordering relationships using the symbol < for “less than” and > for “greater than.” , and the symbols ≤ and ≥ are used to denote inclusive inequalities Use the symbol ≤ to express quantities that are “less than or equal to” and ≥ for quantities that are “greater than or equal to” each other. . In some situations, more than one symbol can be correctly applied. For example, the following two statements are both true: In addition, the “or equal to” component of an inclusive inequality allows us to correctly write the following: The logical use of the word “or” requires that only one of the conditions need be true: the “less than” or the “equal to.”   Example 2: Fill in the blank with <, =, or >: −2 ____ −12. Solution: Use > because the graph of −2 is to the right of the graph of −12 on a number line. Therefore, −2 > −12, which reads “negative two is greater than negative twelve.” Answer: −2 > −12   In this text, we will often point out the equivalent notation used to express mathematical quantities electronically using the standard symbols available on a keyboard. We begin with the equivalent textual notation for inequalities: Many calculators, computer algebra systems, and programming languages use this notation.  || Opposites The opposite Real numbers whose graphs are on opposite sides of the origin with the same distance to the origin. of any real number a is −a. Opposite real numbers are the same distance from the origin on a number line, but their graphs lie on opposite sides of the origin and the numbers have opposite signs. For example, we say that the opposite of 10 is −10. Next, consider the opposite of a negative number. Given the integer −7, the integer the same distance from the origin and with the opposite sign is +7, or just 7. Therefore, we say that the opposite of −7 is −(−7) = 7. This idea leads to what is often referred to as the double-negative property The opposite of a negative number is positive: −(−a) = a. . For any real number a,   Example 3: What is the opposite of − 3 4 ? Solution: Here we apply the double-negative property. Answer: 3 4   Example 4: Simplify: − ( − ( 4 ) ) . Solution: Start with the innermost parentheses by finding the opposite of +4. Answer: 4   Example 5: Simplify: − ( − ( − 2 ) ) . Solution: Apply the double-negative property starting with the innermost parentheses. Answer: −2 Tip If there is an even number of consecutive negative signs, then the result is positive. If there is an odd number of consecutive negative signs, then the result is negative.   Try this! Simplify: − ( − ( − ( 5 ) ) ) . Answer: −5 Video Solution  || Absolute Value The absolute value The absolute value of a number is the distance from the graph of the number to zero on a number line. of a real number a, denoted | a | , is defined as the distance between zero (the origin) and the graph of that real number on the number line. Since it is a distance, it is always positive. For example, Both 4 and −4 are four units from the origin, as illustrated below:   Example 6: Simplify: a. | − 12 | b. | 12 | Solution: Both −12 and 12 are twelve units from the origin on a number line. Therefore, Answers: a. 12; b. 12   Also, it is worth noting that The absolute value can be expressed textually using the notation abs(a). We often encounter negative absolute values, such as − | 3 | or −abs(3). Notice that the negative sign is in front of the absolute value symbol. In this case, work the absolute value first and then find the opposite of the result. Try not to confuse this with the double-negative property, which states that − ( − 7 ) = + 7 .   Example 7: Simplify: − | − ( − 7 ) | . Solution: First, find the opposite of −7 inside the absolute value. Then find the opposite of the result. Answer: −7   At this point, we can determine what real numbers have a particular absolute value. For example, Think of a real number whose distance to the origin is 5 units. There are two solutions: the distance to the right of the origin and the distance to the left of the origin, namely, { ± 5 } . The symbol (±) is read “plus or minus” and indicates that there are two answers, one positive and one negative. Now consider the following: Here we wish to find a value for which the distance to the origin is negative. Since negative distance is not defined, this equation has no solution. If an equation has no solution, we say the solution is the empty set: Ø.  ||  || Addition and Subtraction (+, −) Visualize adding 3 + 2 on the number line by moving from zero three units to the right then another two units to the right, as illustrated below: The illustration shows that 3 + 2 = 5. Similarly, visualize adding two negative numbers (−3) + (−2) by first moving from the origin three units to the left and then moving another two units to the left. In this example, the illustration shows (−3) + (−2) = −5, which leads to the following two properties of real numbers. Next, we will explore addition of numbers with unlike signs. To add 3 + (−7), first move from the origin three units to the right, then move seven units to the left as shown: In this case, we can see that adding a negative number is equivalent to subtraction: It is tempting to say that a positive number plus a negative number is negative, but that is not always true: 7 + ( − 3 ) = 7 − 3 = 4 . The result of adding numbers with unlike signs may be positive or negative. The sign of the result is the same as the sign of the number with the greatest distance from the origin. For example, the following results depend on the sign of the number 12 because it is farther from zero than 5:   Example 1: Simplify: 14 + ( − 25 ) . Solution: Here −25 is the greater distance from the origin. Therefore, the result is negative. Answer: −11   Given any real numbers a, b, and c, we have the following properties of addition: Additive identity property Given any real number a, a + 0 = 0 + a = a   . : a + 0 = 0 + a = a Additive inverse property Given any real number a, a + ( − a ) = ( − a ) + a = 0 . : a + ( − a ) = ( − a ) + a = 0 Associative property Given real numbers a, b and c, ( a + b ) + c = a + ( b + c ) . : ( a + b ) + c = a + ( b + c ) Commutative property Given real numbers a and b, a + b = b + a . : a + b = b + a   Example 2: Simplify: a. 5 + 0 b. 10 + ( − 10 ) Solution: a. Adding zero to any real number results in the same real number. b. Adding opposites results in zero. Answers: a. 5; b. 0   Example 3: Simplify: a. ( 3 + 7 ) + 4 b. 3 + ( 7 + 4 ) Solution: Parentheses group the operations that are to be performed first. a. b. These two examples both result in 14: changing the grouping of the numbers does not change the result. Answers: a. 14; b. 14   At this point, we highlight the fact that addition is commutative: the order in which we add does not matter and yields the same result. On the other hand, subtraction is not commutative. We will use these properties, along with the double-negative property for real numbers, to perform more involved sequential operations. To simplify things, we will make it a general rule to first replace all sequential operations with either addition or subtraction and then perform each operation in order from left to right.   Example 4: Simplify: 4 − ( − 10 ) + ( − 5 ) . Solution: Replace the sequential operations and then perform them from left to right. Answer: 9   Example 5: Simplify: − 3 + ( − 8 ) − ( − 7 ) . Solution: Answer: −4   Try this! Simplify: 12 − ( − 9 ) + ( − 6 ) . Answer: 15 Video Solution Often we find the need to translate English sentences involving addition and subtraction to mathematical statements. Listed below are some key words that translate to the given operation. Key Words Operation Sum, increased by, more than, plus, added to, total + Difference, decreased by, subtracted from, less, minus −   Example 6: What is the difference of 7 and −3? Solution: The key word “difference” implies that we should subtract the numbers. Answer: The difference of 7 and −3 is 10.   Example 7: What is the sum of the first five positive integers? Solution: The initial key word to focus on is “sum”; this means that we will be adding the five numbers. The first five positive integers are {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Recall that 0 is neither positive nor negative. Answer: The sum of the first five positive integers is 15.   Example 8: What is 10 subtracted from the sum of 8 and 6? Solution: We know that subtraction is not commutative; therefore, we must take care to subtract in the correct order. First, add 8 and 6 and then subtract 10 as follows: It is important to notice that the phrase “10 subtracted from” does not translate to a mathematical statement in the order it appears. In other words, 10 − ( 8 + 6 ) would be an incorrect translation and leads to an incorrect answer. After translating the sentence, perform the operations. Answer: Ten subtracted from the sum of 8 and 6 is 4.  || Distance on a Number Line One application of the absolute value is to find the distance between any two points on a number line. For real numbers a and b, the distance formula for a number line The distance between any two real numbers a and b on a number line can be calculated using the formula d = | b − a | . is given as,   Example 9: Determine the distance between 2 and 7 on a number line. Solution: On the graph we see that the distance between the two given integers is 5 units. Using the distance formula we obtain the same result. Answer: 5 units   Example 10: Determine the distance between −4 and 7 on a number line. Solution: Use the distance formula for a number line d = | b − a | , where a = − 4 and b = 7 . Answer: 11 units   It turns out that it does not matter which points are used for a and b; the absolute value always ensures a positive result. Using a = −4 and b = 7 Using a = 7 and b = −4 d = | 7 − ( − 4 ) | = | 7 + 4 | = | 11 | = 11 d = | − 4 − 7 | = | − 11 | = 11   Try this! Determine the distance between −12 and −9 on the number line. Answer: 3 Video Solution  ||  || Multiplication and Division We begin with a review of what it means to multiply and divide signed numbers. The result of multiplying real numbers is called the product The result of multiplying. and the result of dividing is called the quotient The result after dividing. . Recall that multiplication is equivalent to adding: Clearly, the product of two positive numbers is positive. Similarly, the product of a positive number and negative number can be written as shown: We see that the product of a positive number and a negative number is negative. Next, explore the results of multiplying two negative numbers. Consider the products in the following illustration and try to identify the pattern: This shows that the product of two negative numbers is positive. To summarize, The rules for division are the same because division can always be rewritten as multiplication: The rules for multiplication and division should not be confused with the fact that the sum of two negative numbers is negative.   Example 1: Simplify: a. ( − 3 ) + ( − 5 ) b. ( − 3 ) ( − 5 ) Solution: Here we add and multiply the same two negative numbers. a. The result of adding two negative numbers is negative. b. The result of multiplying two negative numbers is positive. Answers: a. −8; b. 15   Given any real numbers a, b, and c, we have the following properties of multiplication: Zero factor property Given any real number a, a ⋅ 0 = 0 ⋅ a = 0 . : a ⋅ 0 = 0 ⋅ a = 0 Multiplicative identity property Given any real number a, a ⋅ 1 = 1 ⋅ a = a . : a ⋅ 1 = 1 ⋅ a = a Associative property Given any real numbers a, b, and c, ( a ⋅ b ) ⋅ c = a ⋅ ( b ⋅ c ) . : ( a ⋅ b ) ⋅ c = a ⋅ ( b ⋅ c ) Commutative property Given any real numbers a and b, a ⋅ b = b ⋅ a . : a ⋅ b = b ⋅ a   Example 2: Simplify: a. 5 ⋅ 0 b. 10 ⋅ 1 Solution: a. Multiplying by zero results in zero. b. Multiplying any real number by one results in the same real number. Answers: a. 0; b. 10   Example 3: Simplify: a. ( 3 ⋅ 7 ) ⋅ 2 b. 3 ⋅ ( 7 ⋅ 2 ) Solution: a. b. The value of each expression is 42. Changing the grouping of the numbers does not change the result. Answers: a. 42; b. 42   At this point, we highlight that multiplication is commutative: the order in which we multiply does not matter and yields the same result. On the other hand, division is not commutative. Use these properties to perform sequential operations involving multiplication and division. When doing so, it is important to perform these operations in order from left to right.   Example 4: Simplify: 3 ( − 2 ) ( − 5 ) ( − 1 ) . Solution: Multiply two numbers at a time as follows: Answer: −30   Because multiplication is commutative, the order in which we multiply does not affect the final answer. When sequential operations involve multiplication and division, order does matter; hence we must work the operations from left to right to obtain a correct result.   Example 5: Simplify: 10 ÷ ( − 2 ) ( − 5 ) . Solution: Perform the division first; otherwise, the result will be incorrect. Answer: 25   Notice that the order in which we multiply and divide does affect the final result. Therefore, it is important to perform the operations of multiplication and division as they appear from left to right.   Example 6: Simplify: − 6 ( 3 ) ÷ ( − 2 ) ( − 3 ) . Solution: Work the operations one at a time from left to right.   Try this! Simplify: − 5 ÷ 5 ⋅ 2 ( − 3 ) . Answer: 6 Video Solution Within text-based applications, the symbol used for multiplication is the asterisk The symbol (*) that indicates multiplication within text-based applications. (*) and the symbol used for division is the forward slash (/). The set of even integers Integers that are divisible by two or are multiples of two. is the set of all integers that are evenly divisible by 2. We can also obtain the set of even integers by multiplying each integer by 2. The set of odd integers Integers that are not divisible by 2. is the set of all integers that are not evenly divisible by 2. A prime number Integers greater than 1 that are divisible only by 1 and itself. is an integer greater than 1 that is divisible only by 1 and itself. The smallest prime number is 2 and the rest are necessarily odd. Any integer greater than 1 that is not prime is called a composite number Integers greater than 1 that are not prime. and can be written as a product of primes. When a composite number, such as 30, is written as a product, 30 = 2 ⋅ 15 , we say that 2 ⋅ 15 is a factorization Any combination of factors, multiplied together, resulting in the product. of 30 and that 2 and 15 are factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. . Note that factors divide the number evenly. We can continue to write composite factors as products until only a product of primes remains. The prime factorization The unique factorization of a natural number written as a product of primes. of 30 is 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 .   Example 7: Determine the prime factorization of 70. Solution: Begin by writing 70 as a product with 2 as a factor. Then express any composite factor as a product of prime numbers. Since the prime factorization is unique, it does not matter how we choose to initially factor the number because the end result is the same. Answer: The prime factorization of 70 is 2 ⋅ 5 ⋅ 7 .   Some tests (called divisibility tests) useful for finding prime factors of composite numbers follow: If the integer is even, then 2 is a factor. If the sum of the digits is evenly divisible by 3, then 3 is a factor. If the last digit is a 5 or 0, then 5 is a factor. Often we find the need to translate English sentences that include multiplication and division terms to mathematical statements. Listed below are some key words that translate to the given operation. Key Words Operation Product, multiplied by, of, times * or ⋅ Quotient, divided by, ratio, per / or ÷   Example 8: Calculate the quotient of 20 and −10. Solution: The key word “quotient” implies that we should divide. Answer: The quotient of 20 and −10 is −2.   Example 9: What is the product of the first three positive even integers? Solution: The first three positive even integers are {2, 4, 6} and the key word “product” implies that we should multiply. Answer: The product of the first three positive even integers is 48.   Example 10: Joe is able to drive 342 miles on 18 gallons of gasoline. How many miles per gallon of gas is this? Solution: The key word “per” indicates that we must divide the number of miles driven by the number of gallons used: Answer: Joe gets 19 miles per gallon from his vehicle.   In everyday life, we often wish to use a single value that typifies a set of values. One way to do this is to use what is called the arithmetic mean A numerical value that typifies a set of numbers. It is calculated by adding up the numbers in the set and dividing by the number of elements in the set. or average Used in reference to the arithmetic mean. . To calculate an average, divide the sum of the values in the set by the number of values in that set.   Example 11: A student earns 75, 86, and 94 on his first three exams. What is the student’s test average? Solution: Add the scores and divide the sum by 3. Answer: The student’s test average is 85.  || Zero and Division Recall the relationship between multiplication and division: In this case, the dividend The numerator of a quotient. 12 is evenly divided by the divisor The denominator of a quotient. 6 to obtain the quotient, 2. It is true in general that if we multiply the divisor by the quotient we obtain the dividend. Now consider the case where the dividend is zero and the divisor is nonzero: This demonstrates that zero divided by any nonzero real number must be zero. Now consider a nonzero number divided by zero: The zero-factor property of multiplication states that any real number times 0 is 0. We conclude that there is no real number such that 0 ⋅ ? = 12 and thus, the quotient is left undefined A quotient such as 5 0 , which is left without meaning and is not assigned an interpretation. . Try 12 ÷ 0 on a calculator. What does it say? For our purposes, we will simply write “undefined.” To summarize, given any real number a ≠ 0 , then We are left to consider the case where the dividend and divisor are both zero. Here any real number seems to work. For example, 0 ⋅ 5 = 0 and 0 ⋅ 3 = 0 . Therefore, the quotient is uncertain or indeterminate A quotient such as 0 0 , which is a quantity that is uncertain or ambiguous. . In this course, we state that 0 ÷ 0 is undefined.  ||  || Reducing A fraction A rational number written as a quotient of two integers: a b , where b is nonzero. is a real number written as a quotient, or ratio Relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. , of two integers a and b, where b ≠ 0 . The integer above the fraction bar is called the numerator The number above the fraction bar. and the integer below is called the denominator The number below the fraction bar. . The numerator is often called the “part” and the denominator is often called the “whole.” Equivalent fractions Two equal fractions expressed using different numerators and denominators. are two equal ratios expressed using different numerators and denominators. For example, Fifty parts out of 100 is the same ratio as 1 part out of 2 and represents the same real number. Consider the following factorizations of 50 and 100: The numbers 50 and 100 share the factor 25. A shared factor is called a common factor A factor that is shared by more than one real number. . We can rewrite the ratio 50 100 as follows: Making use of the multiplicative identity property and the fact that 25 25 = 1 , we have Dividing 25 25 and replacing this factor with a 1 is called canceling The process of dividing out common factors in the numerator and the denominator. . Together, these basic steps for finding equivalent fractions define the process of reducing The process of finding equivalent fractions by dividing the numerator and the denominator by common factors. . Since factors divide their product evenly, we achieve the same result by dividing both the numerator and denominator by 25 as follows: Finding equivalent fractions where the numerator and denominator have no common factor other than 1 is called reducing to lowest terms Finding equivalent fractions where the numerator and the denominator share no common integer factor other than 1. . When learning how to reduce to lowest terms, it is helpful to first rewrite the numerator and denominator as a product of primes and then cancel. For example, We achieve the same result by dividing the numerator and denominator by the greatest common factor (GCF) The largest shared factor of any number of integers. . The GCF is the largest number that divides both the numerator and denominator evenly. One way to find the GCF of 50 and 100 is to list all the factors of each and identify the largest number that appears in both lists. Remember, each number is also a factor of itself. Common factors are listed in bold, and we see that the greatest common factor is 50. We use the following notation to indicate the GCF of two numbers: GCF(50, 100) = 50. After determining the GCF, reduce by dividing both the numerator and the denominator as follows:   Example 1: Reduce to lowest terms: 105 300 . Solution: Rewrite the numerator and denominator as a product of primes and then cancel. Alternatively, we achieve the same result if we divide both the numerator and denominator by the GCF(105, 300). A quick way to find the GCF of the two numbers requires us to first write each as a product of primes. The GCF is the product of all the common prime factors. In this case, the common prime factors are 3 and 5 and the greatest common factor of 105 and 300 is 15. Answer: 7 20   Try this! Reduce to lowest terms: 32 96 . Answer: 1 3 Video Solution An improper fraction A fraction where the numerator is larger than the denominator. is one where the numerator is larger than the denominator. A mixed number A number that represents the sum of a whole number and a fraction. is a number that represents the sum of a whole number and a fraction. For example, 5   1 2 is a mixed number that represents the sum 5 + 1 2 . Use long division to convert an improper fraction to a mixed number; the remainder is the numerator of the fractional part.   Example 2: Write 23 5 as a mixed number. Solution: Notice that 5 divides into 23 four times with a remainder of 3. We then can write Note that the denominator of the fractional part of the mixed number remains the same as the denominator of the original fraction. Answer: 4 3 5   To convert mixed numbers to improper fractions, multiply the whole number by the denominator and then add the numerator; write this result over the original denominator.   Example 3: Write 3 5 7 as an improper fraction. Solution: Obtain the numerator by multiplying 7 times 3 and then add 5. Answer: 26 7   It is important to note that converting to a mixed number is not part of the reducing process. We consider improper fractions, such as 26 7 , to be reduced to lowest terms. In algebra it is often preferable to work with improper fractions, although in some applications, mixed numbers are more appropriate.   Try this! Convert 10 1 2 to an improper fraction. Answer: 21 2 Video Solution  || Multiplying and Dividing Fractions In this section, assume that a, b, c, and d are all nonzero integers. The product of two fractions is the fraction formed by the product of the numerators and the product of the denominators. In other words, to multiply fractions, multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators:   Example 4: Multiply: 2 3 ⋅ 5 7 . Solution: Multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators. Answer: 10 21   Example 5: Multiply: 5 9 ( − 1 4 ) . Solution: Recall that the product of a positive number and a negative number is negative. Answer: − 5 36   Example 6: Multiply: 2 3 ⋅ 5 3 4 . Solution: Begin by converting 5 3 4 to an improper fraction. In this example, we noticed that we could reduce before we multiplied the numerators and the denominators. Reducing in this way is called cross canceling Cancelling common factors in the numerator and the denominator of fractions before multiplying. , and can save time when multiplying fractions. Answer: 3 5 6   Two real numbers whose product is 1 are called reciprocals The reciprocal of a nonzero number n is 1/n. . Therefore, a b and b a are reciprocals because a b ⋅ b a = a b a b = 1 . For example, Because their product is 1, 2 3 and 3 2 are reciprocals. Some other reciprocals are listed below: This definition is important because dividing fractions requires that you multiply the dividend by the reciprocal of the divisor.   Example 7: Divide: 2 3 ÷ 5 7 . Solution: Multiply 2 3 by the reciprocal of 5 7 . Answer: 14 15   You also need to be aware of other forms of notation that indicate division: / and —. For example, Or The latter is an example of a complex fraction A fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. , which is a fraction whose numerator, denominator, or both are fractions. Note Students often ask why dividing is equivalent to multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. A mathematical explanation comes from the fact that the product of reciprocals is 1. If we apply the multiplicative identity property and multiply numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of the denominator, then we obtain the following: Before multiplying, look for common factors to cancel; this eliminates the need to reduce the end result.   Example 8: Divide:   5 2   7 4 . Solution: Answer: 10 7   When dividing by an integer, it is helpful to rewrite it as a fraction over 1.   Example 9: Divide: 2 3 ÷ 6 . Solution: Rewrite 6 as 6 1 and multiply by its reciprocal. Answer: 1 9   Also, note that we only cancel when working with multiplication. Rewrite any division problem as a product before canceling.   Try this! Divide: 5 ÷ 2 3 5 . Answer: 1 12 13 Video Solution  || Adding and Subtracting Fractions Negative fractions are indicated with the negative sign in front of the fraction bar, in the numerator, or in the denominator. All such forms are equivalent and interchangeable. Adding or subtracting fractions requires a common denominator A denominator that is shared by more than one fraction. . In this section, assume the common denominator c is a nonzero integer. It is good practice to use positive common denominators by expressing negative fractions with negative numerators. In short, avoid negative denominators.   Example 10: Subtract: 12 15 − 3 15 . Solution: The two fractions have a common denominator 15. Therefore, subtract the numerators and write the result over the common denominator: Answer: 3 5   Most problems that you are likely to encounter will have unlike denominators Denominators of fractions that are not the same. . In this case, first find equivalent fractions with a common denominator before adding or subtracting the numerators. One way to obtain equivalent fractions is to divide the numerator and the denominator by the same number. We now review a technique for finding equivalent fractions by multiplying the numerator and the denominator by the same number. It should be clear that 5/5 is equal to 1 and that 1 multiplied times any number is that number: We have equivalent fractions 1 2 = 5 10 . Use this idea to find equivalent fractions with a common denominator to add or subtract fractions. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 11: Subtract: 7 15 − 3 10 . Solution: Step 1: Determine a common denominator. To do this, use the least common multiple (LCM) The smallest number that is evenly divisible by a set of numbers. of the given denominators. The LCM of 15 and 10 is indicated by LCM(15, 10). Try to think of the smallest number that both denominators divide into evenly. List the multiples of each number: Common multiples are listed in bold, and the least common multiple is 30. Step 2: Multiply the numerator and the denominator of each fraction by values that result in equivalent fractions with the determined common denominator. Step 3: Add or subtract the numerators, write the result over the common denominator and then reduce if possible. Answer: 1 6   The least common multiple of the denominators is called the least common denominator (LCD) The least common multiple of a set of denominators. . Finding the LCD is often the difficult step. It is worth finding because if any common multiple other than the least is used, then there will be more steps involved when reducing.   Example 12: Add: 5 10 + 1 18 . Solution: First, determine that the LCM(10, 18) is 90 and then find equivalent fractions with 90 as the denominator. Answer: 5 9   Try this! Add: 2 30 + 5 21 . Answer: 32 105 Video Solution   Example 13: Simplify: 2 1 3 + 3 5 − 1 2 . Solution: Begin by converting 2 1 3 to an improper fraction. Answer: 2 13 30   In general, it is preferable to work with improper fractions. However, when the original problem involves mixed numbers, if appropriate, present your answers as mixed numbers. Also, mixed numbers are often preferred when working with numbers on a number line and with real-world applications.   Try this! Subtract: 5 7 − 2 1 7 . Answer: − 1 3 7 Video Solution   Example 14: How many 1 2 inch thick paperback books can be stacked to fit on a shelf that is 1 1 2 feet in height? Solution: First, determine the height of the shelf in inches. To do this, use the fact that there are 12 inches in 1 foot and multiply as follows: Next, determine how many notebooks will fit by dividing the height of the shelf by the thickness of each book. Answer: 36 books can be stacked on the shelf.  ||  || Decimals In this section, we provide a brief review of the decimal system. A real number in decimal form, a decimal A real number expressed using the decimal system. consists of a decimal point, digits (0 through 9) to the left of the decimal point representing the whole number part, and digits to the right of the decimal point representing the fractional part. The digits represent powers of 10 as shown in the set {…, 1,000, 100, 10, 1, 1/10, 1/100, 1/1,000, …} according to the following diagram: For example, the decimal 538.3 can be written in the following expanded form: After simplifying, we obtain the mixed number 538 3 10 . Use this process to convert decimals to mixed numbers.   Example 1: Write as a mixed number: 32.15. Solution: In this example, 32 is the whole part and the decimal ends in the hundredths place. Therefore, the fractional part will be 15/100, and we can write Answer: 32.15 = 32 3 20   To convert fractions to decimal equivalents, divide.   Example 2: Write as a decimal: 3 4 . Solution: Use long division to convert to a decimal. Answer: 3 4 = 0.75   If the division never ends, then use a bar over the repeating digit (or block of digits) to indicate a repeating decimal.   Example 3: Write as a decimal: 2 5 6 . Solution: Use long division to convert the fractional part to a decimal and then add the whole part. At this point, we can see that the long division will continue to repeat. When this is the case, use a bar over the repeating digit to indicate that it continues forever: Then write Answer: 2 5 6 = 2.8 3 ¯   To add or subtract decimals, align them vertically with the decimal point and add corresponding place values. Recall that sometimes you need to borrow from or carry over to the adjoining column (regrouping).   Example 4: Subtract: 54.328 − 23.25 . Solution: Note that trailing zeros to the right of the decimal point do not change the value of the decimal, 23.25 = 23.250. In this case, you need to borrow from the tenths place (regroup) to subtract the digits in the hundredths place. Answer: 31.078   Multiply decimals the same way you multiply whole numbers. The number of decimal places in the product will be the sum of the decimal places found in each of the factors.   Example 5: Multiply: 5.36 × 7.4 . Solution: The total number of decimal places of the two factors is 2 + 1 = 3. Therefore, the result has 3 decimal places. Answer: 39.664   When dividing decimals, move the decimal points of both the dividend and the divisor so that the divisor is a whole number. Remember to move the decimal the same number of places for both the dividend and divisor.   Example 6: Divide: 33.3216 ÷ 6.24 . Solution: Move the decimal point to turn the divisor into a whole number: 624. Move the decimal points of both the divisor and dividend two places to the right. Next, divide. Answer: 5.34   It is often necessary to round off A means of approximating decimals with a specified number of significant digits. decimals to a specified number of decimal places. Rounding off allows us to approximate decimals with fewer significant digits. To do this, look at the digit to the right of the specified place value. If the digit to the right of the specified place is 4 or less, then leave the specified digit unchanged and drop all subsequent digits. If the digit to the right of the specified place is 5 or greater, then increase the value of the digit in the specified place by 1 and drop all subsequent digits. Recall that decimals with trailing zeros to the right of the decimal point can be dropped. For example, round 5.635457 to the nearest thousandth: Round the same number 5.635457 to the nearest hundredth: After rounding off, be sure to use the appropriate notation ( ≈ ) to indicate that the number is now an approximation. When working with US currency, we typically round off to two decimal places, or the nearest hundredth.   Example 7: Calculate and round off to the nearest hundredth. a. 1/3 of $10.25. b. 1/4 of $10.25. Solution: In this context, the key word “of” indicates that we should multiply. a. Multiplying by 1 3 is equivalent to dividing by 3. b. Multiplying by 1 4 is equivalent to dividing by 4. Answers: a. $3.42; b. $2.56  || Definition of Percent A percent A representation of a number as part of 100: N % = N 100 . is a representation of a number as a part of one hundred. The word “percent” can be written “per cent” which means “per 100” or “/100.” We use the symbol ( % ) to denote a percentage: For example, Percents are an important part of our everyday life and show up often in our study of algebra. Percents can be visualized using a pie chart A circular graph divided into sectors whose area is proportional to the relative size of the ratio of the part to the total. (or circle graph), where each sector gives a visual representation of a percentage of the whole. For example, the following pie chart shows the percentage of students in certain age categories of all US community colleges. Source: American Association of Community Colleges. Each sector is proportional to the size of the part out of the whole. The sum of the percentages presented in a pie chart must be 100%. To work with percentages effectively, you have to know how to convert percents to decimals or fractions and back again.  || Percents to Decimals Applying the definition of percent, you see that 58 % = 58 100 = 0.58 . The same result can be obtained by moving the decimal two places to the left. To convert percents to decimals, either apply the definition or move the decimal two places to the left.   Example 8: Convert to a decimal: 152%. Solution: Treat 152 % as  152.0 % and move the decimal two places to the left. Answer: 1.52   Example 9: Convert to a decimal: 2 3 4 % . Solution: First, write the decimal percent equivalent, Next, move the decimal two places to the left, At this point, fill in the tenths place with a zero. Answer: 0.0275   Try this! Convert to a decimal: 215%. Answer: 2.15 Video Solution  || Decimals and Fractions to Percents To convert a decimal to a percent, convert the decimal to a fraction of 100 and apply the definition of percent, or equivalently, move the decimal to the right two places and add a percent sign.   Example 10: Convert 0.23 to a percent. Solution: First, convert the decimal to a fraction of 100 and apply the definition. You can achieve the same result by moving the decimal two places to the right and adding a percent sign. Answer: 23%.   Alternatively, you can multiply by 1 in the form of 100%.   Example 11: Convert 2.35 to a percent. Solution: Recall that 1 = 100%. You can achieve the same result by moving the decimal two places to the right and adding a percent sign. Answer: 235%   Example 12: Convert 5 1 5 to a percent. Solution: Answer: 520%   Sometimes we can use the definition of percent and find an equivalent fraction with a denominator of 100.   Example 13: Convert 13 25 to a percent. Solution: Notice that the denominator 25 is a factor of 100. Use the definition of percent by finding an equivalent fraction with 100 in the denominator. Answer: 52%   This is a very specialized technique because 100 may not be a multiple of the denominator.   Example 14: Convert 1 3 to a percent. Solution: Notice that the denominator 3 is not a factor of 100. In this case, it is best to multiply by 1 in the form of 100%. Answer: 33 1 3 %   Try this! Convert to a percent: 2 3 . Answer: 66 2 3 % Video Solution  || Percents to Fractions When converting percents to fractions, apply the definition of percent and then reduce.   Example 15: Convert to a fraction: 28 % . Solution: Answer: 7 25   Applying the definition of percent is equivalent to removing the percent sign and multiplying by 1 100 .   Example 16: Convert to a fraction: 66 2 3 % . Solution: First, convert to an improper fraction and then apply the definition of percent. Answer: 2 3   Try this! Convert to a fraction: 3 7 31 % . Answer: 1 31 Video Solution   Example 17: Using the given pie chart, calculate the total number of students that were 21 years old or younger if the total US community college enrollment in 2009 was 11.7 million. Solution: From the pie chart we can determine that 47% of the total 11.7 million students were 21 years old or younger. Source: American Association of Community Colleges. Convert 47% to a decimal and multiply as indicated by the key word “of.” Answer: In 2009, approximately 5.5 million students enrolled in US community colleges were 21 years old or younger.  ||  || Exponential Notation and Positive Integer Exponents If a number is repeated as a factor numerous times, then we can write the product in a more compact form using exponential notation The compact notation a x 2 + b x + c = 0. used when a factor is repeated multiple times. . For example, The base The factor a in the exponential notation a n . is the factor, and the positive integer exponent The positive integer n in the exponential notation a n that indicates the number of times the base is used as a factor. indicates the number of times the base is repeated as a factor. In the above example, the base is 5 and the exponent is 4. In general, if a is the base that is repeated as a factor n times, then When the exponent is 2, we call the result a square The result when the exponent of any real number is 2. . For example, The number 3 is the base and the integer 2 is the exponent. The notation 3 2 can be read two ways: “three squared” or “3 raised to the second power.” The base can be any real number. It is important to study the difference between the ways the last two examples are calculated. In the example ( − 7 ) 2 , the base is −7 as indicated by the parentheses. In the example − 5 2 , the base is 5, not −5, so only the 5 is squared and the result remains negative. To illustrate this, write This subtle distinction is very important because it determines the sign of the result. The textual notation for exponents is usually denoted using the caret The symbol ^ that indicates exponents on many calculators, a n = a ^ n . (^) symbol as follows: The square of an integer is called a perfect square The result of squaring an integer. . The ability to recognize perfect squares is useful in our study of algebra. The squares of the integers from 1 to 15 should be memorized. A partial list of perfect squares follows:   Try this! Simplify ( − 12 ) 2 . Answer: 144 Video Solution When the exponent is 3 we call the result a cube The result when the exponent of any real number is 3. . For example, The notation 3 3 can be read two ways: “three cubed” or “3 raised to the third power.” As before, the base can be any real number. Note that the result of cubing a negative number is negative. The cube of an integer is called a perfect cube The result of cubing an integer. . The ability to recognize perfect cubes is useful in our study of algebra. The cubes of the integers from 1 to 10 should be memorized. A partial list of perfect cubes follows:   Try this! Simplify ( − 2 ) 3 . Answer: −8 Video Solution If the exponent is greater than 3, then the notation a n is read “a raised to the nth power.” Notice that the result of a negative base with an even exponent is positive. The result of a negative base with an odd exponent is negative. These facts are often confused when negative numbers are involved. Study the following four examples carefully: The base is (−2) The base is 2 ( − 2 ) 4 = ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) = + 16 ( − 2 ) 3 = ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) = − 8 − 2 4 = − 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = − 16 − 2 3 = − 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = − 8 The parentheses indicate that the negative number is to be used as the base.   Example 1: Calculate: a. ( − 1 3 ) 3 b. ( − 1 3 ) 4 Solution: The base is − 1 3 for both problems. a. Use the base as a factor three times. b. Use the base as a factor four times. Answers: a. − 1 27 ; b. 1 81   Try this! Simplify: − 10 4 and ( − 10 ) 4 . Answers: − 10,000 and 10,000 Video Solution  || Square Root of a Real Number Think of finding the square root The number that, when multiplied by itself, yields the original number. of a number as the inverse of squaring a number. In other words, to determine the square root of 25 the question is, “What number squared equals 25?” Actually, there are two answers to this question, 5 and −5. When asked for the square root of a number, we implicitly mean the principal (nonnegative) square root The non-negative square root. . Therefore we have, As an example, 25 − − √ = 5 , which is read “square root of 25 equals 5.” The symbol √ is called the radical sign The symbol √ used to denote a square root. and 25 is called the radicand The expression a within a radical sign, a √ n . . The alternative textual notation for square roots follows: It is also worthwhile to note that This is the case because 1 2 = 1 and 0 2 = 0 .   Example 2: Simplify: 10,000 − − − − − √ . Solution: 10,000 is a perfect square because 100 ⋅ 100 = 10,000 . Answer: 100   Example 3: Simplify: 1 9 − − √ . Solution: Here we notice that 1 9 is a square because 1 3 ⋅ 1 3 = 1 9 . Answer: 1 3   Given a and b as positive real numbers, use the following property to simplify square roots whose radicands are not squares: The idea is to identify the largest square factor of the radicand and then apply the property shown above. As an example, to simplify 8 √ notice that 8 is not a perfect square. However, 8 = 4 ⋅ 2 and thus has a perfect square factor other than 1. Apply the property as follows: Here 2 2 √ is a simplified irrational number. You are often asked to find an approximate answer rounded off to a certain decimal place. In that case, use a calculator to find the decimal approximation using either the original problem or the simplified equivalent. On a calculator, try 2.83^2. What do you expect? Why is the answer not what you would expect? It is important to mention that the radicand must be positive. For example, − 9 − − − √ is undefined since there is no real number that when squared is negative. Try taking the square root of a negative number on your calculator. What does it say? Note: taking the square root of a negative number is defined later in the course.   Example 4: Simplify and give an approximate answer rounded to the nearest hundredth: 75 − − √ . Solution: The radicand 75 can be factored as 25 ⋅ 3 where the factor 25 is a perfect square. Answer: 75 − − √ ≈ 8.66   As a check, calculate 75 − − √ and 5 3 √ on a calculator and verify that the both results are approximately 8.66.   Example 5: Simplify: 180 − − − √ . Solution: Since the question did not ask for an approximate answer, we present the exact answer. Answer: 6 5 √   Example 5: Simplify: − 5 162 − − − √ . Solution: Answer: − 45 2 √   Try this! Simplify and give an approximate answer rounded to the nearest hundredth: 128 − − − √ . Answer: 8 2 √ ≈ 11.31 Video Solution Figure 1.1 Pythagoras Source: Detail of The School of Athens by Raffaello Sanzio, 1509, from http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sanzio_01_Pythagoras.jpg. A right triangle A triangle with an angle that measures 90°. is a triangle where one of the angles measures 90°. The side opposite the right angle is the longest side, called the hypotenuse The longest side of a right triangle, it will always be the side opposite the right angle. , and the other two sides are called legs The sides of a right triangle that are not the hypotenuse. . Numerous real-world applications involve this geometric figure. The Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . states that given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units, the square of the measure of the hypotenuse c is equal to the sum of the squares of the measures of the legs: a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . In other words, the hypotenuse of any right triangle is equal to the square root of the sum of the squares of its legs.   Example 6: If the two legs of a right triangle measure 3 units and 4 units, then find the length of the hypotenuse. Solution: Given the lengths of the legs of a right triangle, use the formula c = a 2 + b 2 − − − − − − √ to find the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: c = 5 units   When finding the hypotenuse of a right triangle using the Pythagorean theorem, the radicand is not always a perfect square.   Example 7: If the two legs of a right triangle measure 2 units and 6 units, find the length of the hypotenuse. Solution: Answer: c = 2 10 − − √ units  ||  || Grouping Symbols In a computation where more than one operation is involved, grouping symbols help tell us which operations to perform first. The grouping symbols Parentheses, brackets, braces, and the fraction bar are the common symbols used to group expressions and mathematical operations within a computation. commonly used in algebra are All of the above grouping symbols, as well as absolute value, have the same order of precedence. Perform operations inside the innermost grouping symbol or absolute value first.   Example 1: Simplify: 5 − ( 4 − 12 ) . Solution: Perform the operations within the parentheses first. In this case, first subtract 12 from 4. Answer: 13   Example 2: Simplify: 3 { − 2 [ − ( − 3 − 1 ) ] } . Solution: Answer: −24   Example 3: Simplify: 5 − ∣ ∣ 4 − ( − 3 ) ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ − 3 ∣ ∣ − ( 5 − 7 ) . Solution: The fraction bar groups the numerator and denominator. They should be simplified separately. Answer: − 2 5   Try this! Simplify: − [ − 3 ( 2 + 3 ) ] . Answer: 15 Video Solution  || Order of Operations When several operations are to be applied within a calculation, we must follow a specific order To ensure a single correct result, perform mathematical operations in a specific order. to ensure a single correct result. Perform all calculations within the innermost parentheses or grouping symbols. Evaluate all exponents. Perform multiplication and division operations from left to right. Finally, perform all remaining addition and subtraction operations from left to right. Caution: Note that multiplication and division operations must be worked from left to right.   Example 4: Simplify: 5 2 − 4 ⋅ 3 ÷ 12 . Solution: First, evaluate 5 2 and then perform multiplication and division as they appear from left to right. Answer: 24   Because multiplication and division operations should be worked from left to right, it is sometimes correct to perform division before multiplication.   Example 5: Simplify: 2 4 − 12 ÷ 3 ⋅ 2 + 11 . Solution: Begin by evaluating the exponent, 2 4 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = 16 . Multiplying first leads to an incorrect result. Answer: 19   Example 6: Simplify: − 3 − 5 2 + ( − 7 ) 2 . Solution: Take care to correctly identify the base when squaring. Answer: 21   Example 7: Simplify: 5 − 3 [ 2 3 − 5 + 7 ( − 3 ) ] . Solution: It is tempting to first subtract 5 − 3, but this will lead to an incorrect result. The order of operations requires us to simplify within the brackets first. Subtracting 5 − 3 first leads to an incorrect result. Answer: 59   Example 8: Simplify: − 3 2 − [ 5 − ( 4 2 − 10 ) ] . Solution: Perform the operations within the innermost parentheses first. Answer: −8   Example 9: Simplify: ( − 2 3 ) 2 ÷ [ 5 3 − ( − 1 2 ) 3 ] . Solution: Answer: 32 129   We are less likely to make a mistake if we work one operation at a time. Some problems may involve an absolute value, in which case we assign it the same order of precedence as parentheses.   Example 10: Simplify: 2 − 4 | − 4 − 3 | + ( − 2 ) 4 . Solution: We begin by evaluating the absolute value and then the exponent ( − 2 ) 4 = ( − 2 ) ( − 2 ) ( − 2 ) ( − 2 ) = + 16 . Answer: −10   Try this! Simplify: 10 ÷ 5 ⋅ 2 | ( − 4 ) + | − 3 | | + ( − 3 ) 2 . Answer: 13 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter1_1	 || Definitions A set Any collection of objects. is a collection of objects, typically grouped within braces { }, where each object is called an element An object within a set. . For example, {red, green, blue} is a set of colors. A subset A set consisting of elements that belong to a given set. is a set consisting of elements that belong to a given set. For example, {green, blue} is a subset of the color set above. A set with no elements is called the empty set A subset with no elements, denoted ∅ or { }. and has its own special notation, { } or ∅. When studying mathematics, we focus on special sets of numbers. The set of natural (or counting) numbers The set of counting numbers {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, …}. , denoted N, is The three periods (…) is called an ellipsis and indicates that the numbers continue without bound. The set of whole numbers The set of natural numbers combined with zero {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, …}. , denoted W , is the set of natural numbers combined with zero. The set of integers The set of positive and negative whole numbers combined with zero {…, −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, …}. , denoted Z, consists of both positive and negative whole numbers, as well as zero. Notice that the sets of natural and whole numbers are both subsets of the set of integers. Rational numbers Numbers of the form a b , where a and b are integers and b is nonzero. , denoted Q, are defined as any number of the form a b , where a and b are integers and b is nonzero. Decimals that repeat or terminate are rational. For example, The set of integers is a subset of the set of rational numbers because every integer can be expressed as a ratio of the integer and 1. In other words, any integer can be written over 1 and can be considered a rational number. For example, Irrational numbers Numbers that cannot be written as a ratio of two integers. are defined as any number that cannot be written as a ratio of two integers. Nonterminating decimals that do not repeat are irrational. For example, The set of real numbers The set of all rational and irrational numbers. , denoted R, is defined as the set of all rational numbers combined with the set of all irrational numbers. Therefore, all the numbers defined so far are subsets of the set of real numbers. In summary,  || Number Line A real number line A line that allows us to visually represent real numbers by associating them with points on the line. , or simply number line, allows us to visually display real numbers by associating them with unique points on a line. The real number associated with a point is called a coordinate The real number associated with a point on a number line. . A point on the real number line that is associated with a coordinate is called its graph A point on the number line associated with a coordinate. . To construct a number line, draw a horizontal line with arrows on both ends to indicate that it continues without bound. Next, choose any point to represent the number zero; this point is called the origin The point on the number line that represtents zero. . Mark off consistent lengths on both sides of the origin and label each tick mark to define the scale. Positive real numbers lie to the right of the origin and negative real numbers lie to the left. The number zero (0) is neither positive nor negative. Typically, each tick represents one unit. As illustrated below, the scale need not always be one unit. In the first number line, each tick mark represents two units. In the second, each tick mark represents 1 7 . The graph of each real number is shown as a dot at the appropriate point on the number line. A partial graph of the set of integers Z follows:   Example 1: Graph the following set of real numbers: { − 1 ,   − 1 3 ,   0 ,   5 3 } . Solution: Graph the numbers on a number line with a scale where each tick mark represents 1 3 unit.  || Ordering Real Numbers When comparing real numbers on a number line, the larger number will always lie to the right of the smaller one. It is clear that 15 is greater than 5, but it may not be so clear to see that −1 is greater than −5 until we graph each number on a number line. We use symbols to help us efficiently communicate relationships between numbers on the number line. The symbols used to describe an equality relationship Express equality with the symbol =. If two quantities are not equal, use the symbol ≠ . between numbers follow: These symbols are used and interpreted in the following manner: We next define symbols that denote an order relationship between real numbers. These symbols allow us to compare two numbers. For example, Since the graph of −120 is to the left of the graph of –10 on the number line, that number is less than −10. We could write an equivalent statement as follows: Similarly, since the graph of zero is to the right of the graph of any negative number on the number line, zero is greater than any negative number. The symbols < and > are used to denote strict inequalities Express ordering relationships using the symbol < for “less than” and > for “greater than.” , and the symbols ≤ and ≥ are used to denote inclusive inequalities Use the symbol ≤ to express quantities that are “less than or equal to” and ≥ for quantities that are “greater than or equal to” each other. . In some situations, more than one symbol can be correctly applied. For example, the following two statements are both true: In addition, the “or equal to” component of an inclusive inequality allows us to correctly write the following: The logical use of the word “or” requires that only one of the conditions need be true: the “less than” or the “equal to.”   Example 2: Fill in the blank with <, =, or >: −2 ____ −12. Solution: Use > because the graph of −2 is to the right of the graph of −12 on a number line. Therefore, −2 > −12, which reads “negative two is greater than negative twelve.” Answer: −2 > −12   In this text, we will often point out the equivalent notation used to express mathematical quantities electronically using the standard symbols available on a keyboard. We begin with the equivalent textual notation for inequalities: Many calculators, computer algebra systems, and programming languages use this notation.  || Opposites The opposite Real numbers whose graphs are on opposite sides of the origin with the same distance to the origin. of any real number a is −a. Opposite real numbers are the same distance from the origin on a number line, but their graphs lie on opposite sides of the origin and the numbers have opposite signs. For example, we say that the opposite of 10 is −10. Next, consider the opposite of a negative number. Given the integer −7, the integer the same distance from the origin and with the opposite sign is +7, or just 7. Therefore, we say that the opposite of −7 is −(−7) = 7. This idea leads to what is often referred to as the double-negative property The opposite of a negative number is positive: −(−a) = a. . For any real number a,   Example 3: What is the opposite of − 3 4 ? Solution: Here we apply the double-negative property. Answer: 3 4   Example 4: Simplify: − ( − ( 4 ) ) . Solution: Start with the innermost parentheses by finding the opposite of +4. Answer: 4   Example 5: Simplify: − ( − ( − 2 ) ) . Solution: Apply the double-negative property starting with the innermost parentheses. Answer: −2 Tip If there is an even number of consecutive negative signs, then the result is positive. If there is an odd number of consecutive negative signs, then the result is negative.   Try this! Simplify: − ( − ( − ( 5 ) ) ) . Answer: −5 Video Solution  || Absolute Value The absolute value The absolute value of a number is the distance from the graph of the number to zero on a number line. of a real number a, denoted | a | , is defined as the distance between zero (the origin) and the graph of that real number on the number line. Since it is a distance, it is always positive. For example, Both 4 and −4 are four units from the origin, as illustrated below:   Example 6: Simplify: a. | − 12 | b. | 12 | Solution: Both −12 and 12 are twelve units from the origin on a number line. Therefore, Answers: a. 12; b. 12   Also, it is worth noting that The absolute value can be expressed textually using the notation abs(a). We often encounter negative absolute values, such as − | 3 | or −abs(3). Notice that the negative sign is in front of the absolute value symbol. In this case, work the absolute value first and then find the opposite of the result. Try not to confuse this with the double-negative property, which states that − ( − 7 ) = + 7 .   Example 7: Simplify: − | − ( − 7 ) | . Solution: First, find the opposite of −7 inside the absolute value. Then find the opposite of the result. Answer: −7   At this point, we can determine what real numbers have a particular absolute value. For example, Think of a real number whose distance to the origin is 5 units. There are two solutions: the distance to the right of the origin and the distance to the left of the origin, namely, { ± 5 } . The symbol (±) is read “plus or minus” and indicates that there are two answers, one positive and one negative. Now consider the following: Here we wish to find a value for which the distance to the origin is negative. Since negative distance is not defined, this equation has no solution. If an equation has no solution, we say the solution is the empty set: Ø.  || 
book2_chapter1_1_1	Definitions A set Any collection of objects. is a collection of objects, typically grouped within braces { }, where each object is called an element An object within a set. . For example, {red, green, blue} is a set of colors. A subset A set consisting of elements that belong to a given set. is a set consisting of elements that belong to a given set. For example, {green, blue} is a subset of the color set above. A set with no elements is called the empty set A subset with no elements, denoted ∅ or { }. and has its own special notation, { } or ∅. When studying mathematics, we focus on special sets of numbers. The set of natural (or counting) numbers The set of counting numbers {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, …}. , denoted N, is The three periods (…) is called an ellipsis and indicates that the numbers continue without bound. The set of whole numbers The set of natural numbers combined with zero {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, …}. , denoted W , is the set of natural numbers combined with zero. The set of integers The set of positive and negative whole numbers combined with zero {…, −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, …}. , denoted Z, consists of both positive and negative whole numbers, as well as zero. Notice that the sets of natural and whole numbers are both subsets of the set of integers. Rational numbers Numbers of the form a b , where a and b are integers and b is nonzero. , denoted Q, are defined as any number of the form a b , where a and b are integers and b is nonzero. Decimals that repeat or terminate are rational. For example, The set of integers is a subset of the set of rational numbers because every integer can be expressed as a ratio of the integer and 1. In other words, any integer can be written over 1 and can be considered a rational number. For example, Irrational numbers Numbers that cannot be written as a ratio of two integers. are defined as any number that cannot be written as a ratio of two integers. Nonterminating decimals that do not repeat are irrational. For example, The set of real numbers The set of all rational and irrational numbers. , denoted R, is defined as the set of all rational numbers combined with the set of all irrational numbers. Therefore, all the numbers defined so far are subsets of the set of real numbers. In summary, Definitions A set Any collection of objects. is a collection of objects, typically grouped within braces { }, where each object is called an element An object within a set. . For example, {red, green, blue} is a set of colors. A subset A set consisting of elements that belong to a given set. is a set consisting of elements that belong to a given set. For example, {green, blue} is a subset of the color set above. A set with no elements is called the empty set A subset with no elements, denoted ∅ or { }. and has its own special notation, { } or ∅. When studying mathematics, we focus on special sets of numbers. The set of natural (or counting) numbers The set of counting numbers {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, …}. , denoted N, is The three periods (…) is called an ellipsis and indicates that the numbers continue without bound. The set of whole numbers The set of natural numbers combined with zero {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, …}. , denoted W , is the set of natural numbers combined with zero. The set of integers The set of positive and negative whole numbers combined with zero {…, −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, …}. , denoted Z, consists of both positive and negative whole numbers, as well as zero. Notice that the sets of natural and whole numbers are both subsets of the set of integers. Rational numbers Numbers of the form a b , where a and b are integers and b is nonzero. , denoted Q, are defined as any number of the form a b , where a and b are integers and b is nonzero. Decimals that repeat or terminate are rational. For example, The set of integers is a subset of the set of rational numbers because every integer can be expressed as a ratio of the integer and 1. In other words, any integer can be written over 1 and can be considered a rational number. For example, Irrational numbers Numbers that cannot be written as a ratio of two integers. are defined as any number that cannot be written as a ratio of two integers. Nonterminating decimals that do not repeat are irrational. For example, The set of real numbers The set of all rational and irrational numbers. , denoted R, is defined as the set of all rational numbers combined with the set of all irrational numbers. Therefore, all the numbers defined so far are subsets of the set of real numbers. In summary,  || 
book2_chapter1_1_2	Number Line A real number line A line that allows us to visually represent real numbers by associating them with points on the line. , or simply number line, allows us to visually display real numbers by associating them with unique points on a line. The real number associated with a point is called a coordinate The real number associated with a point on a number line. . A point on the real number line that is associated with a coordinate is called its graph A point on the number line associated with a coordinate. . To construct a number line, draw a horizontal line with arrows on both ends to indicate that it continues without bound. Next, choose any point to represent the number zero; this point is called the origin The point on the number line that represtents zero. . Mark off consistent lengths on both sides of the origin and label each tick mark to define the scale. Positive real numbers lie to the right of the origin and negative real numbers lie to the left. The number zero (0) is neither positive nor negative. Typically, each tick represents one unit. As illustrated below, the scale need not always be one unit. In the first number line, each tick mark represents two units. In the second, each tick mark represents 1 7 . The graph of each real number is shown as a dot at the appropriate point on the number line. A partial graph of the set of integers Z follows:   Example 1: Graph the following set of real numbers: { − 1 ,   − 1 3 ,   0 ,   5 3 } . Solution: Graph the numbers on a number line with a scale where each tick mark represents 1 3 unit. Number Line A real number line A line that allows us to visually represent real numbers by associating them with points on the line. , or simply number line, allows us to visually display real numbers by associating them with unique points on a line. The real number associated with a point is called a coordinate The real number associated with a point on a number line. . A point on the real number line that is associated with a coordinate is called its graph A point on the number line associated with a coordinate. . To construct a number line, draw a horizontal line with arrows on both ends to indicate that it continues without bound. Next, choose any point to represent the number zero; this point is called the origin The point on the number line that represtents zero. . Mark off consistent lengths on both sides of the origin and label each tick mark to define the scale. Positive real numbers lie to the right of the origin and negative real numbers lie to the left. The number zero (0) is neither positive nor negative. Typically, each tick represents one unit. As illustrated below, the scale need not always be one unit. In the first number line, each tick mark represents two units. In the second, each tick mark represents 1 7 . The graph of each real number is shown as a dot at the appropriate point on the number line. A partial graph of the set of integers Z follows:   Example 1: Graph the following set of real numbers: { − 1 ,   − 1 3 ,   0 ,   5 3 } . Solution: Graph the numbers on a number line with a scale where each tick mark represents 1 3 unit.  || 
book2_chapter1_1_3	Ordering Real Numbers When comparing real numbers on a number line, the larger number will always lie to the right of the smaller one. It is clear that 15 is greater than 5, but it may not be so clear to see that −1 is greater than −5 until we graph each number on a number line. We use symbols to help us efficiently communicate relationships between numbers on the number line. The symbols used to describe an equality relationship Express equality with the symbol =. If two quantities are not equal, use the symbol ≠ . between numbers follow: These symbols are used and interpreted in the following manner: We next define symbols that denote an order relationship between real numbers. These symbols allow us to compare two numbers. For example, Since the graph of −120 is to the left of the graph of –10 on the number line, that number is less than −10. We could write an equivalent statement as follows: Similarly, since the graph of zero is to the right of the graph of any negative number on the number line, zero is greater than any negative number. The symbols < and > are used to denote strict inequalities Express ordering relationships using the symbol < for “less than” and > for “greater than.” , and the symbols ≤ and ≥ are used to denote inclusive inequalities Use the symbol ≤ to express quantities that are “less than or equal to” and ≥ for quantities that are “greater than or equal to” each other. . In some situations, more than one symbol can be correctly applied. For example, the following two statements are both true: In addition, the “or equal to” component of an inclusive inequality allows us to correctly write the following: The logical use of the word “or” requires that only one of the conditions need be true: the “less than” or the “equal to.”   Example 2: Fill in the blank with <, =, or >: −2 ____ −12. Solution: Use > because the graph of −2 is to the right of the graph of −12 on a number line. Therefore, −2 > −12, which reads “negative two is greater than negative twelve.” Answer: −2 > −12   In this text, we will often point out the equivalent notation used to express mathematical quantities electronically using the standard symbols available on a keyboard. We begin with the equivalent textual notation for inequalities: Many calculators, computer algebra systems, and programming languages use this notation. Ordering Real Numbers When comparing real numbers on a number line, the larger number will always lie to the right of the smaller one. It is clear that 15 is greater than 5, but it may not be so clear to see that −1 is greater than −5 until we graph each number on a number line. We use symbols to help us efficiently communicate relationships between numbers on the number line. The symbols used to describe an equality relationship Express equality with the symbol =. If two quantities are not equal, use the symbol ≠ . between numbers follow: These symbols are used and interpreted in the following manner: We next define symbols that denote an order relationship between real numbers. These symbols allow us to compare two numbers. For example, Since the graph of −120 is to the left of the graph of –10 on the number line, that number is less than −10. We could write an equivalent statement as follows: Similarly, since the graph of zero is to the right of the graph of any negative number on the number line, zero is greater than any negative number. The symbols < and > are used to denote strict inequalities Express ordering relationships using the symbol < for “less than” and > for “greater than.” , and the symbols ≤ and ≥ are used to denote inclusive inequalities Use the symbol ≤ to express quantities that are “less than or equal to” and ≥ for quantities that are “greater than or equal to” each other. . In some situations, more than one symbol can be correctly applied. For example, the following two statements are both true: In addition, the “or equal to” component of an inclusive inequality allows us to correctly write the following: The logical use of the word “or” requires that only one of the conditions need be true: the “less than” or the “equal to.”   Example 2: Fill in the blank with <, =, or >: −2 ____ −12. Solution: Use > because the graph of −2 is to the right of the graph of −12 on a number line. Therefore, −2 > −12, which reads “negative two is greater than negative twelve.” Answer: −2 > −12   In this text, we will often point out the equivalent notation used to express mathematical quantities electronically using the standard symbols available on a keyboard. We begin with the equivalent textual notation for inequalities: Many calculators, computer algebra systems, and programming languages use this notation.  || 
book2_chapter1_1_4	Opposites The opposite Real numbers whose graphs are on opposite sides of the origin with the same distance to the origin. of any real number a is −a. Opposite real numbers are the same distance from the origin on a number line, but their graphs lie on opposite sides of the origin and the numbers have opposite signs. For example, we say that the opposite of 10 is −10. Next, consider the opposite of a negative number. Given the integer −7, the integer the same distance from the origin and with the opposite sign is +7, or just 7. Therefore, we say that the opposite of −7 is −(−7) = 7. This idea leads to what is often referred to as the double-negative property The opposite of a negative number is positive: −(−a) = a. . For any real number a,   Example 3: What is the opposite of − 3 4 ? Solution: Here we apply the double-negative property. Answer: 3 4   Example 4: Simplify: − ( − ( 4 ) ) . Solution: Start with the innermost parentheses by finding the opposite of +4. Answer: 4   Example 5: Simplify: − ( − ( − 2 ) ) . Solution: Apply the double-negative property starting with the innermost parentheses. Answer: −2 Tip If there is an even number of consecutive negative signs, then the result is positive. If there is an odd number of consecutive negative signs, then the result is negative.   Try this! Simplify: − ( − ( − ( 5 ) ) ) . Answer: −5 Video Solution Opposites The opposite Real numbers whose graphs are on opposite sides of the origin with the same distance to the origin. of any real number a is −a. Opposite real numbers are the same distance from the origin on a number line, but their graphs lie on opposite sides of the origin and the numbers have opposite signs. For example, we say that the opposite of 10 is −10. Next, consider the opposite of a negative number. Given the integer −7, the integer the same distance from the origin and with the opposite sign is +7, or just 7. Therefore, we say that the opposite of −7 is −(−7) = 7. This idea leads to what is often referred to as the double-negative property The opposite of a negative number is positive: −(−a) = a. . For any real number a,   Example 3: What is the opposite of − 3 4 ? Solution: Here we apply the double-negative property. Answer: 3 4   Example 4: Simplify: − ( − ( 4 ) ) . Solution: Start with the innermost parentheses by finding the opposite of +4. Answer: 4   Example 5: Simplify: − ( − ( − 2 ) ) . Solution: Apply the double-negative property starting with the innermost parentheses. Answer: −2 Tip If there is an even number of consecutive negative signs, then the result is positive. If there is an odd number of consecutive negative signs, then the result is negative.   Try this! Simplify: − ( − ( − ( 5 ) ) ) . Answer: −5 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter1_1_5	Absolute Value The absolute value The absolute value of a number is the distance from the graph of the number to zero on a number line. of a real number a, denoted | a | , is defined as the distance between zero (the origin) and the graph of that real number on the number line. Since it is a distance, it is always positive. For example, Both 4 and −4 are four units from the origin, as illustrated below:   Example 6: Simplify: a. | − 12 | b. | 12 | Solution: Both −12 and 12 are twelve units from the origin on a number line. Therefore, Answers: a. 12; b. 12   Also, it is worth noting that The absolute value can be expressed textually using the notation abs(a). We often encounter negative absolute values, such as − | 3 | or −abs(3). Notice that the negative sign is in front of the absolute value symbol. In this case, work the absolute value first and then find the opposite of the result. Try not to confuse this with the double-negative property, which states that − ( − 7 ) = + 7 .   Example 7: Simplify: − | − ( − 7 ) | . Solution: First, find the opposite of −7 inside the absolute value. Then find the opposite of the result. Answer: −7   At this point, we can determine what real numbers have a particular absolute value. For example, Think of a real number whose distance to the origin is 5 units. There are two solutions: the distance to the right of the origin and the distance to the left of the origin, namely, { ± 5 } . The symbol (±) is read “plus or minus” and indicates that there are two answers, one positive and one negative. Now consider the following: Here we wish to find a value for which the distance to the origin is negative. Since negative distance is not defined, this equation has no solution. If an equation has no solution, we say the solution is the empty set: Ø. Absolute Value The absolute value The absolute value of a number is the distance from the graph of the number to zero on a number line. of a real number a, denoted | a | , is defined as the distance between zero (the origin) and the graph of that real number on the number line. Since it is a distance, it is always positive. For example, Both 4 and −4 are four units from the origin, as illustrated below:   Example 6: Simplify: a. | − 12 | b. | 12 | Solution: Both −12 and 12 are twelve units from the origin on a number line. Therefore, Answers: a. 12; b. 12   Also, it is worth noting that The absolute value can be expressed textually using the notation abs(a). We often encounter negative absolute values, such as − | 3 | or −abs(3). Notice that the negative sign is in front of the absolute value symbol. In this case, work the absolute value first and then find the opposite of the result. Try not to confuse this with the double-negative property, which states that − ( − 7 ) = + 7 .   Example 7: Simplify: − | − ( − 7 ) | . Solution: First, find the opposite of −7 inside the absolute value. Then find the opposite of the result. Answer: −7   At this point, we can determine what real numbers have a particular absolute value. For example, Think of a real number whose distance to the origin is 5 units. There are two solutions: the distance to the right of the origin and the distance to the left of the origin, namely, { ± 5 } . The symbol (±) is read “plus or minus” and indicates that there are two answers, one positive and one negative. Now consider the following: Here we wish to find a value for which the distance to the origin is negative. Since negative distance is not defined, this equation has no solution. If an equation has no solution, we say the solution is the empty set: Ø.  || 
book2_chapter1_2	 || Addition and Subtraction (+, −) Visualize adding 3 + 2 on the number line by moving from zero three units to the right then another two units to the right, as illustrated below: The illustration shows that 3 + 2 = 5. Similarly, visualize adding two negative numbers (−3) + (−2) by first moving from the origin three units to the left and then moving another two units to the left. In this example, the illustration shows (−3) + (−2) = −5, which leads to the following two properties of real numbers. Next, we will explore addition of numbers with unlike signs. To add 3 + (−7), first move from the origin three units to the right, then move seven units to the left as shown: In this case, we can see that adding a negative number is equivalent to subtraction: It is tempting to say that a positive number plus a negative number is negative, but that is not always true: 7 + ( − 3 ) = 7 − 3 = 4 . The result of adding numbers with unlike signs may be positive or negative. The sign of the result is the same as the sign of the number with the greatest distance from the origin. For example, the following results depend on the sign of the number 12 because it is farther from zero than 5:   Example 1: Simplify: 14 + ( − 25 ) . Solution: Here −25 is the greater distance from the origin. Therefore, the result is negative. Answer: −11   Given any real numbers a, b, and c, we have the following properties of addition: Additive identity property Given any real number a, a + 0 = 0 + a = a   . : a + 0 = 0 + a = a Additive inverse property Given any real number a, a + ( − a ) = ( − a ) + a = 0 . : a + ( − a ) = ( − a ) + a = 0 Associative property Given real numbers a, b and c, ( a + b ) + c = a + ( b + c ) . : ( a + b ) + c = a + ( b + c ) Commutative property Given real numbers a and b, a + b = b + a . : a + b = b + a   Example 2: Simplify: a. 5 + 0 b. 10 + ( − 10 ) Solution: a. Adding zero to any real number results in the same real number. b. Adding opposites results in zero. Answers: a. 5; b. 0   Example 3: Simplify: a. ( 3 + 7 ) + 4 b. 3 + ( 7 + 4 ) Solution: Parentheses group the operations that are to be performed first. a. b. These two examples both result in 14: changing the grouping of the numbers does not change the result. Answers: a. 14; b. 14   At this point, we highlight the fact that addition is commutative: the order in which we add does not matter and yields the same result. On the other hand, subtraction is not commutative. We will use these properties, along with the double-negative property for real numbers, to perform more involved sequential operations. To simplify things, we will make it a general rule to first replace all sequential operations with either addition or subtraction and then perform each operation in order from left to right.   Example 4: Simplify: 4 − ( − 10 ) + ( − 5 ) . Solution: Replace the sequential operations and then perform them from left to right. Answer: 9   Example 5: Simplify: − 3 + ( − 8 ) − ( − 7 ) . Solution: Answer: −4   Try this! Simplify: 12 − ( − 9 ) + ( − 6 ) . Answer: 15 Video Solution Often we find the need to translate English sentences involving addition and subtraction to mathematical statements. Listed below are some key words that translate to the given operation. Key Words Operation Sum, increased by, more than, plus, added to, total + Difference, decreased by, subtracted from, less, minus −   Example 6: What is the difference of 7 and −3? Solution: The key word “difference” implies that we should subtract the numbers. Answer: The difference of 7 and −3 is 10.   Example 7: What is the sum of the first five positive integers? Solution: The initial key word to focus on is “sum”; this means that we will be adding the five numbers. The first five positive integers are {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Recall that 0 is neither positive nor negative. Answer: The sum of the first five positive integers is 15.   Example 8: What is 10 subtracted from the sum of 8 and 6? Solution: We know that subtraction is not commutative; therefore, we must take care to subtract in the correct order. First, add 8 and 6 and then subtract 10 as follows: It is important to notice that the phrase “10 subtracted from” does not translate to a mathematical statement in the order it appears. In other words, 10 − ( 8 + 6 ) would be an incorrect translation and leads to an incorrect answer. After translating the sentence, perform the operations. Answer: Ten subtracted from the sum of 8 and 6 is 4.  || Distance on a Number Line One application of the absolute value is to find the distance between any two points on a number line. For real numbers a and b, the distance formula for a number line The distance between any two real numbers a and b on a number line can be calculated using the formula d = | b − a | . is given as,   Example 9: Determine the distance between 2 and 7 on a number line. Solution: On the graph we see that the distance between the two given integers is 5 units. Using the distance formula we obtain the same result. Answer: 5 units   Example 10: Determine the distance between −4 and 7 on a number line. Solution: Use the distance formula for a number line d = | b − a | , where a = − 4 and b = 7 . Answer: 11 units   It turns out that it does not matter which points are used for a and b; the absolute value always ensures a positive result. Using a = −4 and b = 7 Using a = 7 and b = −4 d = | 7 − ( − 4 ) | = | 7 + 4 | = | 11 | = 11 d = | − 4 − 7 | = | − 11 | = 11   Try this! Determine the distance between −12 and −9 on the number line. Answer: 3 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter1_2_1	Addition and Subtraction (+, −) Visualize adding 3 + 2 on the number line by moving from zero three units to the right then another two units to the right, as illustrated below: The illustration shows that 3 + 2 = 5. Similarly, visualize adding two negative numbers (−3) + (−2) by first moving from the origin three units to the left and then moving another two units to the left. In this example, the illustration shows (−3) + (−2) = −5, which leads to the following two properties of real numbers. Next, we will explore addition of numbers with unlike signs. To add 3 + (−7), first move from the origin three units to the right, then move seven units to the left as shown: In this case, we can see that adding a negative number is equivalent to subtraction: It is tempting to say that a positive number plus a negative number is negative, but that is not always true: 7 + ( − 3 ) = 7 − 3 = 4 . The result of adding numbers with unlike signs may be positive or negative. The sign of the result is the same as the sign of the number with the greatest distance from the origin. For example, the following results depend on the sign of the number 12 because it is farther from zero than 5:   Example 1: Simplify: 14 + ( − 25 ) . Solution: Here −25 is the greater distance from the origin. Therefore, the result is negative. Answer: −11   Given any real numbers a, b, and c, we have the following properties of addition: Additive identity property Given any real number a, a + 0 = 0 + a = a   . : a + 0 = 0 + a = a Additive inverse property Given any real number a, a + ( − a ) = ( − a ) + a = 0 . : a + ( − a ) = ( − a ) + a = 0 Associative property Given real numbers a, b and c, ( a + b ) + c = a + ( b + c ) . : ( a + b ) + c = a + ( b + c ) Commutative property Given real numbers a and b, a + b = b + a . : a + b = b + a   Example 2: Simplify: a. 5 + 0 b. 10 + ( − 10 ) Solution: a. Adding zero to any real number results in the same real number. b. Adding opposites results in zero. Answers: a. 5; b. 0   Example 3: Simplify: a. ( 3 + 7 ) + 4 b. 3 + ( 7 + 4 ) Solution: Parentheses group the operations that are to be performed first. a. b. These two examples both result in 14: changing the grouping of the numbers does not change the result. Answers: a. 14; b. 14   At this point, we highlight the fact that addition is commutative: the order in which we add does not matter and yields the same result. On the other hand, subtraction is not commutative. We will use these properties, along with the double-negative property for real numbers, to perform more involved sequential operations. To simplify things, we will make it a general rule to first replace all sequential operations with either addition or subtraction and then perform each operation in order from left to right.   Example 4: Simplify: 4 − ( − 10 ) + ( − 5 ) . Solution: Replace the sequential operations and then perform them from left to right. Answer: 9   Example 5: Simplify: − 3 + ( − 8 ) − ( − 7 ) . Solution: Answer: −4   Try this! Simplify: 12 − ( − 9 ) + ( − 6 ) . Answer: 15 Video Solution Often we find the need to translate English sentences involving addition and subtraction to mathematical statements. Listed below are some key words that translate to the given operation. Key Words Operation Sum, increased by, more than, plus, added to, total + Difference, decreased by, subtracted from, less, minus −   Example 6: What is the difference of 7 and −3? Solution: The key word “difference” implies that we should subtract the numbers. Answer: The difference of 7 and −3 is 10.   Example 7: What is the sum of the first five positive integers? Solution: The initial key word to focus on is “sum”; this means that we will be adding the five numbers. The first five positive integers are {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Recall that 0 is neither positive nor negative. Answer: The sum of the first five positive integers is 15.   Example 8: What is 10 subtracted from the sum of 8 and 6? Solution: We know that subtraction is not commutative; therefore, we must take care to subtract in the correct order. First, add 8 and 6 and then subtract 10 as follows: It is important to notice that the phrase “10 subtracted from” does not translate to a mathematical statement in the order it appears. In other words, 10 − ( 8 + 6 ) would be an incorrect translation and leads to an incorrect answer. After translating the sentence, perform the operations. Answer: Ten subtracted from the sum of 8 and 6 is 4. Addition and Subtraction (+, −) Visualize adding 3 + 2 on the number line by moving from zero three units to the right then another two units to the right, as illustrated below: The illustration shows that 3 + 2 = 5. Similarly, visualize adding two negative numbers (−3) + (−2) by first moving from the origin three units to the left and then moving another two units to the left. In this example, the illustration shows (−3) + (−2) = −5, which leads to the following two properties of real numbers. Next, we will explore addition of numbers with unlike signs. To add 3 + (−7), first move from the origin three units to the right, then move seven units to the left as shown: In this case, we can see that adding a negative number is equivalent to subtraction: It is tempting to say that a positive number plus a negative number is negative, but that is not always true: 7 + ( − 3 ) = 7 − 3 = 4 . The result of adding numbers with unlike signs may be positive or negative. The sign of the result is the same as the sign of the number with the greatest distance from the origin. For example, the following results depend on the sign of the number 12 because it is farther from zero than 5:   Example 1: Simplify: 14 + ( − 25 ) . Solution: Here −25 is the greater distance from the origin. Therefore, the result is negative. Answer: −11   Given any real numbers a, b, and c, we have the following properties of addition: Additive identity property Given any real number a, a + 0 = 0 + a = a   . : a + 0 = 0 + a = a Additive inverse property Given any real number a, a + ( − a ) = ( − a ) + a = 0 . : a + ( − a ) = ( − a ) + a = 0 Associative property Given real numbers a, b and c, ( a + b ) + c = a + ( b + c ) . : ( a + b ) + c = a + ( b + c ) Commutative property Given real numbers a and b, a + b = b + a . : a + b = b + a   Example 2: Simplify: a. 5 + 0 b. 10 + ( − 10 ) Solution: a. Adding zero to any real number results in the same real number. b. Adding opposites results in zero. Answers: a. 5; b. 0   Example 3: Simplify: a. ( 3 + 7 ) + 4 b. 3 + ( 7 + 4 ) Solution: Parentheses group the operations that are to be performed first. a. b. These two examples both result in 14: changing the grouping of the numbers does not change the result. Answers: a. 14; b. 14   At this point, we highlight the fact that addition is commutative: the order in which we add does not matter and yields the same result. On the other hand, subtraction is not commutative. We will use these properties, along with the double-negative property for real numbers, to perform more involved sequential operations. To simplify things, we will make it a general rule to first replace all sequential operations with either addition or subtraction and then perform each operation in order from left to right.   Example 4: Simplify: 4 − ( − 10 ) + ( − 5 ) . Solution: Replace the sequential operations and then perform them from left to right. Answer: 9   Example 5: Simplify: − 3 + ( − 8 ) − ( − 7 ) . Solution: Answer: −4   Try this! Simplify: 12 − ( − 9 ) + ( − 6 ) . Answer: 15 Video Solution Often we find the need to translate English sentences involving addition and subtraction to mathematical statements. Listed below are some key words that translate to the given operation. Key Words Operation Sum, increased by, more than, plus, added to, total + Difference, decreased by, subtracted from, less, minus −   Example 6: What is the difference of 7 and −3? Solution: The key word “difference” implies that we should subtract the numbers. Answer: The difference of 7 and −3 is 10.   Example 7: What is the sum of the first five positive integers? Solution: The initial key word to focus on is “sum”; this means that we will be adding the five numbers. The first five positive integers are {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Recall that 0 is neither positive nor negative. Answer: The sum of the first five positive integers is 15.   Example 8: What is 10 subtracted from the sum of 8 and 6? Solution: We know that subtraction is not commutative; therefore, we must take care to subtract in the correct order. First, add 8 and 6 and then subtract 10 as follows: It is important to notice that the phrase “10 subtracted from” does not translate to a mathematical statement in the order it appears. In other words, 10 − ( 8 + 6 ) would be an incorrect translation and leads to an incorrect answer. After translating the sentence, perform the operations. Answer: Ten subtracted from the sum of 8 and 6 is 4.  || 
book2_chapter1_2_2	Distance on a Number Line One application of the absolute value is to find the distance between any two points on a number line. For real numbers a and b, the distance formula for a number line The distance between any two real numbers a and b on a number line can be calculated using the formula d = | b − a | . is given as,   Example 9: Determine the distance between 2 and 7 on a number line. Solution: On the graph we see that the distance between the two given integers is 5 units. Using the distance formula we obtain the same result. Answer: 5 units   Example 10: Determine the distance between −4 and 7 on a number line. Solution: Use the distance formula for a number line d = | b − a | , where a = − 4 and b = 7 . Answer: 11 units   It turns out that it does not matter which points are used for a and b; the absolute value always ensures a positive result. Using a = −4 and b = 7 Using a = 7 and b = −4 d = | 7 − ( − 4 ) | = | 7 + 4 | = | 11 | = 11 d = | − 4 − 7 | = | − 11 | = 11   Try this! Determine the distance between −12 and −9 on the number line. Answer: 3 Video Solution Distance on a Number Line One application of the absolute value is to find the distance between any two points on a number line. For real numbers a and b, the distance formula for a number line The distance between any two real numbers a and b on a number line can be calculated using the formula d = | b − a | . is given as,   Example 9: Determine the distance between 2 and 7 on a number line. Solution: On the graph we see that the distance between the two given integers is 5 units. Using the distance formula we obtain the same result. Answer: 5 units   Example 10: Determine the distance between −4 and 7 on a number line. Solution: Use the distance formula for a number line d = | b − a | , where a = − 4 and b = 7 . Answer: 11 units   It turns out that it does not matter which points are used for a and b; the absolute value always ensures a positive result. Using a = −4 and b = 7 Using a = 7 and b = −4 d = | 7 − ( − 4 ) | = | 7 + 4 | = | 11 | = 11 d = | − 4 − 7 | = | − 11 | = 11   Try this! Determine the distance between −12 and −9 on the number line. Answer: 3 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter1_3	 || Multiplication and Division We begin with a review of what it means to multiply and divide signed numbers. The result of multiplying real numbers is called the product The result of multiplying. and the result of dividing is called the quotient The result after dividing. . Recall that multiplication is equivalent to adding: Clearly, the product of two positive numbers is positive. Similarly, the product of a positive number and negative number can be written as shown: We see that the product of a positive number and a negative number is negative. Next, explore the results of multiplying two negative numbers. Consider the products in the following illustration and try to identify the pattern: This shows that the product of two negative numbers is positive. To summarize, The rules for division are the same because division can always be rewritten as multiplication: The rules for multiplication and division should not be confused with the fact that the sum of two negative numbers is negative.   Example 1: Simplify: a. ( − 3 ) + ( − 5 ) b. ( − 3 ) ( − 5 ) Solution: Here we add and multiply the same two negative numbers. a. The result of adding two negative numbers is negative. b. The result of multiplying two negative numbers is positive. Answers: a. −8; b. 15   Given any real numbers a, b, and c, we have the following properties of multiplication: Zero factor property Given any real number a, a ⋅ 0 = 0 ⋅ a = 0 . : a ⋅ 0 = 0 ⋅ a = 0 Multiplicative identity property Given any real number a, a ⋅ 1 = 1 ⋅ a = a . : a ⋅ 1 = 1 ⋅ a = a Associative property Given any real numbers a, b, and c, ( a ⋅ b ) ⋅ c = a ⋅ ( b ⋅ c ) . : ( a ⋅ b ) ⋅ c = a ⋅ ( b ⋅ c ) Commutative property Given any real numbers a and b, a ⋅ b = b ⋅ a . : a ⋅ b = b ⋅ a   Example 2: Simplify: a. 5 ⋅ 0 b. 10 ⋅ 1 Solution: a. Multiplying by zero results in zero. b. Multiplying any real number by one results in the same real number. Answers: a. 0; b. 10   Example 3: Simplify: a. ( 3 ⋅ 7 ) ⋅ 2 b. 3 ⋅ ( 7 ⋅ 2 ) Solution: a. b. The value of each expression is 42. Changing the grouping of the numbers does not change the result. Answers: a. 42; b. 42   At this point, we highlight that multiplication is commutative: the order in which we multiply does not matter and yields the same result. On the other hand, division is not commutative. Use these properties to perform sequential operations involving multiplication and division. When doing so, it is important to perform these operations in order from left to right.   Example 4: Simplify: 3 ( − 2 ) ( − 5 ) ( − 1 ) . Solution: Multiply two numbers at a time as follows: Answer: −30   Because multiplication is commutative, the order in which we multiply does not affect the final answer. When sequential operations involve multiplication and division, order does matter; hence we must work the operations from left to right to obtain a correct result.   Example 5: Simplify: 10 ÷ ( − 2 ) ( − 5 ) . Solution: Perform the division first; otherwise, the result will be incorrect. Answer: 25   Notice that the order in which we multiply and divide does affect the final result. Therefore, it is important to perform the operations of multiplication and division as they appear from left to right.   Example 6: Simplify: − 6 ( 3 ) ÷ ( − 2 ) ( − 3 ) . Solution: Work the operations one at a time from left to right.   Try this! Simplify: − 5 ÷ 5 ⋅ 2 ( − 3 ) . Answer: 6 Video Solution Within text-based applications, the symbol used for multiplication is the asterisk The symbol (*) that indicates multiplication within text-based applications. (*) and the symbol used for division is the forward slash (/). The set of even integers Integers that are divisible by two or are multiples of two. is the set of all integers that are evenly divisible by 2. We can also obtain the set of even integers by multiplying each integer by 2. The set of odd integers Integers that are not divisible by 2. is the set of all integers that are not evenly divisible by 2. A prime number Integers greater than 1 that are divisible only by 1 and itself. is an integer greater than 1 that is divisible only by 1 and itself. The smallest prime number is 2 and the rest are necessarily odd. Any integer greater than 1 that is not prime is called a composite number Integers greater than 1 that are not prime. and can be written as a product of primes. When a composite number, such as 30, is written as a product, 30 = 2 ⋅ 15 , we say that 2 ⋅ 15 is a factorization Any combination of factors, multiplied together, resulting in the product. of 30 and that 2 and 15 are factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. . Note that factors divide the number evenly. We can continue to write composite factors as products until only a product of primes remains. The prime factorization The unique factorization of a natural number written as a product of primes. of 30 is 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 .   Example 7: Determine the prime factorization of 70. Solution: Begin by writing 70 as a product with 2 as a factor. Then express any composite factor as a product of prime numbers. Since the prime factorization is unique, it does not matter how we choose to initially factor the number because the end result is the same. Answer: The prime factorization of 70 is 2 ⋅ 5 ⋅ 7 .   Some tests (called divisibility tests) useful for finding prime factors of composite numbers follow: If the integer is even, then 2 is a factor. If the sum of the digits is evenly divisible by 3, then 3 is a factor. If the last digit is a 5 or 0, then 5 is a factor. Often we find the need to translate English sentences that include multiplication and division terms to mathematical statements. Listed below are some key words that translate to the given operation. Key Words Operation Product, multiplied by, of, times * or ⋅ Quotient, divided by, ratio, per / or ÷   Example 8: Calculate the quotient of 20 and −10. Solution: The key word “quotient” implies that we should divide. Answer: The quotient of 20 and −10 is −2.   Example 9: What is the product of the first three positive even integers? Solution: The first three positive even integers are {2, 4, 6} and the key word “product” implies that we should multiply. Answer: The product of the first three positive even integers is 48.   Example 10: Joe is able to drive 342 miles on 18 gallons of gasoline. How many miles per gallon of gas is this? Solution: The key word “per” indicates that we must divide the number of miles driven by the number of gallons used: Answer: Joe gets 19 miles per gallon from his vehicle.   In everyday life, we often wish to use a single value that typifies a set of values. One way to do this is to use what is called the arithmetic mean A numerical value that typifies a set of numbers. It is calculated by adding up the numbers in the set and dividing by the number of elements in the set. or average Used in reference to the arithmetic mean. . To calculate an average, divide the sum of the values in the set by the number of values in that set.   Example 11: A student earns 75, 86, and 94 on his first three exams. What is the student’s test average? Solution: Add the scores and divide the sum by 3. Answer: The student’s test average is 85.  || Zero and Division Recall the relationship between multiplication and division: In this case, the dividend The numerator of a quotient. 12 is evenly divided by the divisor The denominator of a quotient. 6 to obtain the quotient, 2. It is true in general that if we multiply the divisor by the quotient we obtain the dividend. Now consider the case where the dividend is zero and the divisor is nonzero: This demonstrates that zero divided by any nonzero real number must be zero. Now consider a nonzero number divided by zero: The zero-factor property of multiplication states that any real number times 0 is 0. We conclude that there is no real number such that 0 ⋅ ? = 12 and thus, the quotient is left undefined A quotient such as 5 0 , which is left without meaning and is not assigned an interpretation. . Try 12 ÷ 0 on a calculator. What does it say? For our purposes, we will simply write “undefined.” To summarize, given any real number a ≠ 0 , then We are left to consider the case where the dividend and divisor are both zero. Here any real number seems to work. For example, 0 ⋅ 5 = 0 and 0 ⋅ 3 = 0 . Therefore, the quotient is uncertain or indeterminate A quotient such as 0 0 , which is a quantity that is uncertain or ambiguous. . In this course, we state that 0 ÷ 0 is undefined.  || 
book2_chapter1_3_1	Multiplication and Division We begin with a review of what it means to multiply and divide signed numbers. The result of multiplying real numbers is called the product The result of multiplying. and the result of dividing is called the quotient The result after dividing. . Recall that multiplication is equivalent to adding: Clearly, the product of two positive numbers is positive. Similarly, the product of a positive number and negative number can be written as shown: We see that the product of a positive number and a negative number is negative. Next, explore the results of multiplying two negative numbers. Consider the products in the following illustration and try to identify the pattern: This shows that the product of two negative numbers is positive. To summarize, The rules for division are the same because division can always be rewritten as multiplication: The rules for multiplication and division should not be confused with the fact that the sum of two negative numbers is negative.   Example 1: Simplify: a. ( − 3 ) + ( − 5 ) b. ( − 3 ) ( − 5 ) Solution: Here we add and multiply the same two negative numbers. a. The result of adding two negative numbers is negative. b. The result of multiplying two negative numbers is positive. Answers: a. −8; b. 15   Given any real numbers a, b, and c, we have the following properties of multiplication: Zero factor property Given any real number a, a ⋅ 0 = 0 ⋅ a = 0 . : a ⋅ 0 = 0 ⋅ a = 0 Multiplicative identity property Given any real number a, a ⋅ 1 = 1 ⋅ a = a . : a ⋅ 1 = 1 ⋅ a = a Associative property Given any real numbers a, b, and c, ( a ⋅ b ) ⋅ c = a ⋅ ( b ⋅ c ) . : ( a ⋅ b ) ⋅ c = a ⋅ ( b ⋅ c ) Commutative property Given any real numbers a and b, a ⋅ b = b ⋅ a . : a ⋅ b = b ⋅ a   Example 2: Simplify: a. 5 ⋅ 0 b. 10 ⋅ 1 Solution: a. Multiplying by zero results in zero. b. Multiplying any real number by one results in the same real number. Answers: a. 0; b. 10   Example 3: Simplify: a. ( 3 ⋅ 7 ) ⋅ 2 b. 3 ⋅ ( 7 ⋅ 2 ) Solution: a. b. The value of each expression is 42. Changing the grouping of the numbers does not change the result. Answers: a. 42; b. 42   At this point, we highlight that multiplication is commutative: the order in which we multiply does not matter and yields the same result. On the other hand, division is not commutative. Use these properties to perform sequential operations involving multiplication and division. When doing so, it is important to perform these operations in order from left to right.   Example 4: Simplify: 3 ( − 2 ) ( − 5 ) ( − 1 ) . Solution: Multiply two numbers at a time as follows: Answer: −30   Because multiplication is commutative, the order in which we multiply does not affect the final answer. When sequential operations involve multiplication and division, order does matter; hence we must work the operations from left to right to obtain a correct result.   Example 5: Simplify: 10 ÷ ( − 2 ) ( − 5 ) . Solution: Perform the division first; otherwise, the result will be incorrect. Answer: 25   Notice that the order in which we multiply and divide does affect the final result. Therefore, it is important to perform the operations of multiplication and division as they appear from left to right.   Example 6: Simplify: − 6 ( 3 ) ÷ ( − 2 ) ( − 3 ) . Solution: Work the operations one at a time from left to right.   Try this! Simplify: − 5 ÷ 5 ⋅ 2 ( − 3 ) . Answer: 6 Video Solution Within text-based applications, the symbol used for multiplication is the asterisk The symbol (*) that indicates multiplication within text-based applications. (*) and the symbol used for division is the forward slash (/). The set of even integers Integers that are divisible by two or are multiples of two. is the set of all integers that are evenly divisible by 2. We can also obtain the set of even integers by multiplying each integer by 2. The set of odd integers Integers that are not divisible by 2. is the set of all integers that are not evenly divisible by 2. A prime number Integers greater than 1 that are divisible only by 1 and itself. is an integer greater than 1 that is divisible only by 1 and itself. The smallest prime number is 2 and the rest are necessarily odd. Any integer greater than 1 that is not prime is called a composite number Integers greater than 1 that are not prime. and can be written as a product of primes. When a composite number, such as 30, is written as a product, 30 = 2 ⋅ 15 , we say that 2 ⋅ 15 is a factorization Any combination of factors, multiplied together, resulting in the product. of 30 and that 2 and 15 are factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. . Note that factors divide the number evenly. We can continue to write composite factors as products until only a product of primes remains. The prime factorization The unique factorization of a natural number written as a product of primes. of 30 is 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 .   Example 7: Determine the prime factorization of 70. Solution: Begin by writing 70 as a product with 2 as a factor. Then express any composite factor as a product of prime numbers. Since the prime factorization is unique, it does not matter how we choose to initially factor the number because the end result is the same. Answer: The prime factorization of 70 is 2 ⋅ 5 ⋅ 7 .   Some tests (called divisibility tests) useful for finding prime factors of composite numbers follow: If the integer is even, then 2 is a factor. If the sum of the digits is evenly divisible by 3, then 3 is a factor. If the last digit is a 5 or 0, then 5 is a factor. Often we find the need to translate English sentences that include multiplication and division terms to mathematical statements. Listed below are some key words that translate to the given operation. Key Words Operation Product, multiplied by, of, times * or ⋅ Quotient, divided by, ratio, per / or ÷   Example 8: Calculate the quotient of 20 and −10. Solution: The key word “quotient” implies that we should divide. Answer: The quotient of 20 and −10 is −2.   Example 9: What is the product of the first three positive even integers? Solution: The first three positive even integers are {2, 4, 6} and the key word “product” implies that we should multiply. Answer: The product of the first three positive even integers is 48.   Example 10: Joe is able to drive 342 miles on 18 gallons of gasoline. How many miles per gallon of gas is this? Solution: The key word “per” indicates that we must divide the number of miles driven by the number of gallons used: Answer: Joe gets 19 miles per gallon from his vehicle.   In everyday life, we often wish to use a single value that typifies a set of values. One way to do this is to use what is called the arithmetic mean A numerical value that typifies a set of numbers. It is calculated by adding up the numbers in the set and dividing by the number of elements in the set. or average Used in reference to the arithmetic mean. . To calculate an average, divide the sum of the values in the set by the number of values in that set.   Example 11: A student earns 75, 86, and 94 on his first three exams. What is the student’s test average? Solution: Add the scores and divide the sum by 3. Answer: The student’s test average is 85. Multiplication and Division We begin with a review of what it means to multiply and divide signed numbers. The result of multiplying real numbers is called the product The result of multiplying. and the result of dividing is called the quotient The result after dividing. . Recall that multiplication is equivalent to adding: Clearly, the product of two positive numbers is positive. Similarly, the product of a positive number and negative number can be written as shown: We see that the product of a positive number and a negative number is negative. Next, explore the results of multiplying two negative numbers. Consider the products in the following illustration and try to identify the pattern: This shows that the product of two negative numbers is positive. To summarize, The rules for division are the same because division can always be rewritten as multiplication: The rules for multiplication and division should not be confused with the fact that the sum of two negative numbers is negative.   Example 1: Simplify: a. ( − 3 ) + ( − 5 ) b. ( − 3 ) ( − 5 ) Solution: Here we add and multiply the same two negative numbers. a. The result of adding two negative numbers is negative. b. The result of multiplying two negative numbers is positive. Answers: a. −8; b. 15   Given any real numbers a, b, and c, we have the following properties of multiplication: Zero factor property Given any real number a, a ⋅ 0 = 0 ⋅ a = 0 . : a ⋅ 0 = 0 ⋅ a = 0 Multiplicative identity property Given any real number a, a ⋅ 1 = 1 ⋅ a = a . : a ⋅ 1 = 1 ⋅ a = a Associative property Given any real numbers a, b, and c, ( a ⋅ b ) ⋅ c = a ⋅ ( b ⋅ c ) . : ( a ⋅ b ) ⋅ c = a ⋅ ( b ⋅ c ) Commutative property Given any real numbers a and b, a ⋅ b = b ⋅ a . : a ⋅ b = b ⋅ a   Example 2: Simplify: a. 5 ⋅ 0 b. 10 ⋅ 1 Solution: a. Multiplying by zero results in zero. b. Multiplying any real number by one results in the same real number. Answers: a. 0; b. 10   Example 3: Simplify: a. ( 3 ⋅ 7 ) ⋅ 2 b. 3 ⋅ ( 7 ⋅ 2 ) Solution: a. b. The value of each expression is 42. Changing the grouping of the numbers does not change the result. Answers: a. 42; b. 42   At this point, we highlight that multiplication is commutative: the order in which we multiply does not matter and yields the same result. On the other hand, division is not commutative. Use these properties to perform sequential operations involving multiplication and division. When doing so, it is important to perform these operations in order from left to right.   Example 4: Simplify: 3 ( − 2 ) ( − 5 ) ( − 1 ) . Solution: Multiply two numbers at a time as follows: Answer: −30   Because multiplication is commutative, the order in which we multiply does not affect the final answer. When sequential operations involve multiplication and division, order does matter; hence we must work the operations from left to right to obtain a correct result.   Example 5: Simplify: 10 ÷ ( − 2 ) ( − 5 ) . Solution: Perform the division first; otherwise, the result will be incorrect. Answer: 25   Notice that the order in which we multiply and divide does affect the final result. Therefore, it is important to perform the operations of multiplication and division as they appear from left to right.   Example 6: Simplify: − 6 ( 3 ) ÷ ( − 2 ) ( − 3 ) . Solution: Work the operations one at a time from left to right.   Try this! Simplify: − 5 ÷ 5 ⋅ 2 ( − 3 ) . Answer: 6 Video Solution Within text-based applications, the symbol used for multiplication is the asterisk The symbol (*) that indicates multiplication within text-based applications. (*) and the symbol used for division is the forward slash (/). The set of even integers Integers that are divisible by two or are multiples of two. is the set of all integers that are evenly divisible by 2. We can also obtain the set of even integers by multiplying each integer by 2. The set of odd integers Integers that are not divisible by 2. is the set of all integers that are not evenly divisible by 2. A prime number Integers greater than 1 that are divisible only by 1 and itself. is an integer greater than 1 that is divisible only by 1 and itself. The smallest prime number is 2 and the rest are necessarily odd. Any integer greater than 1 that is not prime is called a composite number Integers greater than 1 that are not prime. and can be written as a product of primes. When a composite number, such as 30, is written as a product, 30 = 2 ⋅ 15 , we say that 2 ⋅ 15 is a factorization Any combination of factors, multiplied together, resulting in the product. of 30 and that 2 and 15 are factors Any of the numbers or expressions that form a product. . Note that factors divide the number evenly. We can continue to write composite factors as products until only a product of primes remains. The prime factorization The unique factorization of a natural number written as a product of primes. of 30 is 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 .   Example 7: Determine the prime factorization of 70. Solution: Begin by writing 70 as a product with 2 as a factor. Then express any composite factor as a product of prime numbers. Since the prime factorization is unique, it does not matter how we choose to initially factor the number because the end result is the same. Answer: The prime factorization of 70 is 2 ⋅ 5 ⋅ 7 .   Some tests (called divisibility tests) useful for finding prime factors of composite numbers follow: If the integer is even, then 2 is a factor. If the sum of the digits is evenly divisible by 3, then 3 is a factor. If the last digit is a 5 or 0, then 5 is a factor. Often we find the need to translate English sentences that include multiplication and division terms to mathematical statements. Listed below are some key words that translate to the given operation. Key Words Operation Product, multiplied by, of, times * or ⋅ Quotient, divided by, ratio, per / or ÷   Example 8: Calculate the quotient of 20 and −10. Solution: The key word “quotient” implies that we should divide. Answer: The quotient of 20 and −10 is −2.   Example 9: What is the product of the first three positive even integers? Solution: The first three positive even integers are {2, 4, 6} and the key word “product” implies that we should multiply. Answer: The product of the first three positive even integers is 48.   Example 10: Joe is able to drive 342 miles on 18 gallons of gasoline. How many miles per gallon of gas is this? Solution: The key word “per” indicates that we must divide the number of miles driven by the number of gallons used: Answer: Joe gets 19 miles per gallon from his vehicle.   In everyday life, we often wish to use a single value that typifies a set of values. One way to do this is to use what is called the arithmetic mean A numerical value that typifies a set of numbers. It is calculated by adding up the numbers in the set and dividing by the number of elements in the set. or average Used in reference to the arithmetic mean. . To calculate an average, divide the sum of the values in the set by the number of values in that set.   Example 11: A student earns 75, 86, and 94 on his first three exams. What is the student’s test average? Solution: Add the scores and divide the sum by 3. Answer: The student’s test average is 85.  || 
book2_chapter1_3_2	Zero and Division Recall the relationship between multiplication and division: In this case, the dividend The numerator of a quotient. 12 is evenly divided by the divisor The denominator of a quotient. 6 to obtain the quotient, 2. It is true in general that if we multiply the divisor by the quotient we obtain the dividend. Now consider the case where the dividend is zero and the divisor is nonzero: This demonstrates that zero divided by any nonzero real number must be zero. Now consider a nonzero number divided by zero: The zero-factor property of multiplication states that any real number times 0 is 0. We conclude that there is no real number such that 0 ⋅ ? = 12 and thus, the quotient is left undefined A quotient such as 5 0 , which is left without meaning and is not assigned an interpretation. . Try 12 ÷ 0 on a calculator. What does it say? For our purposes, we will simply write “undefined.” To summarize, given any real number a ≠ 0 , then We are left to consider the case where the dividend and divisor are both zero. Here any real number seems to work. For example, 0 ⋅ 5 = 0 and 0 ⋅ 3 = 0 . Therefore, the quotient is uncertain or indeterminate A quotient such as 0 0 , which is a quantity that is uncertain or ambiguous. . In this course, we state that 0 ÷ 0 is undefined. Zero and Division Recall the relationship between multiplication and division: In this case, the dividend The numerator of a quotient. 12 is evenly divided by the divisor The denominator of a quotient. 6 to obtain the quotient, 2. It is true in general that if we multiply the divisor by the quotient we obtain the dividend. Now consider the case where the dividend is zero and the divisor is nonzero: This demonstrates that zero divided by any nonzero real number must be zero. Now consider a nonzero number divided by zero: The zero-factor property of multiplication states that any real number times 0 is 0. We conclude that there is no real number such that 0 ⋅ ? = 12 and thus, the quotient is left undefined A quotient such as 5 0 , which is left without meaning and is not assigned an interpretation. . Try 12 ÷ 0 on a calculator. What does it say? For our purposes, we will simply write “undefined.” To summarize, given any real number a ≠ 0 , then We are left to consider the case where the dividend and divisor are both zero. Here any real number seems to work. For example, 0 ⋅ 5 = 0 and 0 ⋅ 3 = 0 . Therefore, the quotient is uncertain or indeterminate A quotient such as 0 0 , which is a quantity that is uncertain or ambiguous. . In this course, we state that 0 ÷ 0 is undefined.  || 
book2_chapter1_4	 || Reducing A fraction A rational number written as a quotient of two integers: a b , where b is nonzero. is a real number written as a quotient, or ratio Relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. , of two integers a and b, where b ≠ 0 . The integer above the fraction bar is called the numerator The number above the fraction bar. and the integer below is called the denominator The number below the fraction bar. . The numerator is often called the “part” and the denominator is often called the “whole.” Equivalent fractions Two equal fractions expressed using different numerators and denominators. are two equal ratios expressed using different numerators and denominators. For example, Fifty parts out of 100 is the same ratio as 1 part out of 2 and represents the same real number. Consider the following factorizations of 50 and 100: The numbers 50 and 100 share the factor 25. A shared factor is called a common factor A factor that is shared by more than one real number. . We can rewrite the ratio 50 100 as follows: Making use of the multiplicative identity property and the fact that 25 25 = 1 , we have Dividing 25 25 and replacing this factor with a 1 is called canceling The process of dividing out common factors in the numerator and the denominator. . Together, these basic steps for finding equivalent fractions define the process of reducing The process of finding equivalent fractions by dividing the numerator and the denominator by common factors. . Since factors divide their product evenly, we achieve the same result by dividing both the numerator and denominator by 25 as follows: Finding equivalent fractions where the numerator and denominator have no common factor other than 1 is called reducing to lowest terms Finding equivalent fractions where the numerator and the denominator share no common integer factor other than 1. . When learning how to reduce to lowest terms, it is helpful to first rewrite the numerator and denominator as a product of primes and then cancel. For example, We achieve the same result by dividing the numerator and denominator by the greatest common factor (GCF) The largest shared factor of any number of integers. . The GCF is the largest number that divides both the numerator and denominator evenly. One way to find the GCF of 50 and 100 is to list all the factors of each and identify the largest number that appears in both lists. Remember, each number is also a factor of itself. Common factors are listed in bold, and we see that the greatest common factor is 50. We use the following notation to indicate the GCF of two numbers: GCF(50, 100) = 50. After determining the GCF, reduce by dividing both the numerator and the denominator as follows:   Example 1: Reduce to lowest terms: 105 300 . Solution: Rewrite the numerator and denominator as a product of primes and then cancel. Alternatively, we achieve the same result if we divide both the numerator and denominator by the GCF(105, 300). A quick way to find the GCF of the two numbers requires us to first write each as a product of primes. The GCF is the product of all the common prime factors. In this case, the common prime factors are 3 and 5 and the greatest common factor of 105 and 300 is 15. Answer: 7 20   Try this! Reduce to lowest terms: 32 96 . Answer: 1 3 Video Solution An improper fraction A fraction where the numerator is larger than the denominator. is one where the numerator is larger than the denominator. A mixed number A number that represents the sum of a whole number and a fraction. is a number that represents the sum of a whole number and a fraction. For example, 5   1 2 is a mixed number that represents the sum 5 + 1 2 . Use long division to convert an improper fraction to a mixed number; the remainder is the numerator of the fractional part.   Example 2: Write 23 5 as a mixed number. Solution: Notice that 5 divides into 23 four times with a remainder of 3. We then can write Note that the denominator of the fractional part of the mixed number remains the same as the denominator of the original fraction. Answer: 4 3 5   To convert mixed numbers to improper fractions, multiply the whole number by the denominator and then add the numerator; write this result over the original denominator.   Example 3: Write 3 5 7 as an improper fraction. Solution: Obtain the numerator by multiplying 7 times 3 and then add 5. Answer: 26 7   It is important to note that converting to a mixed number is not part of the reducing process. We consider improper fractions, such as 26 7 , to be reduced to lowest terms. In algebra it is often preferable to work with improper fractions, although in some applications, mixed numbers are more appropriate.   Try this! Convert 10 1 2 to an improper fraction. Answer: 21 2 Video Solution  || Multiplying and Dividing Fractions In this section, assume that a, b, c, and d are all nonzero integers. The product of two fractions is the fraction formed by the product of the numerators and the product of the denominators. In other words, to multiply fractions, multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators:   Example 4: Multiply: 2 3 ⋅ 5 7 . Solution: Multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators. Answer: 10 21   Example 5: Multiply: 5 9 ( − 1 4 ) . Solution: Recall that the product of a positive number and a negative number is negative. Answer: − 5 36   Example 6: Multiply: 2 3 ⋅ 5 3 4 . Solution: Begin by converting 5 3 4 to an improper fraction. In this example, we noticed that we could reduce before we multiplied the numerators and the denominators. Reducing in this way is called cross canceling Cancelling common factors in the numerator and the denominator of fractions before multiplying. , and can save time when multiplying fractions. Answer: 3 5 6   Two real numbers whose product is 1 are called reciprocals The reciprocal of a nonzero number n is 1/n. . Therefore, a b and b a are reciprocals because a b ⋅ b a = a b a b = 1 . For example, Because their product is 1, 2 3 and 3 2 are reciprocals. Some other reciprocals are listed below: This definition is important because dividing fractions requires that you multiply the dividend by the reciprocal of the divisor.   Example 7: Divide: 2 3 ÷ 5 7 . Solution: Multiply 2 3 by the reciprocal of 5 7 . Answer: 14 15   You also need to be aware of other forms of notation that indicate division: / and —. For example, Or The latter is an example of a complex fraction A fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. , which is a fraction whose numerator, denominator, or both are fractions. Note Students often ask why dividing is equivalent to multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. A mathematical explanation comes from the fact that the product of reciprocals is 1. If we apply the multiplicative identity property and multiply numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of the denominator, then we obtain the following: Before multiplying, look for common factors to cancel; this eliminates the need to reduce the end result.   Example 8: Divide:   5 2   7 4 . Solution: Answer: 10 7   When dividing by an integer, it is helpful to rewrite it as a fraction over 1.   Example 9: Divide: 2 3 ÷ 6 . Solution: Rewrite 6 as 6 1 and multiply by its reciprocal. Answer: 1 9   Also, note that we only cancel when working with multiplication. Rewrite any division problem as a product before canceling.   Try this! Divide: 5 ÷ 2 3 5 . Answer: 1 12 13 Video Solution  || Adding and Subtracting Fractions Negative fractions are indicated with the negative sign in front of the fraction bar, in the numerator, or in the denominator. All such forms are equivalent and interchangeable. Adding or subtracting fractions requires a common denominator A denominator that is shared by more than one fraction. . In this section, assume the common denominator c is a nonzero integer. It is good practice to use positive common denominators by expressing negative fractions with negative numerators. In short, avoid negative denominators.   Example 10: Subtract: 12 15 − 3 15 . Solution: The two fractions have a common denominator 15. Therefore, subtract the numerators and write the result over the common denominator: Answer: 3 5   Most problems that you are likely to encounter will have unlike denominators Denominators of fractions that are not the same. . In this case, first find equivalent fractions with a common denominator before adding or subtracting the numerators. One way to obtain equivalent fractions is to divide the numerator and the denominator by the same number. We now review a technique for finding equivalent fractions by multiplying the numerator and the denominator by the same number. It should be clear that 5/5 is equal to 1 and that 1 multiplied times any number is that number: We have equivalent fractions 1 2 = 5 10 . Use this idea to find equivalent fractions with a common denominator to add or subtract fractions. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 11: Subtract: 7 15 − 3 10 . Solution: Step 1: Determine a common denominator. To do this, use the least common multiple (LCM) The smallest number that is evenly divisible by a set of numbers. of the given denominators. The LCM of 15 and 10 is indicated by LCM(15, 10). Try to think of the smallest number that both denominators divide into evenly. List the multiples of each number: Common multiples are listed in bold, and the least common multiple is 30. Step 2: Multiply the numerator and the denominator of each fraction by values that result in equivalent fractions with the determined common denominator. Step 3: Add or subtract the numerators, write the result over the common denominator and then reduce if possible. Answer: 1 6   The least common multiple of the denominators is called the least common denominator (LCD) The least common multiple of a set of denominators. . Finding the LCD is often the difficult step. It is worth finding because if any common multiple other than the least is used, then there will be more steps involved when reducing.   Example 12: Add: 5 10 + 1 18 . Solution: First, determine that the LCM(10, 18) is 90 and then find equivalent fractions with 90 as the denominator. Answer: 5 9   Try this! Add: 2 30 + 5 21 . Answer: 32 105 Video Solution   Example 13: Simplify: 2 1 3 + 3 5 − 1 2 . Solution: Begin by converting 2 1 3 to an improper fraction. Answer: 2 13 30   In general, it is preferable to work with improper fractions. However, when the original problem involves mixed numbers, if appropriate, present your answers as mixed numbers. Also, mixed numbers are often preferred when working with numbers on a number line and with real-world applications.   Try this! Subtract: 5 7 − 2 1 7 . Answer: − 1 3 7 Video Solution   Example 14: How many 1 2 inch thick paperback books can be stacked to fit on a shelf that is 1 1 2 feet in height? Solution: First, determine the height of the shelf in inches. To do this, use the fact that there are 12 inches in 1 foot and multiply as follows: Next, determine how many notebooks will fit by dividing the height of the shelf by the thickness of each book. Answer: 36 books can be stacked on the shelf.  || 
book2_chapter1_4_1	Reducing A fraction A rational number written as a quotient of two integers: a b , where b is nonzero. is a real number written as a quotient, or ratio Relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. , of two integers a and b, where b ≠ 0 . The integer above the fraction bar is called the numerator The number above the fraction bar. and the integer below is called the denominator The number below the fraction bar. . The numerator is often called the “part” and the denominator is often called the “whole.” Equivalent fractions Two equal fractions expressed using different numerators and denominators. are two equal ratios expressed using different numerators and denominators. For example, Fifty parts out of 100 is the same ratio as 1 part out of 2 and represents the same real number. Consider the following factorizations of 50 and 100: The numbers 50 and 100 share the factor 25. A shared factor is called a common factor A factor that is shared by more than one real number. . We can rewrite the ratio 50 100 as follows: Making use of the multiplicative identity property and the fact that 25 25 = 1 , we have Dividing 25 25 and replacing this factor with a 1 is called canceling The process of dividing out common factors in the numerator and the denominator. . Together, these basic steps for finding equivalent fractions define the process of reducing The process of finding equivalent fractions by dividing the numerator and the denominator by common factors. . Since factors divide their product evenly, we achieve the same result by dividing both the numerator and denominator by 25 as follows: Finding equivalent fractions where the numerator and denominator have no common factor other than 1 is called reducing to lowest terms Finding equivalent fractions where the numerator and the denominator share no common integer factor other than 1. . When learning how to reduce to lowest terms, it is helpful to first rewrite the numerator and denominator as a product of primes and then cancel. For example, We achieve the same result by dividing the numerator and denominator by the greatest common factor (GCF) The largest shared factor of any number of integers. . The GCF is the largest number that divides both the numerator and denominator evenly. One way to find the GCF of 50 and 100 is to list all the factors of each and identify the largest number that appears in both lists. Remember, each number is also a factor of itself. Common factors are listed in bold, and we see that the greatest common factor is 50. We use the following notation to indicate the GCF of two numbers: GCF(50, 100) = 50. After determining the GCF, reduce by dividing both the numerator and the denominator as follows:   Example 1: Reduce to lowest terms: 105 300 . Solution: Rewrite the numerator and denominator as a product of primes and then cancel. Alternatively, we achieve the same result if we divide both the numerator and denominator by the GCF(105, 300). A quick way to find the GCF of the two numbers requires us to first write each as a product of primes. The GCF is the product of all the common prime factors. In this case, the common prime factors are 3 and 5 and the greatest common factor of 105 and 300 is 15. Answer: 7 20   Try this! Reduce to lowest terms: 32 96 . Answer: 1 3 Video Solution An improper fraction A fraction where the numerator is larger than the denominator. is one where the numerator is larger than the denominator. A mixed number A number that represents the sum of a whole number and a fraction. is a number that represents the sum of a whole number and a fraction. For example, 5   1 2 is a mixed number that represents the sum 5 + 1 2 . Use long division to convert an improper fraction to a mixed number; the remainder is the numerator of the fractional part.   Example 2: Write 23 5 as a mixed number. Solution: Notice that 5 divides into 23 four times with a remainder of 3. We then can write Note that the denominator of the fractional part of the mixed number remains the same as the denominator of the original fraction. Answer: 4 3 5   To convert mixed numbers to improper fractions, multiply the whole number by the denominator and then add the numerator; write this result over the original denominator.   Example 3: Write 3 5 7 as an improper fraction. Solution: Obtain the numerator by multiplying 7 times 3 and then add 5. Answer: 26 7   It is important to note that converting to a mixed number is not part of the reducing process. We consider improper fractions, such as 26 7 , to be reduced to lowest terms. In algebra it is often preferable to work with improper fractions, although in some applications, mixed numbers are more appropriate.   Try this! Convert 10 1 2 to an improper fraction. Answer: 21 2 Video Solution Reducing A fraction A rational number written as a quotient of two integers: a b , where b is nonzero. is a real number written as a quotient, or ratio Relationship between two numbers or quantities usually expressed as a quotient. , of two integers a and b, where b ≠ 0 . The integer above the fraction bar is called the numerator The number above the fraction bar. and the integer below is called the denominator The number below the fraction bar. . The numerator is often called the “part” and the denominator is often called the “whole.” Equivalent fractions Two equal fractions expressed using different numerators and denominators. are two equal ratios expressed using different numerators and denominators. For example, Fifty parts out of 100 is the same ratio as 1 part out of 2 and represents the same real number. Consider the following factorizations of 50 and 100: The numbers 50 and 100 share the factor 25. A shared factor is called a common factor A factor that is shared by more than one real number. . We can rewrite the ratio 50 100 as follows: Making use of the multiplicative identity property and the fact that 25 25 = 1 , we have Dividing 25 25 and replacing this factor with a 1 is called canceling The process of dividing out common factors in the numerator and the denominator. . Together, these basic steps for finding equivalent fractions define the process of reducing The process of finding equivalent fractions by dividing the numerator and the denominator by common factors. . Since factors divide their product evenly, we achieve the same result by dividing both the numerator and denominator by 25 as follows: Finding equivalent fractions where the numerator and denominator have no common factor other than 1 is called reducing to lowest terms Finding equivalent fractions where the numerator and the denominator share no common integer factor other than 1. . When learning how to reduce to lowest terms, it is helpful to first rewrite the numerator and denominator as a product of primes and then cancel. For example, We achieve the same result by dividing the numerator and denominator by the greatest common factor (GCF) The largest shared factor of any number of integers. . The GCF is the largest number that divides both the numerator and denominator evenly. One way to find the GCF of 50 and 100 is to list all the factors of each and identify the largest number that appears in both lists. Remember, each number is also a factor of itself. Common factors are listed in bold, and we see that the greatest common factor is 50. We use the following notation to indicate the GCF of two numbers: GCF(50, 100) = 50. After determining the GCF, reduce by dividing both the numerator and the denominator as follows:   Example 1: Reduce to lowest terms: 105 300 . Solution: Rewrite the numerator and denominator as a product of primes and then cancel. Alternatively, we achieve the same result if we divide both the numerator and denominator by the GCF(105, 300). A quick way to find the GCF of the two numbers requires us to first write each as a product of primes. The GCF is the product of all the common prime factors. In this case, the common prime factors are 3 and 5 and the greatest common factor of 105 and 300 is 15. Answer: 7 20   Try this! Reduce to lowest terms: 32 96 . Answer: 1 3 Video Solution An improper fraction A fraction where the numerator is larger than the denominator. is one where the numerator is larger than the denominator. A mixed number A number that represents the sum of a whole number and a fraction. is a number that represents the sum of a whole number and a fraction. For example, 5   1 2 is a mixed number that represents the sum 5 + 1 2 . Use long division to convert an improper fraction to a mixed number; the remainder is the numerator of the fractional part.   Example 2: Write 23 5 as a mixed number. Solution: Notice that 5 divides into 23 four times with a remainder of 3. We then can write Note that the denominator of the fractional part of the mixed number remains the same as the denominator of the original fraction. Answer: 4 3 5   To convert mixed numbers to improper fractions, multiply the whole number by the denominator and then add the numerator; write this result over the original denominator.   Example 3: Write 3 5 7 as an improper fraction. Solution: Obtain the numerator by multiplying 7 times 3 and then add 5. Answer: 26 7   It is important to note that converting to a mixed number is not part of the reducing process. We consider improper fractions, such as 26 7 , to be reduced to lowest terms. In algebra it is often preferable to work with improper fractions, although in some applications, mixed numbers are more appropriate.   Try this! Convert 10 1 2 to an improper fraction. Answer: 21 2 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter1_4_2	Multiplying and Dividing Fractions In this section, assume that a, b, c, and d are all nonzero integers. The product of two fractions is the fraction formed by the product of the numerators and the product of the denominators. In other words, to multiply fractions, multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators:   Example 4: Multiply: 2 3 ⋅ 5 7 . Solution: Multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators. Answer: 10 21   Example 5: Multiply: 5 9 ( − 1 4 ) . Solution: Recall that the product of a positive number and a negative number is negative. Answer: − 5 36   Example 6: Multiply: 2 3 ⋅ 5 3 4 . Solution: Begin by converting 5 3 4 to an improper fraction. In this example, we noticed that we could reduce before we multiplied the numerators and the denominators. Reducing in this way is called cross canceling Cancelling common factors in the numerator and the denominator of fractions before multiplying. , and can save time when multiplying fractions. Answer: 3 5 6   Two real numbers whose product is 1 are called reciprocals The reciprocal of a nonzero number n is 1/n. . Therefore, a b and b a are reciprocals because a b ⋅ b a = a b a b = 1 . For example, Because their product is 1, 2 3 and 3 2 are reciprocals. Some other reciprocals are listed below: This definition is important because dividing fractions requires that you multiply the dividend by the reciprocal of the divisor.   Example 7: Divide: 2 3 ÷ 5 7 . Solution: Multiply 2 3 by the reciprocal of 5 7 . Answer: 14 15   You also need to be aware of other forms of notation that indicate division: / and —. For example, Or The latter is an example of a complex fraction A fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. , which is a fraction whose numerator, denominator, or both are fractions. Note Students often ask why dividing is equivalent to multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. A mathematical explanation comes from the fact that the product of reciprocals is 1. If we apply the multiplicative identity property and multiply numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of the denominator, then we obtain the following: Before multiplying, look for common factors to cancel; this eliminates the need to reduce the end result.   Example 8: Divide:   5 2   7 4 . Solution: Answer: 10 7   When dividing by an integer, it is helpful to rewrite it as a fraction over 1.   Example 9: Divide: 2 3 ÷ 6 . Solution: Rewrite 6 as 6 1 and multiply by its reciprocal. Answer: 1 9   Also, note that we only cancel when working with multiplication. Rewrite any division problem as a product before canceling.   Try this! Divide: 5 ÷ 2 3 5 . Answer: 1 12 13 Video Solution Multiplying and Dividing Fractions In this section, assume that a, b, c, and d are all nonzero integers. The product of two fractions is the fraction formed by the product of the numerators and the product of the denominators. In other words, to multiply fractions, multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators:   Example 4: Multiply: 2 3 ⋅ 5 7 . Solution: Multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators. Answer: 10 21   Example 5: Multiply: 5 9 ( − 1 4 ) . Solution: Recall that the product of a positive number and a negative number is negative. Answer: − 5 36   Example 6: Multiply: 2 3 ⋅ 5 3 4 . Solution: Begin by converting 5 3 4 to an improper fraction. In this example, we noticed that we could reduce before we multiplied the numerators and the denominators. Reducing in this way is called cross canceling Cancelling common factors in the numerator and the denominator of fractions before multiplying. , and can save time when multiplying fractions. Answer: 3 5 6   Two real numbers whose product is 1 are called reciprocals The reciprocal of a nonzero number n is 1/n. . Therefore, a b and b a are reciprocals because a b ⋅ b a = a b a b = 1 . For example, Because their product is 1, 2 3 and 3 2 are reciprocals. Some other reciprocals are listed below: This definition is important because dividing fractions requires that you multiply the dividend by the reciprocal of the divisor.   Example 7: Divide: 2 3 ÷ 5 7 . Solution: Multiply 2 3 by the reciprocal of 5 7 . Answer: 14 15   You also need to be aware of other forms of notation that indicate division: / and —. For example, Or The latter is an example of a complex fraction A fraction where the numerator or denominator consists of one or more fractions. , which is a fraction whose numerator, denominator, or both are fractions. Note Students often ask why dividing is equivalent to multiplying by the reciprocal of the divisor. A mathematical explanation comes from the fact that the product of reciprocals is 1. If we apply the multiplicative identity property and multiply numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of the denominator, then we obtain the following: Before multiplying, look for common factors to cancel; this eliminates the need to reduce the end result.   Example 8: Divide:   5 2   7 4 . Solution: Answer: 10 7   When dividing by an integer, it is helpful to rewrite it as a fraction over 1.   Example 9: Divide: 2 3 ÷ 6 . Solution: Rewrite 6 as 6 1 and multiply by its reciprocal. Answer: 1 9   Also, note that we only cancel when working with multiplication. Rewrite any division problem as a product before canceling.   Try this! Divide: 5 ÷ 2 3 5 . Answer: 1 12 13 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter1_4_3	Adding and Subtracting Fractions Negative fractions are indicated with the negative sign in front of the fraction bar, in the numerator, or in the denominator. All such forms are equivalent and interchangeable. Adding or subtracting fractions requires a common denominator A denominator that is shared by more than one fraction. . In this section, assume the common denominator c is a nonzero integer. It is good practice to use positive common denominators by expressing negative fractions with negative numerators. In short, avoid negative denominators.   Example 10: Subtract: 12 15 − 3 15 . Solution: The two fractions have a common denominator 15. Therefore, subtract the numerators and write the result over the common denominator: Answer: 3 5   Most problems that you are likely to encounter will have unlike denominators Denominators of fractions that are not the same. . In this case, first find equivalent fractions with a common denominator before adding or subtracting the numerators. One way to obtain equivalent fractions is to divide the numerator and the denominator by the same number. We now review a technique for finding equivalent fractions by multiplying the numerator and the denominator by the same number. It should be clear that 5/5 is equal to 1 and that 1 multiplied times any number is that number: We have equivalent fractions 1 2 = 5 10 . Use this idea to find equivalent fractions with a common denominator to add or subtract fractions. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 11: Subtract: 7 15 − 3 10 . Solution: Step 1: Determine a common denominator. To do this, use the least common multiple (LCM) The smallest number that is evenly divisible by a set of numbers. of the given denominators. The LCM of 15 and 10 is indicated by LCM(15, 10). Try to think of the smallest number that both denominators divide into evenly. List the multiples of each number: Common multiples are listed in bold, and the least common multiple is 30. Step 2: Multiply the numerator and the denominator of each fraction by values that result in equivalent fractions with the determined common denominator. Step 3: Add or subtract the numerators, write the result over the common denominator and then reduce if possible. Answer: 1 6   The least common multiple of the denominators is called the least common denominator (LCD) The least common multiple of a set of denominators. . Finding the LCD is often the difficult step. It is worth finding because if any common multiple other than the least is used, then there will be more steps involved when reducing.   Example 12: Add: 5 10 + 1 18 . Solution: First, determine that the LCM(10, 18) is 90 and then find equivalent fractions with 90 as the denominator. Answer: 5 9   Try this! Add: 2 30 + 5 21 . Answer: 32 105 Video Solution   Example 13: Simplify: 2 1 3 + 3 5 − 1 2 . Solution: Begin by converting 2 1 3 to an improper fraction. Answer: 2 13 30   In general, it is preferable to work with improper fractions. However, when the original problem involves mixed numbers, if appropriate, present your answers as mixed numbers. Also, mixed numbers are often preferred when working with numbers on a number line and with real-world applications.   Try this! Subtract: 5 7 − 2 1 7 . Answer: − 1 3 7 Video Solution   Example 14: How many 1 2 inch thick paperback books can be stacked to fit on a shelf that is 1 1 2 feet in height? Solution: First, determine the height of the shelf in inches. To do this, use the fact that there are 12 inches in 1 foot and multiply as follows: Next, determine how many notebooks will fit by dividing the height of the shelf by the thickness of each book. Answer: 36 books can be stacked on the shelf. Adding and Subtracting Fractions Negative fractions are indicated with the negative sign in front of the fraction bar, in the numerator, or in the denominator. All such forms are equivalent and interchangeable. Adding or subtracting fractions requires a common denominator A denominator that is shared by more than one fraction. . In this section, assume the common denominator c is a nonzero integer. It is good practice to use positive common denominators by expressing negative fractions with negative numerators. In short, avoid negative denominators.   Example 10: Subtract: 12 15 − 3 15 . Solution: The two fractions have a common denominator 15. Therefore, subtract the numerators and write the result over the common denominator: Answer: 3 5   Most problems that you are likely to encounter will have unlike denominators Denominators of fractions that are not the same. . In this case, first find equivalent fractions with a common denominator before adding or subtracting the numerators. One way to obtain equivalent fractions is to divide the numerator and the denominator by the same number. We now review a technique for finding equivalent fractions by multiplying the numerator and the denominator by the same number. It should be clear that 5/5 is equal to 1 and that 1 multiplied times any number is that number: We have equivalent fractions 1 2 = 5 10 . Use this idea to find equivalent fractions with a common denominator to add or subtract fractions. The steps are outlined in the following example.   Example 11: Subtract: 7 15 − 3 10 . Solution: Step 1: Determine a common denominator. To do this, use the least common multiple (LCM) The smallest number that is evenly divisible by a set of numbers. of the given denominators. The LCM of 15 and 10 is indicated by LCM(15, 10). Try to think of the smallest number that both denominators divide into evenly. List the multiples of each number: Common multiples are listed in bold, and the least common multiple is 30. Step 2: Multiply the numerator and the denominator of each fraction by values that result in equivalent fractions with the determined common denominator. Step 3: Add or subtract the numerators, write the result over the common denominator and then reduce if possible. Answer: 1 6   The least common multiple of the denominators is called the least common denominator (LCD) The least common multiple of a set of denominators. . Finding the LCD is often the difficult step. It is worth finding because if any common multiple other than the least is used, then there will be more steps involved when reducing.   Example 12: Add: 5 10 + 1 18 . Solution: First, determine that the LCM(10, 18) is 90 and then find equivalent fractions with 90 as the denominator. Answer: 5 9   Try this! Add: 2 30 + 5 21 . Answer: 32 105 Video Solution   Example 13: Simplify: 2 1 3 + 3 5 − 1 2 . Solution: Begin by converting 2 1 3 to an improper fraction. Answer: 2 13 30   In general, it is preferable to work with improper fractions. However, when the original problem involves mixed numbers, if appropriate, present your answers as mixed numbers. Also, mixed numbers are often preferred when working with numbers on a number line and with real-world applications.   Try this! Subtract: 5 7 − 2 1 7 . Answer: − 1 3 7 Video Solution   Example 14: How many 1 2 inch thick paperback books can be stacked to fit on a shelf that is 1 1 2 feet in height? Solution: First, determine the height of the shelf in inches. To do this, use the fact that there are 12 inches in 1 foot and multiply as follows: Next, determine how many notebooks will fit by dividing the height of the shelf by the thickness of each book. Answer: 36 books can be stacked on the shelf.  || 
book2_chapter1_5	 || Decimals In this section, we provide a brief review of the decimal system. A real number in decimal form, a decimal A real number expressed using the decimal system. consists of a decimal point, digits (0 through 9) to the left of the decimal point representing the whole number part, and digits to the right of the decimal point representing the fractional part. The digits represent powers of 10 as shown in the set {…, 1,000, 100, 10, 1, 1/10, 1/100, 1/1,000, …} according to the following diagram: For example, the decimal 538.3 can be written in the following expanded form: After simplifying, we obtain the mixed number 538 3 10 . Use this process to convert decimals to mixed numbers.   Example 1: Write as a mixed number: 32.15. Solution: In this example, 32 is the whole part and the decimal ends in the hundredths place. Therefore, the fractional part will be 15/100, and we can write Answer: 32.15 = 32 3 20   To convert fractions to decimal equivalents, divide.   Example 2: Write as a decimal: 3 4 . Solution: Use long division to convert to a decimal. Answer: 3 4 = 0.75   If the division never ends, then use a bar over the repeating digit (or block of digits) to indicate a repeating decimal.   Example 3: Write as a decimal: 2 5 6 . Solution: Use long division to convert the fractional part to a decimal and then add the whole part. At this point, we can see that the long division will continue to repeat. When this is the case, use a bar over the repeating digit to indicate that it continues forever: Then write Answer: 2 5 6 = 2.8 3 ¯   To add or subtract decimals, align them vertically with the decimal point and add corresponding place values. Recall that sometimes you need to borrow from or carry over to the adjoining column (regrouping).   Example 4: Subtract: 54.328 − 23.25 . Solution: Note that trailing zeros to the right of the decimal point do not change the value of the decimal, 23.25 = 23.250. In this case, you need to borrow from the tenths place (regroup) to subtract the digits in the hundredths place. Answer: 31.078   Multiply decimals the same way you multiply whole numbers. The number of decimal places in the product will be the sum of the decimal places found in each of the factors.   Example 5: Multiply: 5.36 × 7.4 . Solution: The total number of decimal places of the two factors is 2 + 1 = 3. Therefore, the result has 3 decimal places. Answer: 39.664   When dividing decimals, move the decimal points of both the dividend and the divisor so that the divisor is a whole number. Remember to move the decimal the same number of places for both the dividend and divisor.   Example 6: Divide: 33.3216 ÷ 6.24 . Solution: Move the decimal point to turn the divisor into a whole number: 624. Move the decimal points of both the divisor and dividend two places to the right. Next, divide. Answer: 5.34   It is often necessary to round off A means of approximating decimals with a specified number of significant digits. decimals to a specified number of decimal places. Rounding off allows us to approximate decimals with fewer significant digits. To do this, look at the digit to the right of the specified place value. If the digit to the right of the specified place is 4 or less, then leave the specified digit unchanged and drop all subsequent digits. If the digit to the right of the specified place is 5 or greater, then increase the value of the digit in the specified place by 1 and drop all subsequent digits. Recall that decimals with trailing zeros to the right of the decimal point can be dropped. For example, round 5.635457 to the nearest thousandth: Round the same number 5.635457 to the nearest hundredth: After rounding off, be sure to use the appropriate notation ( ≈ ) to indicate that the number is now an approximation. When working with US currency, we typically round off to two decimal places, or the nearest hundredth.   Example 7: Calculate and round off to the nearest hundredth. a. 1/3 of $10.25. b. 1/4 of $10.25. Solution: In this context, the key word “of” indicates that we should multiply. a. Multiplying by 1 3 is equivalent to dividing by 3. b. Multiplying by 1 4 is equivalent to dividing by 4. Answers: a. $3.42; b. $2.56  || Definition of Percent A percent A representation of a number as part of 100: N % = N 100 . is a representation of a number as a part of one hundred. The word “percent” can be written “per cent” which means “per 100” or “/100.” We use the symbol ( % ) to denote a percentage: For example, Percents are an important part of our everyday life and show up often in our study of algebra. Percents can be visualized using a pie chart A circular graph divided into sectors whose area is proportional to the relative size of the ratio of the part to the total. (or circle graph), where each sector gives a visual representation of a percentage of the whole. For example, the following pie chart shows the percentage of students in certain age categories of all US community colleges. Source: American Association of Community Colleges. Each sector is proportional to the size of the part out of the whole. The sum of the percentages presented in a pie chart must be 100%. To work with percentages effectively, you have to know how to convert percents to decimals or fractions and back again.  || Percents to Decimals Applying the definition of percent, you see that 58 % = 58 100 = 0.58 . The same result can be obtained by moving the decimal two places to the left. To convert percents to decimals, either apply the definition or move the decimal two places to the left.   Example 8: Convert to a decimal: 152%. Solution: Treat 152 % as  152.0 % and move the decimal two places to the left. Answer: 1.52   Example 9: Convert to a decimal: 2 3 4 % . Solution: First, write the decimal percent equivalent, Next, move the decimal two places to the left, At this point, fill in the tenths place with a zero. Answer: 0.0275   Try this! Convert to a decimal: 215%. Answer: 2.15 Video Solution  || Decimals and Fractions to Percents To convert a decimal to a percent, convert the decimal to a fraction of 100 and apply the definition of percent, or equivalently, move the decimal to the right two places and add a percent sign.   Example 10: Convert 0.23 to a percent. Solution: First, convert the decimal to a fraction of 100 and apply the definition. You can achieve the same result by moving the decimal two places to the right and adding a percent sign. Answer: 23%.   Alternatively, you can multiply by 1 in the form of 100%.   Example 11: Convert 2.35 to a percent. Solution: Recall that 1 = 100%. You can achieve the same result by moving the decimal two places to the right and adding a percent sign. Answer: 235%   Example 12: Convert 5 1 5 to a percent. Solution: Answer: 520%   Sometimes we can use the definition of percent and find an equivalent fraction with a denominator of 100.   Example 13: Convert 13 25 to a percent. Solution: Notice that the denominator 25 is a factor of 100. Use the definition of percent by finding an equivalent fraction with 100 in the denominator. Answer: 52%   This is a very specialized technique because 100 may not be a multiple of the denominator.   Example 14: Convert 1 3 to a percent. Solution: Notice that the denominator 3 is not a factor of 100. In this case, it is best to multiply by 1 in the form of 100%. Answer: 33 1 3 %   Try this! Convert to a percent: 2 3 . Answer: 66 2 3 % Video Solution  || Percents to Fractions When converting percents to fractions, apply the definition of percent and then reduce.   Example 15: Convert to a fraction: 28 % . Solution: Answer: 7 25   Applying the definition of percent is equivalent to removing the percent sign and multiplying by 1 100 .   Example 16: Convert to a fraction: 66 2 3 % . Solution: First, convert to an improper fraction and then apply the definition of percent. Answer: 2 3   Try this! Convert to a fraction: 3 7 31 % . Answer: 1 31 Video Solution   Example 17: Using the given pie chart, calculate the total number of students that were 21 years old or younger if the total US community college enrollment in 2009 was 11.7 million. Solution: From the pie chart we can determine that 47% of the total 11.7 million students were 21 years old or younger. Source: American Association of Community Colleges. Convert 47% to a decimal and multiply as indicated by the key word “of.” Answer: In 2009, approximately 5.5 million students enrolled in US community colleges were 21 years old or younger.  || 
book2_chapter1_5_1	Decimals In this section, we provide a brief review of the decimal system. A real number in decimal form, a decimal A real number expressed using the decimal system. consists of a decimal point, digits (0 through 9) to the left of the decimal point representing the whole number part, and digits to the right of the decimal point representing the fractional part. The digits represent powers of 10 as shown in the set {…, 1,000, 100, 10, 1, 1/10, 1/100, 1/1,000, …} according to the following diagram: For example, the decimal 538.3 can be written in the following expanded form: After simplifying, we obtain the mixed number 538 3 10 . Use this process to convert decimals to mixed numbers.   Example 1: Write as a mixed number: 32.15. Solution: In this example, 32 is the whole part and the decimal ends in the hundredths place. Therefore, the fractional part will be 15/100, and we can write Answer: 32.15 = 32 3 20   To convert fractions to decimal equivalents, divide.   Example 2: Write as a decimal: 3 4 . Solution: Use long division to convert to a decimal. Answer: 3 4 = 0.75   If the division never ends, then use a bar over the repeating digit (or block of digits) to indicate a repeating decimal.   Example 3: Write as a decimal: 2 5 6 . Solution: Use long division to convert the fractional part to a decimal and then add the whole part. At this point, we can see that the long division will continue to repeat. When this is the case, use a bar over the repeating digit to indicate that it continues forever: Then write Answer: 2 5 6 = 2.8 3 ¯   To add or subtract decimals, align them vertically with the decimal point and add corresponding place values. Recall that sometimes you need to borrow from or carry over to the adjoining column (regrouping).   Example 4: Subtract: 54.328 − 23.25 . Solution: Note that trailing zeros to the right of the decimal point do not change the value of the decimal, 23.25 = 23.250. In this case, you need to borrow from the tenths place (regroup) to subtract the digits in the hundredths place. Answer: 31.078   Multiply decimals the same way you multiply whole numbers. The number of decimal places in the product will be the sum of the decimal places found in each of the factors.   Example 5: Multiply: 5.36 × 7.4 . Solution: The total number of decimal places of the two factors is 2 + 1 = 3. Therefore, the result has 3 decimal places. Answer: 39.664   When dividing decimals, move the decimal points of both the dividend and the divisor so that the divisor is a whole number. Remember to move the decimal the same number of places for both the dividend and divisor.   Example 6: Divide: 33.3216 ÷ 6.24 . Solution: Move the decimal point to turn the divisor into a whole number: 624. Move the decimal points of both the divisor and dividend two places to the right. Next, divide. Answer: 5.34   It is often necessary to round off A means of approximating decimals with a specified number of significant digits. decimals to a specified number of decimal places. Rounding off allows us to approximate decimals with fewer significant digits. To do this, look at the digit to the right of the specified place value. If the digit to the right of the specified place is 4 or less, then leave the specified digit unchanged and drop all subsequent digits. If the digit to the right of the specified place is 5 or greater, then increase the value of the digit in the specified place by 1 and drop all subsequent digits. Recall that decimals with trailing zeros to the right of the decimal point can be dropped. For example, round 5.635457 to the nearest thousandth: Round the same number 5.635457 to the nearest hundredth: After rounding off, be sure to use the appropriate notation ( ≈ ) to indicate that the number is now an approximation. When working with US currency, we typically round off to two decimal places, or the nearest hundredth.   Example 7: Calculate and round off to the nearest hundredth. a. 1/3 of $10.25. b. 1/4 of $10.25. Solution: In this context, the key word “of” indicates that we should multiply. a. Multiplying by 1 3 is equivalent to dividing by 3. b. Multiplying by 1 4 is equivalent to dividing by 4. Answers: a. $3.42; b. $2.56 Decimals In this section, we provide a brief review of the decimal system. A real number in decimal form, a decimal A real number expressed using the decimal system. consists of a decimal point, digits (0 through 9) to the left of the decimal point representing the whole number part, and digits to the right of the decimal point representing the fractional part. The digits represent powers of 10 as shown in the set {…, 1,000, 100, 10, 1, 1/10, 1/100, 1/1,000, …} according to the following diagram: For example, the decimal 538.3 can be written in the following expanded form: After simplifying, we obtain the mixed number 538 3 10 . Use this process to convert decimals to mixed numbers.   Example 1: Write as a mixed number: 32.15. Solution: In this example, 32 is the whole part and the decimal ends in the hundredths place. Therefore, the fractional part will be 15/100, and we can write Answer: 32.15 = 32 3 20   To convert fractions to decimal equivalents, divide.   Example 2: Write as a decimal: 3 4 . Solution: Use long division to convert to a decimal. Answer: 3 4 = 0.75   If the division never ends, then use a bar over the repeating digit (or block of digits) to indicate a repeating decimal.   Example 3: Write as a decimal: 2 5 6 . Solution: Use long division to convert the fractional part to a decimal and then add the whole part. At this point, we can see that the long division will continue to repeat. When this is the case, use a bar over the repeating digit to indicate that it continues forever: Then write Answer: 2 5 6 = 2.8 3 ¯   To add or subtract decimals, align them vertically with the decimal point and add corresponding place values. Recall that sometimes you need to borrow from or carry over to the adjoining column (regrouping).   Example 4: Subtract: 54.328 − 23.25 . Solution: Note that trailing zeros to the right of the decimal point do not change the value of the decimal, 23.25 = 23.250. In this case, you need to borrow from the tenths place (regroup) to subtract the digits in the hundredths place. Answer: 31.078   Multiply decimals the same way you multiply whole numbers. The number of decimal places in the product will be the sum of the decimal places found in each of the factors.   Example 5: Multiply: 5.36 × 7.4 . Solution: The total number of decimal places of the two factors is 2 + 1 = 3. Therefore, the result has 3 decimal places. Answer: 39.664   When dividing decimals, move the decimal points of both the dividend and the divisor so that the divisor is a whole number. Remember to move the decimal the same number of places for both the dividend and divisor.   Example 6: Divide: 33.3216 ÷ 6.24 . Solution: Move the decimal point to turn the divisor into a whole number: 624. Move the decimal points of both the divisor and dividend two places to the right. Next, divide. Answer: 5.34   It is often necessary to round off A means of approximating decimals with a specified number of significant digits. decimals to a specified number of decimal places. Rounding off allows us to approximate decimals with fewer significant digits. To do this, look at the digit to the right of the specified place value. If the digit to the right of the specified place is 4 or less, then leave the specified digit unchanged and drop all subsequent digits. If the digit to the right of the specified place is 5 or greater, then increase the value of the digit in the specified place by 1 and drop all subsequent digits. Recall that decimals with trailing zeros to the right of the decimal point can be dropped. For example, round 5.635457 to the nearest thousandth: Round the same number 5.635457 to the nearest hundredth: After rounding off, be sure to use the appropriate notation ( ≈ ) to indicate that the number is now an approximation. When working with US currency, we typically round off to two decimal places, or the nearest hundredth.   Example 7: Calculate and round off to the nearest hundredth. a. 1/3 of $10.25. b. 1/4 of $10.25. Solution: In this context, the key word “of” indicates that we should multiply. a. Multiplying by 1 3 is equivalent to dividing by 3. b. Multiplying by 1 4 is equivalent to dividing by 4. Answers: a. $3.42; b. $2.56  || 
book2_chapter1_5_2	Definition of Percent A percent A representation of a number as part of 100: N % = N 100 . is a representation of a number as a part of one hundred. The word “percent” can be written “per cent” which means “per 100” or “/100.” We use the symbol ( % ) to denote a percentage: For example, Percents are an important part of our everyday life and show up often in our study of algebra. Percents can be visualized using a pie chart A circular graph divided into sectors whose area is proportional to the relative size of the ratio of the part to the total. (or circle graph), where each sector gives a visual representation of a percentage of the whole. For example, the following pie chart shows the percentage of students in certain age categories of all US community colleges. Source: American Association of Community Colleges. Each sector is proportional to the size of the part out of the whole. The sum of the percentages presented in a pie chart must be 100%. To work with percentages effectively, you have to know how to convert percents to decimals or fractions and back again. Definition of Percent A percent A representation of a number as part of 100: N % = N 100 . is a representation of a number as a part of one hundred. The word “percent” can be written “per cent” which means “per 100” or “/100.” We use the symbol ( % ) to denote a percentage: For example, Percents are an important part of our everyday life and show up often in our study of algebra. Percents can be visualized using a pie chart A circular graph divided into sectors whose area is proportional to the relative size of the ratio of the part to the total. (or circle graph), where each sector gives a visual representation of a percentage of the whole. For example, the following pie chart shows the percentage of students in certain age categories of all US community colleges. Source: American Association of Community Colleges. Each sector is proportional to the size of the part out of the whole. The sum of the percentages presented in a pie chart must be 100%. To work with percentages effectively, you have to know how to convert percents to decimals or fractions and back again.  || 
book2_chapter1_5_3	Percents to Decimals Applying the definition of percent, you see that 58 % = 58 100 = 0.58 . The same result can be obtained by moving the decimal two places to the left. To convert percents to decimals, either apply the definition or move the decimal two places to the left.   Example 8: Convert to a decimal: 152%. Solution: Treat 152 % as  152.0 % and move the decimal two places to the left. Answer: 1.52   Example 9: Convert to a decimal: 2 3 4 % . Solution: First, write the decimal percent equivalent, Next, move the decimal two places to the left, At this point, fill in the tenths place with a zero. Answer: 0.0275   Try this! Convert to a decimal: 215%. Answer: 2.15 Video Solution Percents to Decimals Applying the definition of percent, you see that 58 % = 58 100 = 0.58 . The same result can be obtained by moving the decimal two places to the left. To convert percents to decimals, either apply the definition or move the decimal two places to the left.   Example 8: Convert to a decimal: 152%. Solution: Treat 152 % as  152.0 % and move the decimal two places to the left. Answer: 1.52   Example 9: Convert to a decimal: 2 3 4 % . Solution: First, write the decimal percent equivalent, Next, move the decimal two places to the left, At this point, fill in the tenths place with a zero. Answer: 0.0275   Try this! Convert to a decimal: 215%. Answer: 2.15 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter1_5_4	Decimals and Fractions to Percents To convert a decimal to a percent, convert the decimal to a fraction of 100 and apply the definition of percent, or equivalently, move the decimal to the right two places and add a percent sign.   Example 10: Convert 0.23 to a percent. Solution: First, convert the decimal to a fraction of 100 and apply the definition. You can achieve the same result by moving the decimal two places to the right and adding a percent sign. Answer: 23%.   Alternatively, you can multiply by 1 in the form of 100%.   Example 11: Convert 2.35 to a percent. Solution: Recall that 1 = 100%. You can achieve the same result by moving the decimal two places to the right and adding a percent sign. Answer: 235%   Example 12: Convert 5 1 5 to a percent. Solution: Answer: 520%   Sometimes we can use the definition of percent and find an equivalent fraction with a denominator of 100.   Example 13: Convert 13 25 to a percent. Solution: Notice that the denominator 25 is a factor of 100. Use the definition of percent by finding an equivalent fraction with 100 in the denominator. Answer: 52%   This is a very specialized technique because 100 may not be a multiple of the denominator.   Example 14: Convert 1 3 to a percent. Solution: Notice that the denominator 3 is not a factor of 100. In this case, it is best to multiply by 1 in the form of 100%. Answer: 33 1 3 %   Try this! Convert to a percent: 2 3 . Answer: 66 2 3 % Video Solution Decimals and Fractions to Percents To convert a decimal to a percent, convert the decimal to a fraction of 100 and apply the definition of percent, or equivalently, move the decimal to the right two places and add a percent sign.   Example 10: Convert 0.23 to a percent. Solution: First, convert the decimal to a fraction of 100 and apply the definition. You can achieve the same result by moving the decimal two places to the right and adding a percent sign. Answer: 23%.   Alternatively, you can multiply by 1 in the form of 100%.   Example 11: Convert 2.35 to a percent. Solution: Recall that 1 = 100%. You can achieve the same result by moving the decimal two places to the right and adding a percent sign. Answer: 235%   Example 12: Convert 5 1 5 to a percent. Solution: Answer: 520%   Sometimes we can use the definition of percent and find an equivalent fraction with a denominator of 100.   Example 13: Convert 13 25 to a percent. Solution: Notice that the denominator 25 is a factor of 100. Use the definition of percent by finding an equivalent fraction with 100 in the denominator. Answer: 52%   This is a very specialized technique because 100 may not be a multiple of the denominator.   Example 14: Convert 1 3 to a percent. Solution: Notice that the denominator 3 is not a factor of 100. In this case, it is best to multiply by 1 in the form of 100%. Answer: 33 1 3 %   Try this! Convert to a percent: 2 3 . Answer: 66 2 3 % Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter1_5_5	Percents to Fractions When converting percents to fractions, apply the definition of percent and then reduce.   Example 15: Convert to a fraction: 28 % . Solution: Answer: 7 25   Applying the definition of percent is equivalent to removing the percent sign and multiplying by 1 100 .   Example 16: Convert to a fraction: 66 2 3 % . Solution: First, convert to an improper fraction and then apply the definition of percent. Answer: 2 3   Try this! Convert to a fraction: 3 7 31 % . Answer: 1 31 Video Solution   Example 17: Using the given pie chart, calculate the total number of students that were 21 years old or younger if the total US community college enrollment in 2009 was 11.7 million. Solution: From the pie chart we can determine that 47% of the total 11.7 million students were 21 years old or younger. Source: American Association of Community Colleges. Convert 47% to a decimal and multiply as indicated by the key word “of.” Answer: In 2009, approximately 5.5 million students enrolled in US community colleges were 21 years old or younger. Percents to Fractions When converting percents to fractions, apply the definition of percent and then reduce.   Example 15: Convert to a fraction: 28 % . Solution: Answer: 7 25   Applying the definition of percent is equivalent to removing the percent sign and multiplying by 1 100 .   Example 16: Convert to a fraction: 66 2 3 % . Solution: First, convert to an improper fraction and then apply the definition of percent. Answer: 2 3   Try this! Convert to a fraction: 3 7 31 % . Answer: 1 31 Video Solution   Example 17: Using the given pie chart, calculate the total number of students that were 21 years old or younger if the total US community college enrollment in 2009 was 11.7 million. Solution: From the pie chart we can determine that 47% of the total 11.7 million students were 21 years old or younger. Source: American Association of Community Colleges. Convert 47% to a decimal and multiply as indicated by the key word “of.” Answer: In 2009, approximately 5.5 million students enrolled in US community colleges were 21 years old or younger.  || 
book2_chapter1_6	 || Exponential Notation and Positive Integer Exponents If a number is repeated as a factor numerous times, then we can write the product in a more compact form using exponential notation The compact notation a x 2 + b x + c = 0. used when a factor is repeated multiple times. . For example, The base The factor a in the exponential notation a n . is the factor, and the positive integer exponent The positive integer n in the exponential notation a n that indicates the number of times the base is used as a factor. indicates the number of times the base is repeated as a factor. In the above example, the base is 5 and the exponent is 4. In general, if a is the base that is repeated as a factor n times, then When the exponent is 2, we call the result a square The result when the exponent of any real number is 2. . For example, The number 3 is the base and the integer 2 is the exponent. The notation 3 2 can be read two ways: “three squared” or “3 raised to the second power.” The base can be any real number. It is important to study the difference between the ways the last two examples are calculated. In the example ( − 7 ) 2 , the base is −7 as indicated by the parentheses. In the example − 5 2 , the base is 5, not −5, so only the 5 is squared and the result remains negative. To illustrate this, write This subtle distinction is very important because it determines the sign of the result. The textual notation for exponents is usually denoted using the caret The symbol ^ that indicates exponents on many calculators, a n = a ^ n . (^) symbol as follows: The square of an integer is called a perfect square The result of squaring an integer. . The ability to recognize perfect squares is useful in our study of algebra. The squares of the integers from 1 to 15 should be memorized. A partial list of perfect squares follows:   Try this! Simplify ( − 12 ) 2 . Answer: 144 Video Solution When the exponent is 3 we call the result a cube The result when the exponent of any real number is 3. . For example, The notation 3 3 can be read two ways: “three cubed” or “3 raised to the third power.” As before, the base can be any real number. Note that the result of cubing a negative number is negative. The cube of an integer is called a perfect cube The result of cubing an integer. . The ability to recognize perfect cubes is useful in our study of algebra. The cubes of the integers from 1 to 10 should be memorized. A partial list of perfect cubes follows:   Try this! Simplify ( − 2 ) 3 . Answer: −8 Video Solution If the exponent is greater than 3, then the notation a n is read “a raised to the nth power.” Notice that the result of a negative base with an even exponent is positive. The result of a negative base with an odd exponent is negative. These facts are often confused when negative numbers are involved. Study the following four examples carefully: The base is (−2) The base is 2 ( − 2 ) 4 = ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) = + 16 ( − 2 ) 3 = ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) = − 8 − 2 4 = − 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = − 16 − 2 3 = − 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = − 8 The parentheses indicate that the negative number is to be used as the base.   Example 1: Calculate: a. ( − 1 3 ) 3 b. ( − 1 3 ) 4 Solution: The base is − 1 3 for both problems. a. Use the base as a factor three times. b. Use the base as a factor four times. Answers: a. − 1 27 ; b. 1 81   Try this! Simplify: − 10 4 and ( − 10 ) 4 . Answers: − 10,000 and 10,000 Video Solution  || Square Root of a Real Number Think of finding the square root The number that, when multiplied by itself, yields the original number. of a number as the inverse of squaring a number. In other words, to determine the square root of 25 the question is, “What number squared equals 25?” Actually, there are two answers to this question, 5 and −5. When asked for the square root of a number, we implicitly mean the principal (nonnegative) square root The non-negative square root. . Therefore we have, As an example, 25 − − √ = 5 , which is read “square root of 25 equals 5.” The symbol √ is called the radical sign The symbol √ used to denote a square root. and 25 is called the radicand The expression a within a radical sign, a √ n . . The alternative textual notation for square roots follows: It is also worthwhile to note that This is the case because 1 2 = 1 and 0 2 = 0 .   Example 2: Simplify: 10,000 − − − − − √ . Solution: 10,000 is a perfect square because 100 ⋅ 100 = 10,000 . Answer: 100   Example 3: Simplify: 1 9 − − √ . Solution: Here we notice that 1 9 is a square because 1 3 ⋅ 1 3 = 1 9 . Answer: 1 3   Given a and b as positive real numbers, use the following property to simplify square roots whose radicands are not squares: The idea is to identify the largest square factor of the radicand and then apply the property shown above. As an example, to simplify 8 √ notice that 8 is not a perfect square. However, 8 = 4 ⋅ 2 and thus has a perfect square factor other than 1. Apply the property as follows: Here 2 2 √ is a simplified irrational number. You are often asked to find an approximate answer rounded off to a certain decimal place. In that case, use a calculator to find the decimal approximation using either the original problem or the simplified equivalent. On a calculator, try 2.83^2. What do you expect? Why is the answer not what you would expect? It is important to mention that the radicand must be positive. For example, − 9 − − − √ is undefined since there is no real number that when squared is negative. Try taking the square root of a negative number on your calculator. What does it say? Note: taking the square root of a negative number is defined later in the course.   Example 4: Simplify and give an approximate answer rounded to the nearest hundredth: 75 − − √ . Solution: The radicand 75 can be factored as 25 ⋅ 3 where the factor 25 is a perfect square. Answer: 75 − − √ ≈ 8.66   As a check, calculate 75 − − √ and 5 3 √ on a calculator and verify that the both results are approximately 8.66.   Example 5: Simplify: 180 − − − √ . Solution: Since the question did not ask for an approximate answer, we present the exact answer. Answer: 6 5 √   Example 5: Simplify: − 5 162 − − − √ . Solution: Answer: − 45 2 √   Try this! Simplify and give an approximate answer rounded to the nearest hundredth: 128 − − − √ . Answer: 8 2 √ ≈ 11.31 Video Solution Figure 1.1 Pythagoras Source: Detail of The School of Athens by Raffaello Sanzio, 1509, from http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sanzio_01_Pythagoras.jpg. A right triangle A triangle with an angle that measures 90°. is a triangle where one of the angles measures 90°. The side opposite the right angle is the longest side, called the hypotenuse The longest side of a right triangle, it will always be the side opposite the right angle. , and the other two sides are called legs The sides of a right triangle that are not the hypotenuse. . Numerous real-world applications involve this geometric figure. The Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . states that given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units, the square of the measure of the hypotenuse c is equal to the sum of the squares of the measures of the legs: a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . In other words, the hypotenuse of any right triangle is equal to the square root of the sum of the squares of its legs.   Example 6: If the two legs of a right triangle measure 3 units and 4 units, then find the length of the hypotenuse. Solution: Given the lengths of the legs of a right triangle, use the formula c = a 2 + b 2 − − − − − − √ to find the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: c = 5 units   When finding the hypotenuse of a right triangle using the Pythagorean theorem, the radicand is not always a perfect square.   Example 7: If the two legs of a right triangle measure 2 units and 6 units, find the length of the hypotenuse. Solution: Answer: c = 2 10 − − √ units  || 
book2_chapter1_6_1	Exponential Notation and Positive Integer Exponents If a number is repeated as a factor numerous times, then we can write the product in a more compact form using exponential notation The compact notation a x 2 + b x + c = 0. used when a factor is repeated multiple times. . For example, The base The factor a in the exponential notation a n . is the factor, and the positive integer exponent The positive integer n in the exponential notation a n that indicates the number of times the base is used as a factor. indicates the number of times the base is repeated as a factor. In the above example, the base is 5 and the exponent is 4. In general, if a is the base that is repeated as a factor n times, then When the exponent is 2, we call the result a square The result when the exponent of any real number is 2. . For example, The number 3 is the base and the integer 2 is the exponent. The notation 3 2 can be read two ways: “three squared” or “3 raised to the second power.” The base can be any real number. It is important to study the difference between the ways the last two examples are calculated. In the example ( − 7 ) 2 , the base is −7 as indicated by the parentheses. In the example − 5 2 , the base is 5, not −5, so only the 5 is squared and the result remains negative. To illustrate this, write This subtle distinction is very important because it determines the sign of the result. The textual notation for exponents is usually denoted using the caret The symbol ^ that indicates exponents on many calculators, a n = a ^ n . (^) symbol as follows: The square of an integer is called a perfect square The result of squaring an integer. . The ability to recognize perfect squares is useful in our study of algebra. The squares of the integers from 1 to 15 should be memorized. A partial list of perfect squares follows:   Try this! Simplify ( − 12 ) 2 . Answer: 144 Video Solution When the exponent is 3 we call the result a cube The result when the exponent of any real number is 3. . For example, The notation 3 3 can be read two ways: “three cubed” or “3 raised to the third power.” As before, the base can be any real number. Note that the result of cubing a negative number is negative. The cube of an integer is called a perfect cube The result of cubing an integer. . The ability to recognize perfect cubes is useful in our study of algebra. The cubes of the integers from 1 to 10 should be memorized. A partial list of perfect cubes follows:   Try this! Simplify ( − 2 ) 3 . Answer: −8 Video Solution If the exponent is greater than 3, then the notation a n is read “a raised to the nth power.” Notice that the result of a negative base with an even exponent is positive. The result of a negative base with an odd exponent is negative. These facts are often confused when negative numbers are involved. Study the following four examples carefully: The base is (−2) The base is 2 ( − 2 ) 4 = ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) = + 16 ( − 2 ) 3 = ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) = − 8 − 2 4 = − 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = − 16 − 2 3 = − 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = − 8 The parentheses indicate that the negative number is to be used as the base.   Example 1: Calculate: a. ( − 1 3 ) 3 b. ( − 1 3 ) 4 Solution: The base is − 1 3 for both problems. a. Use the base as a factor three times. b. Use the base as a factor four times. Answers: a. − 1 27 ; b. 1 81   Try this! Simplify: − 10 4 and ( − 10 ) 4 . Answers: − 10,000 and 10,000 Video Solution Exponential Notation and Positive Integer Exponents If a number is repeated as a factor numerous times, then we can write the product in a more compact form using exponential notation The compact notation a x 2 + b x + c = 0. used when a factor is repeated multiple times. . For example, The base The factor a in the exponential notation a n . is the factor, and the positive integer exponent The positive integer n in the exponential notation a n that indicates the number of times the base is used as a factor. indicates the number of times the base is repeated as a factor. In the above example, the base is 5 and the exponent is 4. In general, if a is the base that is repeated as a factor n times, then When the exponent is 2, we call the result a square The result when the exponent of any real number is 2. . For example, The number 3 is the base and the integer 2 is the exponent. The notation 3 2 can be read two ways: “three squared” or “3 raised to the second power.” The base can be any real number. It is important to study the difference between the ways the last two examples are calculated. In the example ( − 7 ) 2 , the base is −7 as indicated by the parentheses. In the example − 5 2 , the base is 5, not −5, so only the 5 is squared and the result remains negative. To illustrate this, write This subtle distinction is very important because it determines the sign of the result. The textual notation for exponents is usually denoted using the caret The symbol ^ that indicates exponents on many calculators, a n = a ^ n . (^) symbol as follows: The square of an integer is called a perfect square The result of squaring an integer. . The ability to recognize perfect squares is useful in our study of algebra. The squares of the integers from 1 to 15 should be memorized. A partial list of perfect squares follows:   Try this! Simplify ( − 12 ) 2 . Answer: 144 Video Solution When the exponent is 3 we call the result a cube The result when the exponent of any real number is 3. . For example, The notation 3 3 can be read two ways: “three cubed” or “3 raised to the third power.” As before, the base can be any real number. Note that the result of cubing a negative number is negative. The cube of an integer is called a perfect cube The result of cubing an integer. . The ability to recognize perfect cubes is useful in our study of algebra. The cubes of the integers from 1 to 10 should be memorized. A partial list of perfect cubes follows:   Try this! Simplify ( − 2 ) 3 . Answer: −8 Video Solution If the exponent is greater than 3, then the notation a n is read “a raised to the nth power.” Notice that the result of a negative base with an even exponent is positive. The result of a negative base with an odd exponent is negative. These facts are often confused when negative numbers are involved. Study the following four examples carefully: The base is (−2) The base is 2 ( − 2 ) 4 = ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) = + 16 ( − 2 ) 3 = ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) ⋅ ( − 2 ) = − 8 − 2 4 = − 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = − 16 − 2 3 = − 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = − 8 The parentheses indicate that the negative number is to be used as the base.   Example 1: Calculate: a. ( − 1 3 ) 3 b. ( − 1 3 ) 4 Solution: The base is − 1 3 for both problems. a. Use the base as a factor three times. b. Use the base as a factor four times. Answers: a. − 1 27 ; b. 1 81   Try this! Simplify: − 10 4 and ( − 10 ) 4 . Answers: − 10,000 and 10,000 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter1_6_2	Square Root of a Real Number Think of finding the square root The number that, when multiplied by itself, yields the original number. of a number as the inverse of squaring a number. In other words, to determine the square root of 25 the question is, “What number squared equals 25?” Actually, there are two answers to this question, 5 and −5. When asked for the square root of a number, we implicitly mean the principal (nonnegative) square root The non-negative square root. . Therefore we have, As an example, 25 − − √ = 5 , which is read “square root of 25 equals 5.” The symbol √ is called the radical sign The symbol √ used to denote a square root. and 25 is called the radicand The expression a within a radical sign, a √ n . . The alternative textual notation for square roots follows: It is also worthwhile to note that This is the case because 1 2 = 1 and 0 2 = 0 .   Example 2: Simplify: 10,000 − − − − − √ . Solution: 10,000 is a perfect square because 100 ⋅ 100 = 10,000 . Answer: 100   Example 3: Simplify: 1 9 − − √ . Solution: Here we notice that 1 9 is a square because 1 3 ⋅ 1 3 = 1 9 . Answer: 1 3   Given a and b as positive real numbers, use the following property to simplify square roots whose radicands are not squares: The idea is to identify the largest square factor of the radicand and then apply the property shown above. As an example, to simplify 8 √ notice that 8 is not a perfect square. However, 8 = 4 ⋅ 2 and thus has a perfect square factor other than 1. Apply the property as follows: Here 2 2 √ is a simplified irrational number. You are often asked to find an approximate answer rounded off to a certain decimal place. In that case, use a calculator to find the decimal approximation using either the original problem or the simplified equivalent. On a calculator, try 2.83^2. What do you expect? Why is the answer not what you would expect? It is important to mention that the radicand must be positive. For example, − 9 − − − √ is undefined since there is no real number that when squared is negative. Try taking the square root of a negative number on your calculator. What does it say? Note: taking the square root of a negative number is defined later in the course.   Example 4: Simplify and give an approximate answer rounded to the nearest hundredth: 75 − − √ . Solution: The radicand 75 can be factored as 25 ⋅ 3 where the factor 25 is a perfect square. Answer: 75 − − √ ≈ 8.66   As a check, calculate 75 − − √ and 5 3 √ on a calculator and verify that the both results are approximately 8.66.   Example 5: Simplify: 180 − − − √ . Solution: Since the question did not ask for an approximate answer, we present the exact answer. Answer: 6 5 √   Example 5: Simplify: − 5 162 − − − √ . Solution: Answer: − 45 2 √   Try this! Simplify and give an approximate answer rounded to the nearest hundredth: 128 − − − √ . Answer: 8 2 √ ≈ 11.31 Video Solution Figure 1.1 Pythagoras Source: Detail of The School of Athens by Raffaello Sanzio, 1509, from http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sanzio_01_Pythagoras.jpg. A right triangle A triangle with an angle that measures 90°. is a triangle where one of the angles measures 90°. The side opposite the right angle is the longest side, called the hypotenuse The longest side of a right triangle, it will always be the side opposite the right angle. , and the other two sides are called legs The sides of a right triangle that are not the hypotenuse. . Numerous real-world applications involve this geometric figure. The Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . states that given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units, the square of the measure of the hypotenuse c is equal to the sum of the squares of the measures of the legs: a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . In other words, the hypotenuse of any right triangle is equal to the square root of the sum of the squares of its legs.   Example 6: If the two legs of a right triangle measure 3 units and 4 units, then find the length of the hypotenuse. Solution: Given the lengths of the legs of a right triangle, use the formula c = a 2 + b 2 − − − − − − √ to find the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: c = 5 units   When finding the hypotenuse of a right triangle using the Pythagorean theorem, the radicand is not always a perfect square.   Example 7: If the two legs of a right triangle measure 2 units and 6 units, find the length of the hypotenuse. Solution: Answer: c = 2 10 − − √ units Square Root of a Real Number Think of finding the square root The number that, when multiplied by itself, yields the original number. of a number as the inverse of squaring a number. In other words, to determine the square root of 25 the question is, “What number squared equals 25?” Actually, there are two answers to this question, 5 and −5. When asked for the square root of a number, we implicitly mean the principal (nonnegative) square root The non-negative square root. . Therefore we have, As an example, 25 − − √ = 5 , which is read “square root of 25 equals 5.” The symbol √ is called the radical sign The symbol √ used to denote a square root. and 25 is called the radicand The expression a within a radical sign, a √ n . . The alternative textual notation for square roots follows: It is also worthwhile to note that This is the case because 1 2 = 1 and 0 2 = 0 .   Example 2: Simplify: 10,000 − − − − − √ . Solution: 10,000 is a perfect square because 100 ⋅ 100 = 10,000 . Answer: 100   Example 3: Simplify: 1 9 − − √ . Solution: Here we notice that 1 9 is a square because 1 3 ⋅ 1 3 = 1 9 . Answer: 1 3   Given a and b as positive real numbers, use the following property to simplify square roots whose radicands are not squares: The idea is to identify the largest square factor of the radicand and then apply the property shown above. As an example, to simplify 8 √ notice that 8 is not a perfect square. However, 8 = 4 ⋅ 2 and thus has a perfect square factor other than 1. Apply the property as follows: Here 2 2 √ is a simplified irrational number. You are often asked to find an approximate answer rounded off to a certain decimal place. In that case, use a calculator to find the decimal approximation using either the original problem or the simplified equivalent. On a calculator, try 2.83^2. What do you expect? Why is the answer not what you would expect? It is important to mention that the radicand must be positive. For example, − 9 − − − √ is undefined since there is no real number that when squared is negative. Try taking the square root of a negative number on your calculator. What does it say? Note: taking the square root of a negative number is defined later in the course.   Example 4: Simplify and give an approximate answer rounded to the nearest hundredth: 75 − − √ . Solution: The radicand 75 can be factored as 25 ⋅ 3 where the factor 25 is a perfect square. Answer: 75 − − √ ≈ 8.66   As a check, calculate 75 − − √ and 5 3 √ on a calculator and verify that the both results are approximately 8.66.   Example 5: Simplify: 180 − − − √ . Solution: Since the question did not ask for an approximate answer, we present the exact answer. Answer: 6 5 √   Example 5: Simplify: − 5 162 − − − √ . Solution: Answer: − 45 2 √   Try this! Simplify and give an approximate answer rounded to the nearest hundredth: 128 − − − √ . Answer: 8 2 √ ≈ 11.31 Video Solution Figure 1.1 Pythagoras Source: Detail of The School of Athens by Raffaello Sanzio, 1509, from http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sanzio_01_Pythagoras.jpg. A right triangle A triangle with an angle that measures 90°. is a triangle where one of the angles measures 90°. The side opposite the right angle is the longest side, called the hypotenuse The longest side of a right triangle, it will always be the side opposite the right angle. , and the other two sides are called legs The sides of a right triangle that are not the hypotenuse. . Numerous real-world applications involve this geometric figure. The Pythagorean theorem Given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units and hypotenuse measuring c units, then a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . states that given any right triangle with legs measuring a and b units, the square of the measure of the hypotenuse c is equal to the sum of the squares of the measures of the legs: a 2 + b 2 = c 2 . In other words, the hypotenuse of any right triangle is equal to the square root of the sum of the squares of its legs.   Example 6: If the two legs of a right triangle measure 3 units and 4 units, then find the length of the hypotenuse. Solution: Given the lengths of the legs of a right triangle, use the formula c = a 2 + b 2 − − − − − − √ to find the length of the hypotenuse. Answer: c = 5 units   When finding the hypotenuse of a right triangle using the Pythagorean theorem, the radicand is not always a perfect square.   Example 7: If the two legs of a right triangle measure 2 units and 6 units, find the length of the hypotenuse. Solution: Answer: c = 2 10 − − √ units  || 
book2_chapter1_7	 || Grouping Symbols In a computation where more than one operation is involved, grouping symbols help tell us which operations to perform first. The grouping symbols Parentheses, brackets, braces, and the fraction bar are the common symbols used to group expressions and mathematical operations within a computation. commonly used in algebra are All of the above grouping symbols, as well as absolute value, have the same order of precedence. Perform operations inside the innermost grouping symbol or absolute value first.   Example 1: Simplify: 5 − ( 4 − 12 ) . Solution: Perform the operations within the parentheses first. In this case, first subtract 12 from 4. Answer: 13   Example 2: Simplify: 3 { − 2 [ − ( − 3 − 1 ) ] } . Solution: Answer: −24   Example 3: Simplify: 5 − ∣ ∣ 4 − ( − 3 ) ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ − 3 ∣ ∣ − ( 5 − 7 ) . Solution: The fraction bar groups the numerator and denominator. They should be simplified separately. Answer: − 2 5   Try this! Simplify: − [ − 3 ( 2 + 3 ) ] . Answer: 15 Video Solution  || Order of Operations When several operations are to be applied within a calculation, we must follow a specific order To ensure a single correct result, perform mathematical operations in a specific order. to ensure a single correct result. Perform all calculations within the innermost parentheses or grouping symbols. Evaluate all exponents. Perform multiplication and division operations from left to right. Finally, perform all remaining addition and subtraction operations from left to right. Caution: Note that multiplication and division operations must be worked from left to right.   Example 4: Simplify: 5 2 − 4 ⋅ 3 ÷ 12 . Solution: First, evaluate 5 2 and then perform multiplication and division as they appear from left to right. Answer: 24   Because multiplication and division operations should be worked from left to right, it is sometimes correct to perform division before multiplication.   Example 5: Simplify: 2 4 − 12 ÷ 3 ⋅ 2 + 11 . Solution: Begin by evaluating the exponent, 2 4 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = 16 . Multiplying first leads to an incorrect result. Answer: 19   Example 6: Simplify: − 3 − 5 2 + ( − 7 ) 2 . Solution: Take care to correctly identify the base when squaring. Answer: 21   Example 7: Simplify: 5 − 3 [ 2 3 − 5 + 7 ( − 3 ) ] . Solution: It is tempting to first subtract 5 − 3, but this will lead to an incorrect result. The order of operations requires us to simplify within the brackets first. Subtracting 5 − 3 first leads to an incorrect result. Answer: 59   Example 8: Simplify: − 3 2 − [ 5 − ( 4 2 − 10 ) ] . Solution: Perform the operations within the innermost parentheses first. Answer: −8   Example 9: Simplify: ( − 2 3 ) 2 ÷ [ 5 3 − ( − 1 2 ) 3 ] . Solution: Answer: 32 129   We are less likely to make a mistake if we work one operation at a time. Some problems may involve an absolute value, in which case we assign it the same order of precedence as parentheses.   Example 10: Simplify: 2 − 4 | − 4 − 3 | + ( − 2 ) 4 . Solution: We begin by evaluating the absolute value and then the exponent ( − 2 ) 4 = ( − 2 ) ( − 2 ) ( − 2 ) ( − 2 ) = + 16 . Answer: −10   Try this! Simplify: 10 ÷ 5 ⋅ 2 | ( − 4 ) + | − 3 | | + ( − 3 ) 2 . Answer: 13 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter1_7_1	Grouping Symbols In a computation where more than one operation is involved, grouping symbols help tell us which operations to perform first. The grouping symbols Parentheses, brackets, braces, and the fraction bar are the common symbols used to group expressions and mathematical operations within a computation. commonly used in algebra are All of the above grouping symbols, as well as absolute value, have the same order of precedence. Perform operations inside the innermost grouping symbol or absolute value first.   Example 1: Simplify: 5 − ( 4 − 12 ) . Solution: Perform the operations within the parentheses first. In this case, first subtract 12 from 4. Answer: 13   Example 2: Simplify: 3 { − 2 [ − ( − 3 − 1 ) ] } . Solution: Answer: −24   Example 3: Simplify: 5 − ∣ ∣ 4 − ( − 3 ) ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ − 3 ∣ ∣ − ( 5 − 7 ) . Solution: The fraction bar groups the numerator and denominator. They should be simplified separately. Answer: − 2 5   Try this! Simplify: − [ − 3 ( 2 + 3 ) ] . Answer: 15 Video Solution Grouping Symbols In a computation where more than one operation is involved, grouping symbols help tell us which operations to perform first. The grouping symbols Parentheses, brackets, braces, and the fraction bar are the common symbols used to group expressions and mathematical operations within a computation. commonly used in algebra are All of the above grouping symbols, as well as absolute value, have the same order of precedence. Perform operations inside the innermost grouping symbol or absolute value first.   Example 1: Simplify: 5 − ( 4 − 12 ) . Solution: Perform the operations within the parentheses first. In this case, first subtract 12 from 4. Answer: 13   Example 2: Simplify: 3 { − 2 [ − ( − 3 − 1 ) ] } . Solution: Answer: −24   Example 3: Simplify: 5 − ∣ ∣ 4 − ( − 3 ) ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ − 3 ∣ ∣ − ( 5 − 7 ) . Solution: The fraction bar groups the numerator and denominator. They should be simplified separately. Answer: − 2 5   Try this! Simplify: − [ − 3 ( 2 + 3 ) ] . Answer: 15 Video Solution  || 
book2_chapter1_7_2	Order of Operations When several operations are to be applied within a calculation, we must follow a specific order To ensure a single correct result, perform mathematical operations in a specific order. to ensure a single correct result. Perform all calculations within the innermost parentheses or grouping symbols. Evaluate all exponents. Perform multiplication and division operations from left to right. Finally, perform all remaining addition and subtraction operations from left to right. Caution: Note that multiplication and division operations must be worked from left to right.   Example 4: Simplify: 5 2 − 4 ⋅ 3 ÷ 12 . Solution: First, evaluate 5 2 and then perform multiplication and division as they appear from left to right. Answer: 24   Because multiplication and division operations should be worked from left to right, it is sometimes correct to perform division before multiplication.   Example 5: Simplify: 2 4 − 12 ÷ 3 ⋅ 2 + 11 . Solution: Begin by evaluating the exponent, 2 4 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = 16 . Multiplying first leads to an incorrect result. Answer: 19   Example 6: Simplify: − 3 − 5 2 + ( − 7 ) 2 . Solution: Take care to correctly identify the base when squaring. Answer: 21   Example 7: Simplify: 5 − 3 [ 2 3 − 5 + 7 ( − 3 ) ] . Solution: It is tempting to first subtract 5 − 3, but this will lead to an incorrect result. The order of operations requires us to simplify within the brackets first. Subtracting 5 − 3 first leads to an incorrect result. Answer: 59   Example 8: Simplify: − 3 2 − [ 5 − ( 4 2 − 10 ) ] . Solution: Perform the operations within the innermost parentheses first. Answer: −8   Example 9: Simplify: ( − 2 3 ) 2 ÷ [ 5 3 − ( − 1 2 ) 3 ] . Solution: Answer: 32 129   We are less likely to make a mistake if we work one operation at a time. Some problems may involve an absolute value, in which case we assign it the same order of precedence as parentheses.   Example 10: Simplify: 2 − 4 | − 4 − 3 | + ( − 2 ) 4 . Solution: We begin by evaluating the absolute value and then the exponent ( − 2 ) 4 = ( − 2 ) ( − 2 ) ( − 2 ) ( − 2 ) = + 16 . Answer: −10   Try this! Simplify: 10 ÷ 5 ⋅ 2 | ( − 4 ) + | − 3 | | + ( − 3 ) 2 . Answer: 13 Video Solution Order of Operations When several operations are to be applied within a calculation, we must follow a specific order To ensure a single correct result, perform mathematical operations in a specific order. to ensure a single correct result. Perform all calculations within the innermost parentheses or grouping symbols. Evaluate all exponents. Perform multiplication and division operations from left to right. Finally, perform all remaining addition and subtraction operations from left to right. Caution: Note that multiplication and division operations must be worked from left to right.   Example 4: Simplify: 5 2 − 4 ⋅ 3 ÷ 12 . Solution: First, evaluate 5 2 and then perform multiplication and division as they appear from left to right. Answer: 24   Because multiplication and division operations should be worked from left to right, it is sometimes correct to perform division before multiplication.   Example 5: Simplify: 2 4 − 12 ÷ 3 ⋅ 2 + 11 . Solution: Begin by evaluating the exponent, 2 4 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = 16 . Multiplying first leads to an incorrect result. Answer: 19   Example 6: Simplify: − 3 − 5 2 + ( − 7 ) 2 . Solution: Take care to correctly identify the base when squaring. Answer: 21   Example 7: Simplify: 5 − 3 [ 2 3 − 5 + 7 ( − 3 ) ] . Solution: It is tempting to first subtract 5 − 3, but this will lead to an incorrect result. The order of operations requires us to simplify within the brackets first. Subtracting 5 − 3 first leads to an incorrect result. Answer: 59   Example 8: Simplify: − 3 2 − [ 5 − ( 4 2 − 10 ) ] . Solution: Perform the operations within the innermost parentheses first. Answer: −8   Example 9: Simplify: ( − 2 3 ) 2 ÷ [ 5 3 − ( − 1 2 ) 3 ] . Solution: Answer: 32 129   We are less likely to make a mistake if we work one operation at a time. Some problems may involve an absolute value, in which case we assign it the same order of precedence as parentheses.   Example 10: Simplify: 2 − 4 | − 4 − 3 | + ( − 2 ) 4 . Solution: We begin by evaluating the absolute value and then the exponent ( − 2 ) 4 = ( − 2 ) ( − 2 ) ( − 2 ) ( − 2 ) = + 16 . Answer: −10   Try this! Simplify: 10 ÷ 5 ⋅ 2 | ( − 4 ) + | − 3 | | + ( − 3 ) 2 . Answer: 13 Video Solution  || 
book3_chapter06	 ||  || Binomial A binomial has two terms: x + 1 5x2 – 3x  || Degree of a Term The degree of an individual term in a polynomial is the sum of powers of all the variables in that term. We only have to use the plurals in this definition because of the possibility that there may be more than one variable. In practice, you will most often see polynomials that have only one variable (traditionally denoted by the letter ‘x’). In that case, the degree will simply be the power of the variable. Examples:  2x3 Degree = 3 3x4 Degree = 4 x Degree = 1 3x2y5 Degree = 7 (because 2 + 5 = 7) 37 Degree = 0 Why is the last example, which is just a plain number, considered to be of degree zero? It is because of the fact that x0 = 1, and everything has a factor of 1. So we can say that 37 is the coefficient of x0.  || Degree of a Polynomial The degree of the entire polynomial is the degree of the highest-degree term that it contains, so x2 + 2x – 7 is a second-degree trinomial, and x4 – 7x3  is a fourth-degree binomial.  || Adding (or subtracting) polynomials is really just an exercise in collecting like terms. For example, if we want to add the polynomial2x2 + 4x – 3 to the polynomial6x + 4,we would just put them together and collect like terms:Notice that the parentheses in the first line are only there to distinguish the two polynomials.Although this is basically just a bookkeeping activity, it can get a little messy when there are many terms. One way to help keep things straight is to use the column format for addition, keeping like terms lined up in columns:This method is particularly helpful in the case of subtraction, because it is too easy to make a mistake distributing the minus sign when you write it all in one row.  ||  || Product of a monomial and a binomial: Distributive Law Example: ab(2a + 1) = ab(2a) + ab(1) = 2a2b + ab  || Product of two binomials: FOIL (First-Outer-Inner-Last) Because the situation of a binomial times a binomial is so common, it helps to use a quick mnemonic device to help remember all the products. This is called the FOIL method. Example: 1.      The F stands for first, which means the x in the first factor times the x in the second factor 2.      The O stands for outer, which means the x in the first factor times the 3 in the second factor 3.      The I stands for inner, which means the 2 in the first factor times the x in the second factor 4.      The L stands for last, which means the 2 in the first factor times the 3 in the second factor ·        Of course you would then combine the 3x + 2x into a 5x, because they are like terms, so the final result is  ||  || Squaring a binomial What you should to be able to recognize by sight are these three formulas: You should be able to recognize these products both ways. That is, if you see the left side you should think of the right side, and if you see the right side you should think of the left side.  ||  || Difference of Two Squares If you see something of the form a2 - b2, you should remember the formula Example:  x2 – 4 = (x – 2)(x + 2) This only holds for a difference of two squares. There is no way to factor a sum of two squares such as a2 + b2 into factors with real numbers.  || Trinomials (Quadratic) A quadratic trinomial has the form ax2 + bx + c, where the coefficients a, b, and c, are real numbers (for simplicity we will only use integers, but in real life they could be any real number). We are interested here in factoring quadratic trinomials with integer coefficients into factors that have integer coefficients. Not all such quadratic polynomials can be factored over the real numbers, and even fewer into integers (they all can be factored of we allow for imaginary numbers and rational coefficients, but we don't). Therefore, when we say a quadratic can be factored, we mean that we can write the factors with only integer coefficients. If a quadratic can be factored, it will be the product of two first-degree binomials, except for very simple cases that just involve monomials. For example x2 by itself is a quadratic expression where the coefficient a is equal to 1, and b and c are zero. Obviously, x2 factors into (x)(x), but this is not a very interesting case. A slightly more complicated case occurs when only the coefficient c is zero. Then you get something that looks like 2x2 + 3x This can be factored very simply by factoring out (‘undistributing’) the common factor of x: 2x2 + 3x = x(2x + 3) The most general case is when all three terms are present, as in x2 + 5x + 6 We look at two cases of this type. The easiest to factor are the ones where the coefficient of x2 (which we are calling ‘a’) is equal to 1, as in the above example. If a is not 1 then things get a little bit more complicated, so we will begin by looking at a = 1 examples. Coefficient of x2 is 1 Since the trinomial comes from multiplying two first-degree binomials, let’s review what happens when we multiply binomials using the FOIL method. Remember that to do factoring we will have to think about this process in reverse (you could say we want to ‘de-FOIL’ the trinomial). Suppose we are given (x + 2)(x + 3) Using the FOIL method, we get (x + 2)(x + 3) = x2 + 3x + 2x + 6 Then, collecting like terms gives (x + 2)(x + 3) = x2 + 5x + 6 Now look at this and think about where the terms in the trinomial came from. Obviously the x2 came from x times x. The interesting part is what happens with the other parts, the ‘+ 2’ and the ‘+ 3’. The last term in the trinomial, the 6 in this case, came from multiplying the 2 and the 3. Where did the 5x in the middle come from? We got the 5x by adding the 2x and the 3x when we collected like terms. We can state this as a rule: If the coefficient of x2 is one, then to factor the quadratic you need to find two numbers that: 1. Multiply to give the constant term (which we call c) 2. Add to give the coefficient of x (which we call b) This rule works even if there are minus signs in the quadratic expression (assuming that you remember how to add and multiply positive and negative numbers).  || Special Case: Perfect Square Trinomial Recall from special products of binomials that and The trinomials on the right are called perfect squares because they are the squares of a single binomial, rather than the product of two different binomials. A quadratic trinomial can also have this form: (x + 3)2 = (x + 3)(x + 3) = x2 + 6x + 9 Notice that just as before the coefficient of x is the sum 3 + 3, and the constant term is the product 3 ´ 3. One can also say that The coefficient of x is twice the number 3 The constant term is the number three squared In general, if a quadratic trinomial is a perfect square, then o        The coefficient of x is twice the square root of the constant term Or to put it another way, o        The constant term is the square of half the coefficient of x In symbolic form we can express this as It is helpful to be able to recognize perfect square trinomials. We will see them again when we talk about solving quadratic equations. Coefficient of x2 is not 1 A quadratic is more difficult to factor when the coefficient of the squared term is not 1, because that coefficient is mixed in with the other products from FOILing the two binomials. There are two methods for attacking these: either you can use a systematic guess-and-check method, or a method called factoring by grouping. We will first look at the guess-and-check method (which we could call factoring by grouping). If you need to factor a trinomial such as 2x2 + x - 3, you have to think about what combinations could give the 2x2 as well as the other two terms. In this example the 2x2 must come from (x)(2x), and the constant term might come from either (-1)(3) or (1)(-3). The hard part is figuring out which combination will give the correct middle term. This gets messy because all those coefficients will be mixed in with the middle term when you FOIL the binomials. To see what is going on, let’s see what happens when we FOIL the following binomials: What happened? There are several significant things to notice: The leading term in the trinomial (the 2x2) is just the product of the leading terms in the binomials. The constant term in the trinomial (the -3) is the product of the constant terms in the binomials (so far this is the same as in the case where the coefficient of x2 is 1) The middle term in the trinomial (the x) is the sum of the outer and inner products, which involves all the constants and coefficients in the binomials, in a messy way that is not always obvious by inspection. Because 1 and 2 are relatively simple and 3 is complicated, it makes sense to think of the possible candidates that would satisfy conditions 1 and 2, and then test them in every possible combination by multiplying the resulting binomials to see if you get the correct middle term. This seems tedious, and indeed it can be if the numbers you are working with have a lot of factors, but in practice you usually only have to try a few combinations before you see what will work. As a demonstration, let’s see how we would attack the example by this method. Given 2x2 + x - 3 We make a list of the possible factors of 2x2: The only choice is (2x)(x). Then we make a list of the possible factors of the constant term -3: it is either (1)(-3) or (-1)(3). (Notice that since we need a negative number, one factor must be negative and the other positive, but it doesn’t matter which one so we have to try it both ways). The possible factors of the trinomial are the binomials that we can make out of these possible factors, taken in every possible order. From these possibilities, we see that the candidate binomials are: (2x + 1)(x – 3) (x + 1)(2x – 3) (2x + 3)(x – 1) (x + 3)(2x – 1) If we start multiplying these out, we will find that the third one works, and then we are finished. All you really need to check is to see if the sum of the outer and inner multiplications will give you the correct middle term, since we already know that we will get the correct first and last terms. In short, the method is: 1.      List all the possible ways to get the coefficient of x2 (which we call a) by multiplying two numbers 2.      List all the possible ways to get the constant term (which we call c) by multiplying two numbers 3.      Try all possible combinations of these to see which ones give the correct middle term ·        Don’t forget that the number itself times 1 is a possibility ·        If the number (a or c) is negative, remember to try the plus and minus signs both ways    || Another method for factoring these kinds of quadratic trinomials is called factoring by grouping. Factoring by grouping can be a bit more tedious, and is often not worth the trouble if you can find the correct factors by some quick trial and error. However, it works quite well when the factors are not immediately obvious, such as when you have a very large number of candidate factors. When this happens, the trial and error method becomes very tediousFactoring by grouping is best demonstrated with a few examples. Example: Given: 5x2 + 11x + 2 Find the product ac: (5)(2) = 10 Think of two factors of 10 that add up to 11: 1 and 10 Write the 11x as the sum of 1x and 10x: 5x2 + 1x + 10x + 2 Group the two pairs of terms: (5x2 + 1x) + (10x + 2) Remove common factors from each group: x(5x + 1) + 2(5x + 1) Notice that the two quantities in parentheses are now identical. That means we can factor out a common factor of (5x + 1): (5x + 1)(x + 2) Example: Given: 4x2 + 7x – 15 Find the product ac: (4)(-15) = -60 Think of two factors of -60 that add up to 7: -5 and 12 Write the 7x as the sum of -5x and 12x: 4x2 – 5x + 12x – 15 Group the two pairs of terms: (4x2 – 5x) + (12x – 15) Remove common factors from each group: x(4x – 5) + 3(4x – 5) Notice that the two quantities in parentheses are now identical. That means we can factor out a common factor of (4x - 5): (4x – 5)(x + 3)The ProcedureGiven a general quadratic trinomialax2 + bx + c1. Find the product ac.2. Find two numbers h and k such thathk = ac(h and k are factors of the product of the coefficient of x2 and the constant term)AND h + k = b(h and k add to give the coefficient of x)3. Rewrite the quadratic asax2 + hx + kx + c4. Group the two pairs of terms that have common factors and simplify.(ax2 + hx) + (kx + c)x(ax + h) + (kx + c)(note: because of the way you chose h and k, you will be able to factor a constant out of the second parentheses, leaving you with two identical expressions in parentheses as in the examples).·        Remember that this won’t work for all quadratic trinomials, because not all quadratic trinomials can be factored into products of binomials with integer coefficients. If you have a non-factorable trinomial, you will not be able to do step 2 above.Why this works Suppose the quadratic trinomial in question came from multiplying two arbitrary binomials: (px + n)(qx + m) If we multiply this out we will get pqx2 + pmx + qnx + nm or pqx2 + (pm + qn)x + nm Notice that the coefficient of x consists of a sum of two terms, pm and qn. These are the two numbers we called h and k above. pm = h qn = k Now we see that the two numbers h and k add up to the coefficient of x, which we called b: h + k = b Obviously they are factors of their own product pmqn, but we notice that pq = a, and mn = c, so (pm)(qn) = (pq)(nm) which is equivalent to hk = ac || 
book3_chapter06_1	 || Binomial A binomial has two terms: x + 1 5x2 – 3x  || Degree of a Term The degree of an individual term in a polynomial is the sum of powers of all the variables in that term. We only have to use the plurals in this definition because of the possibility that there may be more than one variable. In practice, you will most often see polynomials that have only one variable (traditionally denoted by the letter ‘x’). In that case, the degree will simply be the power of the variable. Examples:  2x3 Degree = 3 3x4 Degree = 4 x Degree = 1 3x2y5 Degree = 7 (because 2 + 5 = 7) 37 Degree = 0 Why is the last example, which is just a plain number, considered to be of degree zero? It is because of the fact that x0 = 1, and everything has a factor of 1. So we can say that 37 is the coefficient of x0.  || Degree of a Polynomial The degree of the entire polynomial is the degree of the highest-degree term that it contains, so x2 + 2x – 7 is a second-degree trinomial, and x4 – 7x3  is a fourth-degree binomial.  || 
book3_chapter06_1_1	Binomial A binomial has two terms: x + 1 5x2 – 3x Binomial A binomial has two terms: x + 1 5x2 – 3x  || 
book3_chapter06_1_3	Degree of a Term The degree of an individual term in a polynomial is the sum of powers of all the variables in that term. We only have to use the plurals in this definition because of the possibility that there may be more than one variable. In practice, you will most often see polynomials that have only one variable (traditionally denoted by the letter ‘x’). In that case, the degree will simply be the power of the variable. Examples:  2x3 Degree = 3 3x4 Degree = 4 x Degree = 1 3x2y5 Degree = 7 (because 2 + 5 = 7) 37 Degree = 0 Why is the last example, which is just a plain number, considered to be of degree zero? It is because of the fact that x0 = 1, and everything has a factor of 1. So we can say that 37 is the coefficient of x0. Degree of a Term The degree of an individual term in a polynomial is the sum of powers of all the variables in that term. We only have to use the plurals in this definition because of the possibility that there may be more than one variable. In practice, you will most often see polynomials that have only one variable (traditionally denoted by the letter ‘x’). In that case, the degree will simply be the power of the variable. Examples:  2x3 Degree = 3 3x4 Degree = 4 x Degree = 1 3x2y5 Degree = 7 (because 2 + 5 = 7) 37 Degree = 0 Why is the last example, which is just a plain number, considered to be of degree zero? It is because of the fact that x0 = 1, and everything has a factor of 1. So we can say that 37 is the coefficient of x0.  || 
book3_chapter06_1_4	Degree of a Polynomial The degree of the entire polynomial is the degree of the highest-degree term that it contains, so x2 + 2x – 7 is a second-degree trinomial, and x4 – 7x3  is a fourth-degree binomial. Degree of a Polynomial The degree of the entire polynomial is the degree of the highest-degree term that it contains, so x2 + 2x – 7 is a second-degree trinomial, and x4 – 7x3  is a fourth-degree binomial.  || 
book3_chapter06_2	Adding (or subtracting) polynomials is really just an exercise in collecting like terms. For example, if we want to add the polynomial2x2 + 4x – 3 to the polynomial6x + 4,we would just put them together and collect like terms:Notice that the parentheses in the first line are only there to distinguish the two polynomials.Although this is basically just a bookkeeping activity, it can get a little messy when there are many terms. One way to help keep things straight is to use the column format for addition, keeping like terms lined up in columns:This method is particularly helpful in the case of subtraction, because it is too easy to make a mistake distributing the minus sign when you write it all in one row. Adding (or subtracting) polynomials is really just an exercise in collecting like terms. For example, if we want to add the polynomial2x2 + 4x – 3 to the polynomial6x + 4,we would just put them together and collect like terms:Notice that the parentheses in the first line are only there to distinguish the two polynomials.Although this is basically just a bookkeeping activity, it can get a little messy when there are many terms. One way to help keep things straight is to use the column format for addition, keeping like terms lined up in columns:This method is particularly helpful in the case of subtraction, because it is too easy to make a mistake distributing the minus sign when you write it all in one row.  || 
book3_chapter06_3	 || Product of a monomial and a binomial: Distributive Law Example: ab(2a + 1) = ab(2a) + ab(1) = 2a2b + ab  || Product of two binomials: FOIL (First-Outer-Inner-Last) Because the situation of a binomial times a binomial is so common, it helps to use a quick mnemonic device to help remember all the products. This is called the FOIL method. Example: 1.      The F stands for first, which means the x in the first factor times the x in the second factor 2.      The O stands for outer, which means the x in the first factor times the 3 in the second factor 3.      The I stands for inner, which means the 2 in the first factor times the x in the second factor 4.      The L stands for last, which means the 2 in the first factor times the 3 in the second factor ·        Of course you would then combine the 3x + 2x into a 5x, because they are like terms, so the final result is  || 
book3_chapter06_3_1	Product of a monomial and a binomial: Distributive Law Example: ab(2a + 1) = ab(2a) + ab(1) = 2a2b + ab Product of a monomial and a binomial: Distributive Law Example: ab(2a + 1) = ab(2a) + ab(1) = 2a2b + ab  || 
book3_chapter06_3_2	Product of two binomials: FOIL (First-Outer-Inner-Last) Because the situation of a binomial times a binomial is so common, it helps to use a quick mnemonic device to help remember all the products. This is called the FOIL method. Example: 1.      The F stands for first, which means the x in the first factor times the x in the second factor 2.      The O stands for outer, which means the x in the first factor times the 3 in the second factor 3.      The I stands for inner, which means the 2 in the first factor times the x in the second factor 4.      The L stands for last, which means the 2 in the first factor times the 3 in the second factor ·        Of course you would then combine the 3x + 2x into a 5x, because they are like terms, so the final result is Product of two binomials: FOIL (First-Outer-Inner-Last) Because the situation of a binomial times a binomial is so common, it helps to use a quick mnemonic device to help remember all the products. This is called the FOIL method. Example: 1.      The F stands for first, which means the x in the first factor times the x in the second factor 2.      The O stands for outer, which means the x in the first factor times the 3 in the second factor 3.      The I stands for inner, which means the 2 in the first factor times the x in the second factor 4.      The L stands for last, which means the 2 in the first factor times the 3 in the second factor ·        Of course you would then combine the 3x + 2x into a 5x, because they are like terms, so the final result is  || 
book3_chapter06_4	 || Squaring a binomial What you should to be able to recognize by sight are these three formulas: You should be able to recognize these products both ways. That is, if you see the left side you should think of the right side, and if you see the right side you should think of the left side.  || 
book3_chapter06_4_1	Squaring a binomial What you should to be able to recognize by sight are these three formulas: You should be able to recognize these products both ways. That is, if you see the left side you should think of the right side, and if you see the right side you should think of the left side. Squaring a binomial What you should to be able to recognize by sight are these three formulas: You should be able to recognize these products both ways. That is, if you see the left side you should think of the right side, and if you see the right side you should think of the left side.  || 
book3_chapter06_5	 || Difference of Two Squares If you see something of the form a2 - b2, you should remember the formula Example:  x2 – 4 = (x – 2)(x + 2) This only holds for a difference of two squares. There is no way to factor a sum of two squares such as a2 + b2 into factors with real numbers.  || Trinomials (Quadratic) A quadratic trinomial has the form ax2 + bx + c, where the coefficients a, b, and c, are real numbers (for simplicity we will only use integers, but in real life they could be any real number). We are interested here in factoring quadratic trinomials with integer coefficients into factors that have integer coefficients. Not all such quadratic polynomials can be factored over the real numbers, and even fewer into integers (they all can be factored of we allow for imaginary numbers and rational coefficients, but we don't). Therefore, when we say a quadratic can be factored, we mean that we can write the factors with only integer coefficients. If a quadratic can be factored, it will be the product of two first-degree binomials, except for very simple cases that just involve monomials. For example x2 by itself is a quadratic expression where the coefficient a is equal to 1, and b and c are zero. Obviously, x2 factors into (x)(x), but this is not a very interesting case. A slightly more complicated case occurs when only the coefficient c is zero. Then you get something that looks like 2x2 + 3x This can be factored very simply by factoring out (‘undistributing’) the common factor of x: 2x2 + 3x = x(2x + 3) The most general case is when all three terms are present, as in x2 + 5x + 6 We look at two cases of this type. The easiest to factor are the ones where the coefficient of x2 (which we are calling ‘a’) is equal to 1, as in the above example. If a is not 1 then things get a little bit more complicated, so we will begin by looking at a = 1 examples. Coefficient of x2 is 1 Since the trinomial comes from multiplying two first-degree binomials, let’s review what happens when we multiply binomials using the FOIL method. Remember that to do factoring we will have to think about this process in reverse (you could say we want to ‘de-FOIL’ the trinomial). Suppose we are given (x + 2)(x + 3) Using the FOIL method, we get (x + 2)(x + 3) = x2 + 3x + 2x + 6 Then, collecting like terms gives (x + 2)(x + 3) = x2 + 5x + 6 Now look at this and think about where the terms in the trinomial came from. Obviously the x2 came from x times x. The interesting part is what happens with the other parts, the ‘+ 2’ and the ‘+ 3’. The last term in the trinomial, the 6 in this case, came from multiplying the 2 and the 3. Where did the 5x in the middle come from? We got the 5x by adding the 2x and the 3x when we collected like terms. We can state this as a rule: If the coefficient of x2 is one, then to factor the quadratic you need to find two numbers that: 1. Multiply to give the constant term (which we call c) 2. Add to give the coefficient of x (which we call b) This rule works even if there are minus signs in the quadratic expression (assuming that you remember how to add and multiply positive and negative numbers).  || Special Case: Perfect Square Trinomial Recall from special products of binomials that and The trinomials on the right are called perfect squares because they are the squares of a single binomial, rather than the product of two different binomials. A quadratic trinomial can also have this form: (x + 3)2 = (x + 3)(x + 3) = x2 + 6x + 9 Notice that just as before the coefficient of x is the sum 3 + 3, and the constant term is the product 3 ´ 3. One can also say that The coefficient of x is twice the number 3 The constant term is the number three squared In general, if a quadratic trinomial is a perfect square, then o        The coefficient of x is twice the square root of the constant term Or to put it another way, o        The constant term is the square of half the coefficient of x In symbolic form we can express this as It is helpful to be able to recognize perfect square trinomials. We will see them again when we talk about solving quadratic equations. Coefficient of x2 is not 1 A quadratic is more difficult to factor when the coefficient of the squared term is not 1, because that coefficient is mixed in with the other products from FOILing the two binomials. There are two methods for attacking these: either you can use a systematic guess-and-check method, or a method called factoring by grouping. We will first look at the guess-and-check method (which we could call factoring by grouping). If you need to factor a trinomial such as 2x2 + x - 3, you have to think about what combinations could give the 2x2 as well as the other two terms. In this example the 2x2 must come from (x)(2x), and the constant term might come from either (-1)(3) or (1)(-3). The hard part is figuring out which combination will give the correct middle term. This gets messy because all those coefficients will be mixed in with the middle term when you FOIL the binomials. To see what is going on, let’s see what happens when we FOIL the following binomials: What happened? There are several significant things to notice: The leading term in the trinomial (the 2x2) is just the product of the leading terms in the binomials. The constant term in the trinomial (the -3) is the product of the constant terms in the binomials (so far this is the same as in the case where the coefficient of x2 is 1) The middle term in the trinomial (the x) is the sum of the outer and inner products, which involves all the constants and coefficients in the binomials, in a messy way that is not always obvious by inspection. Because 1 and 2 are relatively simple and 3 is complicated, it makes sense to think of the possible candidates that would satisfy conditions 1 and 2, and then test them in every possible combination by multiplying the resulting binomials to see if you get the correct middle term. This seems tedious, and indeed it can be if the numbers you are working with have a lot of factors, but in practice you usually only have to try a few combinations before you see what will work. As a demonstration, let’s see how we would attack the example by this method. Given 2x2 + x - 3 We make a list of the possible factors of 2x2: The only choice is (2x)(x). Then we make a list of the possible factors of the constant term -3: it is either (1)(-3) or (-1)(3). (Notice that since we need a negative number, one factor must be negative and the other positive, but it doesn’t matter which one so we have to try it both ways). The possible factors of the trinomial are the binomials that we can make out of these possible factors, taken in every possible order. From these possibilities, we see that the candidate binomials are: (2x + 1)(x – 3) (x + 1)(2x – 3) (2x + 3)(x – 1) (x + 3)(2x – 1) If we start multiplying these out, we will find that the third one works, and then we are finished. All you really need to check is to see if the sum of the outer and inner multiplications will give you the correct middle term, since we already know that we will get the correct first and last terms. In short, the method is: 1.      List all the possible ways to get the coefficient of x2 (which we call a) by multiplying two numbers 2.      List all the possible ways to get the constant term (which we call c) by multiplying two numbers 3.      Try all possible combinations of these to see which ones give the correct middle term ·        Don’t forget that the number itself times 1 is a possibility ·        If the number (a or c) is negative, remember to try the plus and minus signs both ways    || 
book3_chapter06_5_1	Difference of Two Squares If you see something of the form a2 - b2, you should remember the formula Example:  x2 – 4 = (x – 2)(x + 2) This only holds for a difference of two squares. There is no way to factor a sum of two squares such as a2 + b2 into factors with real numbers. Difference of Two Squares If you see something of the form a2 - b2, you should remember the formula Example:  x2 – 4 = (x – 2)(x + 2) This only holds for a difference of two squares. There is no way to factor a sum of two squares such as a2 + b2 into factors with real numbers.  || 
book3_chapter06_5_2	Trinomials (Quadratic) A quadratic trinomial has the form ax2 + bx + c, where the coefficients a, b, and c, are real numbers (for simplicity we will only use integers, but in real life they could be any real number). We are interested here in factoring quadratic trinomials with integer coefficients into factors that have integer coefficients. Not all such quadratic polynomials can be factored over the real numbers, and even fewer into integers (they all can be factored of we allow for imaginary numbers and rational coefficients, but we don't). Therefore, when we say a quadratic can be factored, we mean that we can write the factors with only integer coefficients. If a quadratic can be factored, it will be the product of two first-degree binomials, except for very simple cases that just involve monomials. For example x2 by itself is a quadratic expression where the coefficient a is equal to 1, and b and c are zero. Obviously, x2 factors into (x)(x), but this is not a very interesting case. A slightly more complicated case occurs when only the coefficient c is zero. Then you get something that looks like 2x2 + 3x This can be factored very simply by factoring out (‘undistributing’) the common factor of x: 2x2 + 3x = x(2x + 3) The most general case is when all three terms are present, as in x2 + 5x + 6 We look at two cases of this type. The easiest to factor are the ones where the coefficient of x2 (which we are calling ‘a’) is equal to 1, as in the above example. If a is not 1 then things get a little bit more complicated, so we will begin by looking at a = 1 examples. Coefficient of x2 is 1 Since the trinomial comes from multiplying two first-degree binomials, let’s review what happens when we multiply binomials using the FOIL method. Remember that to do factoring we will have to think about this process in reverse (you could say we want to ‘de-FOIL’ the trinomial). Suppose we are given (x + 2)(x + 3) Using the FOIL method, we get (x + 2)(x + 3) = x2 + 3x + 2x + 6 Then, collecting like terms gives (x + 2)(x + 3) = x2 + 5x + 6 Now look at this and think about where the terms in the trinomial came from. Obviously the x2 came from x times x. The interesting part is what happens with the other parts, the ‘+ 2’ and the ‘+ 3’. The last term in the trinomial, the 6 in this case, came from multiplying the 2 and the 3. Where did the 5x in the middle come from? We got the 5x by adding the 2x and the 3x when we collected like terms. We can state this as a rule: If the coefficient of x2 is one, then to factor the quadratic you need to find two numbers that: 1. Multiply to give the constant term (which we call c) 2. Add to give the coefficient of x (which we call b) This rule works even if there are minus signs in the quadratic expression (assuming that you remember how to add and multiply positive and negative numbers). Trinomials (Quadratic) A quadratic trinomial has the form ax2 + bx + c, where the coefficients a, b, and c, are real numbers (for simplicity we will only use integers, but in real life they could be any real number). We are interested here in factoring quadratic trinomials with integer coefficients into factors that have integer coefficients. Not all such quadratic polynomials can be factored over the real numbers, and even fewer into integers (they all can be factored of we allow for imaginary numbers and rational coefficients, but we don't). Therefore, when we say a quadratic can be factored, we mean that we can write the factors with only integer coefficients. If a quadratic can be factored, it will be the product of two first-degree binomials, except for very simple cases that just involve monomials. For example x2 by itself is a quadratic expression where the coefficient a is equal to 1, and b and c are zero. Obviously, x2 factors into (x)(x), but this is not a very interesting case. A slightly more complicated case occurs when only the coefficient c is zero. Then you get something that looks like 2x2 + 3x This can be factored very simply by factoring out (‘undistributing’) the common factor of x: 2x2 + 3x = x(2x + 3) The most general case is when all three terms are present, as in x2 + 5x + 6 We look at two cases of this type. The easiest to factor are the ones where the coefficient of x2 (which we are calling ‘a’) is equal to 1, as in the above example. If a is not 1 then things get a little bit more complicated, so we will begin by looking at a = 1 examples. Coefficient of x2 is 1 Since the trinomial comes from multiplying two first-degree binomials, let’s review what happens when we multiply binomials using the FOIL method. Remember that to do factoring we will have to think about this process in reverse (you could say we want to ‘de-FOIL’ the trinomial). Suppose we are given (x + 2)(x + 3) Using the FOIL method, we get (x + 2)(x + 3) = x2 + 3x + 2x + 6 Then, collecting like terms gives (x + 2)(x + 3) = x2 + 5x + 6 Now look at this and think about where the terms in the trinomial came from. Obviously the x2 came from x times x. The interesting part is what happens with the other parts, the ‘+ 2’ and the ‘+ 3’. The last term in the trinomial, the 6 in this case, came from multiplying the 2 and the 3. Where did the 5x in the middle come from? We got the 5x by adding the 2x and the 3x when we collected like terms. We can state this as a rule: If the coefficient of x2 is one, then to factor the quadratic you need to find two numbers that: 1. Multiply to give the constant term (which we call c) 2. Add to give the coefficient of x (which we call b) This rule works even if there are minus signs in the quadratic expression (assuming that you remember how to add and multiply positive and negative numbers).  || 
book3_chapter06_5_3	Special Case: Perfect Square Trinomial Recall from special products of binomials that and The trinomials on the right are called perfect squares because they are the squares of a single binomial, rather than the product of two different binomials. A quadratic trinomial can also have this form: (x + 3)2 = (x + 3)(x + 3) = x2 + 6x + 9 Notice that just as before the coefficient of x is the sum 3 + 3, and the constant term is the product 3 ´ 3. One can also say that The coefficient of x is twice the number 3 The constant term is the number three squared In general, if a quadratic trinomial is a perfect square, then o        The coefficient of x is twice the square root of the constant term Or to put it another way, o        The constant term is the square of half the coefficient of x In symbolic form we can express this as It is helpful to be able to recognize perfect square trinomials. We will see them again when we talk about solving quadratic equations. Coefficient of x2 is not 1 A quadratic is more difficult to factor when the coefficient of the squared term is not 1, because that coefficient is mixed in with the other products from FOILing the two binomials. There are two methods for attacking these: either you can use a systematic guess-and-check method, or a method called factoring by grouping. We will first look at the guess-and-check method (which we could call factoring by grouping). If you need to factor a trinomial such as 2x2 + x - 3, you have to think about what combinations could give the 2x2 as well as the other two terms. In this example the 2x2 must come from (x)(2x), and the constant term might come from either (-1)(3) or (1)(-3). The hard part is figuring out which combination will give the correct middle term. This gets messy because all those coefficients will be mixed in with the middle term when you FOIL the binomials. To see what is going on, let’s see what happens when we FOIL the following binomials: What happened? There are several significant things to notice: The leading term in the trinomial (the 2x2) is just the product of the leading terms in the binomials. The constant term in the trinomial (the -3) is the product of the constant terms in the binomials (so far this is the same as in the case where the coefficient of x2 is 1) The middle term in the trinomial (the x) is the sum of the outer and inner products, which involves all the constants and coefficients in the binomials, in a messy way that is not always obvious by inspection. Because 1 and 2 are relatively simple and 3 is complicated, it makes sense to think of the possible candidates that would satisfy conditions 1 and 2, and then test them in every possible combination by multiplying the resulting binomials to see if you get the correct middle term. This seems tedious, and indeed it can be if the numbers you are working with have a lot of factors, but in practice you usually only have to try a few combinations before you see what will work. As a demonstration, let’s see how we would attack the example by this method. Given 2x2 + x - 3 We make a list of the possible factors of 2x2: The only choice is (2x)(x). Then we make a list of the possible factors of the constant term -3: it is either (1)(-3) or (-1)(3). (Notice that since we need a negative number, one factor must be negative and the other positive, but it doesn’t matter which one so we have to try it both ways). The possible factors of the trinomial are the binomials that we can make out of these possible factors, taken in every possible order. From these possibilities, we see that the candidate binomials are: (2x + 1)(x – 3) (x + 1)(2x – 3) (2x + 3)(x – 1) (x + 3)(2x – 1) If we start multiplying these out, we will find that the third one works, and then we are finished. All you really need to check is to see if the sum of the outer and inner multiplications will give you the correct middle term, since we already know that we will get the correct first and last terms. In short, the method is: 1.      List all the possible ways to get the coefficient of x2 (which we call a) by multiplying two numbers 2.      List all the possible ways to get the constant term (which we call c) by multiplying two numbers 3.      Try all possible combinations of these to see which ones give the correct middle term ·        Don’t forget that the number itself times 1 is a possibility ·        If the number (a or c) is negative, remember to try the plus and minus signs both ways   Special Case: Perfect Square Trinomial Recall from special products of binomials that and The trinomials on the right are called perfect squares because they are the squares of a single binomial, rather than the product of two different binomials. A quadratic trinomial can also have this form: (x + 3)2 = (x + 3)(x + 3) = x2 + 6x + 9 Notice that just as before the coefficient of x is the sum 3 + 3, and the constant term is the product 3 ´ 3. One can also say that The coefficient of x is twice the number 3 The constant term is the number three squared In general, if a quadratic trinomial is a perfect square, then o        The coefficient of x is twice the square root of the constant term Or to put it another way, o        The constant term is the square of half the coefficient of x In symbolic form we can express this as It is helpful to be able to recognize perfect square trinomials. We will see them again when we talk about solving quadratic equations. Coefficient of x2 is not 1 A quadratic is more difficult to factor when the coefficient of the squared term is not 1, because that coefficient is mixed in with the other products from FOILing the two binomials. There are two methods for attacking these: either you can use a systematic guess-and-check method, or a method called factoring by grouping. We will first look at the guess-and-check method (which we could call factoring by grouping). If you need to factor a trinomial such as 2x2 + x - 3, you have to think about what combinations could give the 2x2 as well as the other two terms. In this example the 2x2 must come from (x)(2x), and the constant term might come from either (-1)(3) or (1)(-3). The hard part is figuring out which combination will give the correct middle term. This gets messy because all those coefficients will be mixed in with the middle term when you FOIL the binomials. To see what is going on, let’s see what happens when we FOIL the following binomials: What happened? There are several significant things to notice: The leading term in the trinomial (the 2x2) is just the product of the leading terms in the binomials. The constant term in the trinomial (the -3) is the product of the constant terms in the binomials (so far this is the same as in the case where the coefficient of x2 is 1) The middle term in the trinomial (the x) is the sum of the outer and inner products, which involves all the constants and coefficients in the binomials, in a messy way that is not always obvious by inspection. Because 1 and 2 are relatively simple and 3 is complicated, it makes sense to think of the possible candidates that would satisfy conditions 1 and 2, and then test them in every possible combination by multiplying the resulting binomials to see if you get the correct middle term. This seems tedious, and indeed it can be if the numbers you are working with have a lot of factors, but in practice you usually only have to try a few combinations before you see what will work. As a demonstration, let’s see how we would attack the example by this method. Given 2x2 + x - 3 We make a list of the possible factors of 2x2: The only choice is (2x)(x). Then we make a list of the possible factors of the constant term -3: it is either (1)(-3) or (-1)(3). (Notice that since we need a negative number, one factor must be negative and the other positive, but it doesn’t matter which one so we have to try it both ways). The possible factors of the trinomial are the binomials that we can make out of these possible factors, taken in every possible order. From these possibilities, we see that the candidate binomials are: (2x + 1)(x – 3) (x + 1)(2x – 3) (2x + 3)(x – 1) (x + 3)(2x – 1) If we start multiplying these out, we will find that the third one works, and then we are finished. All you really need to check is to see if the sum of the outer and inner multiplications will give you the correct middle term, since we already know that we will get the correct first and last terms. In short, the method is: 1.      List all the possible ways to get the coefficient of x2 (which we call a) by multiplying two numbers 2.      List all the possible ways to get the constant term (which we call c) by multiplying two numbers 3.      Try all possible combinations of these to see which ones give the correct middle term ·        Don’t forget that the number itself times 1 is a possibility ·        If the number (a or c) is negative, remember to try the plus and minus signs both ways    || 
book3_chapter06_6	Another method for factoring these kinds of quadratic trinomials is called factoring by grouping. Factoring by grouping can be a bit more tedious, and is often not worth the trouble if you can find the correct factors by some quick trial and error. However, it works quite well when the factors are not immediately obvious, such as when you have a very large number of candidate factors. When this happens, the trial and error method becomes very tediousFactoring by grouping is best demonstrated with a few examples. Example: Given: 5x2 + 11x + 2 Find the product ac: (5)(2) = 10 Think of two factors of 10 that add up to 11: 1 and 10 Write the 11x as the sum of 1x and 10x: 5x2 + 1x + 10x + 2 Group the two pairs of terms: (5x2 + 1x) + (10x + 2) Remove common factors from each group: x(5x + 1) + 2(5x + 1) Notice that the two quantities in parentheses are now identical. That means we can factor out a common factor of (5x + 1): (5x + 1)(x + 2) Example: Given: 4x2 + 7x – 15 Find the product ac: (4)(-15) = -60 Think of two factors of -60 that add up to 7: -5 and 12 Write the 7x as the sum of -5x and 12x: 4x2 – 5x + 12x – 15 Group the two pairs of terms: (4x2 – 5x) + (12x – 15) Remove common factors from each group: x(4x – 5) + 3(4x – 5) Notice that the two quantities in parentheses are now identical. That means we can factor out a common factor of (4x - 5): (4x – 5)(x + 3)The ProcedureGiven a general quadratic trinomialax2 + bx + c1. Find the product ac.2. Find two numbers h and k such thathk = ac(h and k are factors of the product of the coefficient of x2 and the constant term)AND h + k = b(h and k add to give the coefficient of x)3. Rewrite the quadratic asax2 + hx + kx + c4. Group the two pairs of terms that have common factors and simplify.(ax2 + hx) + (kx + c)x(ax + h) + (kx + c)(note: because of the way you chose h and k, you will be able to factor a constant out of the second parentheses, leaving you with two identical expressions in parentheses as in the examples).·        Remember that this won’t work for all quadratic trinomials, because not all quadratic trinomials can be factored into products of binomials with integer coefficients. If you have a non-factorable trinomial, you will not be able to do step 2 above.Why this works Suppose the quadratic trinomial in question came from multiplying two arbitrary binomials: (px + n)(qx + m) If we multiply this out we will get pqx2 + pmx + qnx + nm or pqx2 + (pm + qn)x + nm Notice that the coefficient of x consists of a sum of two terms, pm and qn. These are the two numbers we called h and k above. pm = h qn = k Now we see that the two numbers h and k add up to the coefficient of x, which we called b: h + k = b Obviously they are factors of their own product pmqn, but we notice that pq = a, and mn = c, so (pm)(qn) = (pq)(nm) which is equivalent to hk = acAnother method for factoring these kinds of quadratic trinomials is called factoring by grouping. Factoring by grouping can be a bit more tedious, and is often not worth the trouble if you can find the correct factors by some quick trial and error. However, it works quite well when the factors are not immediately obvious, such as when you have a very large number of candidate factors. When this happens, the trial and error method becomes very tediousFactoring by grouping is best demonstrated with a few examples. Example: Given: 5x2 + 11x + 2 Find the product ac: (5)(2) = 10 Think of two factors of 10 that add up to 11: 1 and 10 Write the 11x as the sum of 1x and 10x: 5x2 + 1x + 10x + 2 Group the two pairs of terms: (5x2 + 1x) + (10x + 2) Remove common factors from each group: x(5x + 1) + 2(5x + 1) Notice that the two quantities in parentheses are now identical. That means we can factor out a common factor of (5x + 1): (5x + 1)(x + 2) Example: Given: 4x2 + 7x – 15 Find the product ac: (4)(-15) = -60 Think of two factors of -60 that add up to 7: -5 and 12 Write the 7x as the sum of -5x and 12x: 4x2 – 5x + 12x – 15 Group the two pairs of terms: (4x2 – 5x) + (12x – 15) Remove common factors from each group: x(4x – 5) + 3(4x – 5) Notice that the two quantities in parentheses are now identical. That means we can factor out a common factor of (4x - 5): (4x – 5)(x + 3)The ProcedureGiven a general quadratic trinomialax2 + bx + c1. Find the product ac.2. Find two numbers h and k such thathk = ac(h and k are factors of the product of the coefficient of x2 and the constant term)AND h + k = b(h and k add to give the coefficient of x)3. Rewrite the quadratic asax2 + hx + kx + c4. Group the two pairs of terms that have common factors and simplify.(ax2 + hx) + (kx + c)x(ax + h) + (kx + c)(note: because of the way you chose h and k, you will be able to factor a constant out of the second parentheses, leaving you with two identical expressions in parentheses as in the examples).·        Remember that this won’t work for all quadratic trinomials, because not all quadratic trinomials can be factored into products of binomials with integer coefficients. If you have a non-factorable trinomial, you will not be able to do step 2 above.Why this works Suppose the quadratic trinomial in question came from multiplying two arbitrary binomials: (px + n)(qx + m) If we multiply this out we will get pqx2 + pmx + qnx + nm or pqx2 + (pm + qn)x + nm Notice that the coefficient of x consists of a sum of two terms, pm and qn. These are the two numbers we called h and k above. pm = h qn = k Now we see that the two numbers h and k add up to the coefficient of x, which we called b: h + k = b Obviously they are factors of their own product pmqn, but we notice that pq = a, and mn = c, so (pm)(qn) = (pq)(nm) which is equivalent to hk = ac || 
book3_chapter07	 || o        A rational expression is a ratio of polynomials:Examples: Excluded Values Whenever an expression containing variables is present in the denominator of a fraction, you should be alert to the possibility that certain values of the variables might make the denominator equal to zero, which is forbidden. This means that when we are talking about rational expressions we can no longer say that the variable represents “any real number.” Certain values may have to be excluded. For example, in the expression , we cannot allow the value x = 0 so we would parenthetically add the comment (x ¹ 0), and for we would say (x ¹ 3) . In the case of we would exclude both x = 1 and x = –1, since either choice would make the denominator zero. We don’t care if the numerator is zero. If the numerator is zero, that just makes the whole rational expression zero (assuming, of course, that the denominator is not zero), just as with common fractions. Recall that 0/4 = 0, but 4/0 is undefined. It is important to keep this in mind as you work with rational expressions, because it can happen that you are trying to solve an equation and you get one of the “forbidden” values as a solution. You would have to discard that solution as being unacceptable. You can also get some crazy results if you don’t pay attention to the possibility that the denominator might be zero for certain values of the variable. For example, the celebrated proof that 0 = 1 and other nonsense. Proof that 1 = 0 And other nonsense Can you identify the flaw in this argument? Let x = 1. Then Given: x = 1 Multiply both sides by x: x2 = x Subtract x from both sides: x2 – x = 0 Factor out an x: x(x – 1) = 0 Divide both sides by (x ‑ 1): x = 0 But x = 1, so substitute 1 for x to get: 1 = 0 This is a very simple variant of this classic ‘proof’. Once you see the trick*, you can construct more elaborate versions that do a better job of concealing the error, and you can vary it to ‘prove’ other nonsense such as 1 = 2. For example: Let x = 1 . Then Given: x = 1 Multiply both sides by –1: –x = –1 Add x2 to both sides: x2 - x = x2 – 1 Factor both sides: x(x – 1) = (x – 1)(x + 1) Divide both sides by (x – 1): x = (x + 1) Substituting 1 back in for x gives the result: 1 = 2 *The trick:  We are dividing by zero because if x = 1 then (x – 1) = 0. Thus, all of these “proofs” are invalid because they use an illegal step. ||  || Multiplication and Division Same rules as for rational numbers! Multiplication Both the numerators and the denominators multiply together Common factors may be cancelled before multiplying Example:    Given Equation: First factor all the expressions: (I also put the denominators in parentheses because then it is easier to see them as distinct factors) Now cancel common factors—any factor on the top can cancel with any factor on the bottom: Now just multiply what’s left. You usually do not have to multiply out the factors, just leave them as shown.   Division Multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor Invert the second fraction, then proceed with multiplication as above Do not attempt to cancel factors before it is written as a multiplication  || Addition and Subtraction Same procedure as for rational numbers! ·        Only the numerators can be added together, and only when all the denominators are the same Finding the LCD The LCD is built up of all the factors of the individual denominators, each factor included the most number of times it appears in an individual denominator. The product of all the denominators is always a common denominator, but not necessarily the LCD (the final answer may have to be reduced).   Example:  Given equation: Factor both denominators: Assemble the LCD: Note that the LCD contains both denominators Build up the fractions so that they both have the LCD for a denominator: (keep both denominators in factored form to make it easier to see what factors they need to look like the LCD) Now that they are over the same denominator, you can add the numerators: And simplify:  || 
book3_chapter07_1	o        A rational expression is a ratio of polynomials:Examples: Excluded Values Whenever an expression containing variables is present in the denominator of a fraction, you should be alert to the possibility that certain values of the variables might make the denominator equal to zero, which is forbidden. This means that when we are talking about rational expressions we can no longer say that the variable represents “any real number.” Certain values may have to be excluded. For example, in the expression , we cannot allow the value x = 0 so we would parenthetically add the comment (x ¹ 0), and for we would say (x ¹ 3) . In the case of we would exclude both x = 1 and x = –1, since either choice would make the denominator zero. We don’t care if the numerator is zero. If the numerator is zero, that just makes the whole rational expression zero (assuming, of course, that the denominator is not zero), just as with common fractions. Recall that 0/4 = 0, but 4/0 is undefined. It is important to keep this in mind as you work with rational expressions, because it can happen that you are trying to solve an equation and you get one of the “forbidden” values as a solution. You would have to discard that solution as being unacceptable. You can also get some crazy results if you don’t pay attention to the possibility that the denominator might be zero for certain values of the variable. For example, the celebrated proof that 0 = 1 and other nonsense. Proof that 1 = 0 And other nonsense Can you identify the flaw in this argument? Let x = 1. Then Given: x = 1 Multiply both sides by x: x2 = x Subtract x from both sides: x2 – x = 0 Factor out an x: x(x – 1) = 0 Divide both sides by (x ‑ 1): x = 0 But x = 1, so substitute 1 for x to get: 1 = 0 This is a very simple variant of this classic ‘proof’. Once you see the trick*, you can construct more elaborate versions that do a better job of concealing the error, and you can vary it to ‘prove’ other nonsense such as 1 = 2. For example: Let x = 1 . Then Given: x = 1 Multiply both sides by –1: –x = –1 Add x2 to both sides: x2 - x = x2 – 1 Factor both sides: x(x – 1) = (x – 1)(x + 1) Divide both sides by (x – 1): x = (x + 1) Substituting 1 back in for x gives the result: 1 = 2 *The trick:  We are dividing by zero because if x = 1 then (x – 1) = 0. Thus, all of these “proofs” are invalid because they use an illegal step.o        A rational expression is a ratio of polynomials:Examples: Excluded Values Whenever an expression containing variables is present in the denominator of a fraction, you should be alert to the possibility that certain values of the variables might make the denominator equal to zero, which is forbidden. This means that when we are talking about rational expressions we can no longer say that the variable represents “any real number.” Certain values may have to be excluded. For example, in the expression , we cannot allow the value x = 0 so we would parenthetically add the comment (x ¹ 0), and for we would say (x ¹ 3) . In the case of we would exclude both x = 1 and x = –1, since either choice would make the denominator zero. We don’t care if the numerator is zero. If the numerator is zero, that just makes the whole rational expression zero (assuming, of course, that the denominator is not zero), just as with common fractions. Recall that 0/4 = 0, but 4/0 is undefined. It is important to keep this in mind as you work with rational expressions, because it can happen that you are trying to solve an equation and you get one of the “forbidden” values as a solution. You would have to discard that solution as being unacceptable. You can also get some crazy results if you don’t pay attention to the possibility that the denominator might be zero for certain values of the variable. For example, the celebrated proof that 0 = 1 and other nonsense. Proof that 1 = 0 And other nonsense Can you identify the flaw in this argument? Let x = 1. Then Given: x = 1 Multiply both sides by x: x2 = x Subtract x from both sides: x2 – x = 0 Factor out an x: x(x – 1) = 0 Divide both sides by (x ‑ 1): x = 0 But x = 1, so substitute 1 for x to get: 1 = 0 This is a very simple variant of this classic ‘proof’. Once you see the trick*, you can construct more elaborate versions that do a better job of concealing the error, and you can vary it to ‘prove’ other nonsense such as 1 = 2. For example: Let x = 1 . Then Given: x = 1 Multiply both sides by –1: –x = –1 Add x2 to both sides: x2 - x = x2 – 1 Factor both sides: x(x – 1) = (x – 1)(x + 1) Divide both sides by (x – 1): x = (x + 1) Substituting 1 back in for x gives the result: 1 = 2 *The trick:  We are dividing by zero because if x = 1 then (x – 1) = 0. Thus, all of these “proofs” are invalid because they use an illegal step. || 
book3_chapter07_2	 || Multiplication and Division Same rules as for rational numbers! Multiplication Both the numerators and the denominators multiply together Common factors may be cancelled before multiplying Example:    Given Equation: First factor all the expressions: (I also put the denominators in parentheses because then it is easier to see them as distinct factors) Now cancel common factors—any factor on the top can cancel with any factor on the bottom: Now just multiply what’s left. You usually do not have to multiply out the factors, just leave them as shown.   Division Multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor Invert the second fraction, then proceed with multiplication as above Do not attempt to cancel factors before it is written as a multiplication  || Addition and Subtraction Same procedure as for rational numbers! ·        Only the numerators can be added together, and only when all the denominators are the same Finding the LCD The LCD is built up of all the factors of the individual denominators, each factor included the most number of times it appears in an individual denominator. The product of all the denominators is always a common denominator, but not necessarily the LCD (the final answer may have to be reduced).   Example:  Given equation: Factor both denominators: Assemble the LCD: Note that the LCD contains both denominators Build up the fractions so that they both have the LCD for a denominator: (keep both denominators in factored form to make it easier to see what factors they need to look like the LCD) Now that they are over the same denominator, you can add the numerators: And simplify:  || 
book3_chapter07_2_1	Multiplication and Division Same rules as for rational numbers! Multiplication Both the numerators and the denominators multiply together Common factors may be cancelled before multiplying Example:    Given Equation: First factor all the expressions: (I also put the denominators in parentheses because then it is easier to see them as distinct factors) Now cancel common factors—any factor on the top can cancel with any factor on the bottom: Now just multiply what’s left. You usually do not have to multiply out the factors, just leave them as shown.   Division Multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor Invert the second fraction, then proceed with multiplication as above Do not attempt to cancel factors before it is written as a multiplication Multiplication and Division Same rules as for rational numbers! Multiplication Both the numerators and the denominators multiply together Common factors may be cancelled before multiplying Example:    Given Equation: First factor all the expressions: (I also put the denominators in parentheses because then it is easier to see them as distinct factors) Now cancel common factors—any factor on the top can cancel with any factor on the bottom: Now just multiply what’s left. You usually do not have to multiply out the factors, just leave them as shown.   Division Multiply by the reciprocal of the divisor Invert the second fraction, then proceed with multiplication as above Do not attempt to cancel factors before it is written as a multiplication  || 
book3_chapter07_2_2	Addition and Subtraction Same procedure as for rational numbers! ·        Only the numerators can be added together, and only when all the denominators are the same Finding the LCD The LCD is built up of all the factors of the individual denominators, each factor included the most number of times it appears in an individual denominator. The product of all the denominators is always a common denominator, but not necessarily the LCD (the final answer may have to be reduced).   Example:  Given equation: Factor both denominators: Assemble the LCD: Note that the LCD contains both denominators Build up the fractions so that they both have the LCD for a denominator: (keep both denominators in factored form to make it easier to see what factors they need to look like the LCD) Now that they are over the same denominator, you can add the numerators: And simplify: Addition and Subtraction Same procedure as for rational numbers! ·        Only the numerators can be added together, and only when all the denominators are the same Finding the LCD The LCD is built up of all the factors of the individual denominators, each factor included the most number of times it appears in an individual denominator. The product of all the denominators is always a common denominator, but not necessarily the LCD (the final answer may have to be reduced).   Example:  Given equation: Factor both denominators: Assemble the LCD: Note that the LCD contains both denominators Build up the fractions so that they both have the LCD for a denominator: (keep both denominators in factored form to make it easier to see what factors they need to look like the LCD) Now that they are over the same denominator, you can add the numerators: And simplify:  || 
book3_chapter02	 ||  || Constants ·        Fixed values, like 2 or 7. ·        Can also be represented by letters: a, b, c, p, e, k  || Terms Terms are Separated by + or –  || Factors Factors are multiplied together.  || Coefficients Coefficients are constant factors that multiply a variable or powers of a variable The middle term has 2 factors, –3 and x. We say that the coefficient of x is –3. The first term has three factors, 2 and two factors of x. We say that 2 is the coefficient of x2. The last term is a factor all by itself (although the number 4 could be factored into 2 × 2).  ||  || Combining Like terms Combining like terms is permitted because of the distributive law. For example, 3x2 + 5x2 = (3 + 5)x2 = 8x2 What happened here is that the distributive law was used in reverse—we “undistributed” a common factor of x2 from each term. The way to think about this operation is that if you have three x-squareds, and then you get five more x-squareds, you will then have eight x-squareds. Example:  x2 + 2x + 3x2 + 2 + 4x + 7 Starting with the highest power of x, we see that there are four x-squareds in all (1x2 + 3x2). Then we collect the first powers of x, and see that there are six of them (2x + 4x). The only thing left is the constants 2 + 7 = 9. Putting this all together we get x2 + 2x + 3x2 + 2 + 4x + 7 = 4x2 + 6x + 9  || Parentheses ·        Parentheses must be multiplied out before collecting like terms You cannot combine things in parentheses (or other grouping symbols) with things outside the parentheses. Think of parentheses as opaque—the stuff inside the parentheses can’t “see” the stuff outside the parentheses. If there is some factor multiplying the parentheses, then the only way to get rid of the parentheses is to multiply using the distributive law. Example:  3x + 2(x – 4) = 3x + 2x – 8 = 5x – 8  || Minus Signs: Subtraction and Negatives Subtraction can be replaced by adding the opposite 3x – 2 = 3x + (–2) Negative signs in front of parentheses A special case is when a minus sign appears in front of parentheses. At first glance, it looks as though there is no factor multiplying the parentheses, and you may be tempted to just remove the parentheses. What you need to remember is that the minus sign indicating subtraction should always be thought of as adding the opposite. This means that you want to add the opposite of the entire thing inside the parentheses, and so you have to change the sign of each term in the parentheses. Another way of looking at it is to imagine an implied factor of one in front of the parentheses. Then the minus sign makes that factor into a negative one, which can be multiplied by the distributive law: 3x – (2 – x) = 3x + (–1)[2 + (–x)] = 3x + (–1)(2) + (–1)(–x) = 3x – 2 + x = 4x – 2 However, if there is only a plus sign in front of the parentheses, then you can simply erase the parentheses: 3x + (2 – x) = 3x + 2 – x A comment about subtraction and minus signs Although you can always explicitly replace subtraction with adding the opposite, as in this previous example, it is often tedious and inconvenient to do so. Once you get used to thinking that way, it is no longer necessary to actually write it that way. It is helpful to always think of minus signs as being “stuck” to the term directly to their right. That way, as you rearrange terms, collect like terms, and clear parentheses, the “adding the opposite” business will be taken care of because the minus signs will go with whatever was to their right. If what is immediately to the right of a minus sign happens to be a parenthesis, then the minus sign attacks every term inside the parentheses.  || Up until now, we have just been talking about manipulating algebraic expressions. Now it is time to talk about equations. An expression is just a statement like2x + 3This expression might be equal to any number, depending on the choice of x. For example, if x = 3 then the value of this expression is 9. But if we are writing an equation, then we are making a statement about its value. We might say2x + 3 = 7A mathematical equation is either true or false. This equation, 2x + 3 = 7, might be true or it might be false; it depends on the value chosen for x. We call such equations conditional, because their truth depends on choosing the correct value for x. If I choose x = 3, then the equation is clearly false because 2(3) + 3 = 9, not 7. In fact, it is only true if I choose x = 2. Any other value for x produces a false equation. We say that x = 2 is the solution of this equation.Solutions The solution of an equation is the value(s) of the variable(s) that make the equation a true statement. An equation like 2x + 3 = 7 is a simple type called a linear equation in one variable. These will always have one solution, no solutions, or an infinite number of solutions. There are other types of equations, however, that can have several solutions. For example, the equation x2 = 9 is satisfied by both 3 and –3, and so it has two solutions. One Solution This is the normal case, as in our example where the equation 2x + 3 = 7 had exactly one solution, namely x = 2. The other two cases, no solution and an infinite number of solutions, are the oddball cases that you don’t expect to run into very often. Nevertheless, it is important to know that they can happen in case you do encounter one of these situations. Infinite Number of Solutions Consider the equation x = x This equation is obviously true for every possible value of x. This is, of course, a ridiculously simple example, but it makes the point. Equations that have this property are called identities. Some examples of identities would be   2x = x + x 3 = 3 (x – 2)(x + 2) = x2 – 4   All of these equations are true for any value of x. The second example, 3 = 3, is interesting because it does not even contain an x, so obviously its truthfulness cannot depend on the value of x! When you are attempting to solve an equation algebraically and you end up with an obvious identity (like 3 = 3), then you know that the original equation must also be an identity, and therefore it has an infinite number of solutions. No Solutions Now consider the equation x + 4 = x + 3 There is no possible value for x that could make this true. If you take a number and add 4 to it, it will never be the same as if you take the same number and add 3 to it. Such an equation is called a contradiction, because it cannot ever be true. If you are attempting to solve such an equation, you will end up with an extremely obvious contradiction such as 1 = 2. This indicates that the original equation is a contradiction, and has no solution.  In summary, o        An identity is always true, no matter what x is o        A contradiction is never true for any value of x o        A conditional equation is true for some values of x ||  || The Addition Principle ·        Adding (or subtracting) the same number to both sides of an equation does not change its solution set. Think of the balance analogy—if both sides of the equation are equal, then increasing both sides by the same amount will change the value of each side, but they will still be equal. For example, if 3 = 3, then 3 + 2 = 3 + 2.   Consequently, if   6 + x = 8   for some value of x (which in this case is x = 2), then we can add any number to both sides of the equation and x = 2 will still be the solution. If we wanted to, we could add a 3 to both sides of the equation, producing the equation   9 + x = 11.   As you can see, x = 2 is still the solution. Of course, this new equation is no simpler than the one we started with, and this maneuver did not help us solve the equation. If we want to solve the equation   6 + x = 8,   the idea is to get x by itself on one side, and so we want to get rid of the 6 that is on the left side. We can do this by subtracting a 6 from both sides of the equation (which of course can be thought of as adding a negative six):   6 – 6 + x = 8 – 6 or x = 2   You can think of this operation as moving the 6 from one side of the equation to the other, which causes it to change sign   ·        The addition principle is useful in solving equations because it allows us to move whole terms from one side of the equal sign to the other. While this is a convenient way to think of it, you should remember that you are not really “moving” the term from one side to the other—you are really adding (or subtracting) the term on both sides of the equation.  || Notation notes In the previous example, we wrote the –6 in-line with the rest of the equation. This is analogous to writing an arithmetic subtraction problem in one line, as in   234 – 56 = 178.   You probably also learned to write subtraction and addition problems in a column format, like We can also use a similar notation for the addition method with algebraic equations. Given the equation   x + 3 = 2, we want to subtract a 3 from both sides in order to isolate the variable. In column format this would look like Here the numbers in the second row are negative 3’s, so we are adding the two rows together to produce the bottom row. The advantage of the column notation is that it makes the operation easier to see and reduces the chances for an error. The disadvantage is that it takes more space, but that is a relatively minor disadvantage. Which notation you prefer to use is not important, as long as you can follow what you are doing and it makes sense to you.  || Multiplying (or dividing) the same non-zero number to both sides of an equation does not change its solution set.Example:so if 6x = 12, then 18x = 36 for the same value of x (which in this case is x = 2).The way we use the multiplication principle to solve equations is that it allows us to isolate the variable by getting rid of a factor that is multiplying the variable.Example:  2x = 6To get rid of the 2 that is multiplying the x, we can divide both sides of the equation by 2, or multiply by its reciprocal (one-half).Either divide both sides by 2: or multiply both sides by a half:Whether you prefer to think of it as dividing by the number or multiplying by its reciprocal is not important, although when the coefficient is a fraction it is easier to multiply by the reciprocal:  Example:  Multiply both sides by the reciprocal of the coefficient, or   || Suppose you were given an equation like 2x – 3 = 5. You will need to use the addition principle to move the –3, and the multiplication principle to remove the coefficient 2. Which one should you use first? Strictly speaking, it does not matter—you will eventually get the right answer. In practice, however, it is usually simpler to use the addition principle first, and then the multiplication principle. The reason for this is that if we divide by 2 first we will turn everything into fractions: Given: 2x – 3 = 5 Suppose we first divide both sides by 2: Now there is nothing wrong with doing arithmetic with fractions, but it is not as simple as working with whole numbers. In this example we would have to add 3/2 to both sides of the equation to isolate the x. It is usually more convenient, though, to use the addition principle first: Given: 2x – 3 = 5 Add 3 to both sides:    At this point all we need to do is divide both sides by 2 to get x = 4. || 
book3_chapter02_1	 || Constants ·        Fixed values, like 2 or 7. ·        Can also be represented by letters: a, b, c, p, e, k  || Terms Terms are Separated by + or –  || Factors Factors are multiplied together.  || Coefficients Coefficients are constant factors that multiply a variable or powers of a variable The middle term has 2 factors, –3 and x. We say that the coefficient of x is –3. The first term has three factors, 2 and two factors of x. We say that 2 is the coefficient of x2. The last term is a factor all by itself (although the number 4 could be factored into 2 × 2).  || 
book3_chapter02_1_1	Constants ·        Fixed values, like 2 or 7. ·        Can also be represented by letters: a, b, c, p, e, k Constants ·        Fixed values, like 2 or 7. ·        Can also be represented by letters: a, b, c, p, e, k  || 
book3_chapter02_1_2	Terms Terms are Separated by + or – Terms Terms are Separated by + or –  || 
book3_chapter02_1_3	Factors Factors are multiplied together. Factors Factors are multiplied together.  || 
book3_chapter02_1_4	Coefficients Coefficients are constant factors that multiply a variable or powers of a variable The middle term has 2 factors, –3 and x. We say that the coefficient of x is –3. The first term has three factors, 2 and two factors of x. We say that 2 is the coefficient of x2. The last term is a factor all by itself (although the number 4 could be factored into 2 × 2). Coefficients Coefficients are constant factors that multiply a variable or powers of a variable The middle term has 2 factors, –3 and x. We say that the coefficient of x is –3. The first term has three factors, 2 and two factors of x. We say that 2 is the coefficient of x2. The last term is a factor all by itself (although the number 4 could be factored into 2 × 2).  || 
book3_chapter02_2	 || Combining Like terms Combining like terms is permitted because of the distributive law. For example, 3x2 + 5x2 = (3 + 5)x2 = 8x2 What happened here is that the distributive law was used in reverse—we “undistributed” a common factor of x2 from each term. The way to think about this operation is that if you have three x-squareds, and then you get five more x-squareds, you will then have eight x-squareds. Example:  x2 + 2x + 3x2 + 2 + 4x + 7 Starting with the highest power of x, we see that there are four x-squareds in all (1x2 + 3x2). Then we collect the first powers of x, and see that there are six of them (2x + 4x). The only thing left is the constants 2 + 7 = 9. Putting this all together we get x2 + 2x + 3x2 + 2 + 4x + 7 = 4x2 + 6x + 9  || Parentheses ·        Parentheses must be multiplied out before collecting like terms You cannot combine things in parentheses (or other grouping symbols) with things outside the parentheses. Think of parentheses as opaque—the stuff inside the parentheses can’t “see” the stuff outside the parentheses. If there is some factor multiplying the parentheses, then the only way to get rid of the parentheses is to multiply using the distributive law. Example:  3x + 2(x – 4) = 3x + 2x – 8 = 5x – 8  || Minus Signs: Subtraction and Negatives Subtraction can be replaced by adding the opposite 3x – 2 = 3x + (–2) Negative signs in front of parentheses A special case is when a minus sign appears in front of parentheses. At first glance, it looks as though there is no factor multiplying the parentheses, and you may be tempted to just remove the parentheses. What you need to remember is that the minus sign indicating subtraction should always be thought of as adding the opposite. This means that you want to add the opposite of the entire thing inside the parentheses, and so you have to change the sign of each term in the parentheses. Another way of looking at it is to imagine an implied factor of one in front of the parentheses. Then the minus sign makes that factor into a negative one, which can be multiplied by the distributive law: 3x – (2 – x) = 3x + (–1)[2 + (–x)] = 3x + (–1)(2) + (–1)(–x) = 3x – 2 + x = 4x – 2 However, if there is only a plus sign in front of the parentheses, then you can simply erase the parentheses: 3x + (2 – x) = 3x + 2 – x A comment about subtraction and minus signs Although you can always explicitly replace subtraction with adding the opposite, as in this previous example, it is often tedious and inconvenient to do so. Once you get used to thinking that way, it is no longer necessary to actually write it that way. It is helpful to always think of minus signs as being “stuck” to the term directly to their right. That way, as you rearrange terms, collect like terms, and clear parentheses, the “adding the opposite” business will be taken care of because the minus signs will go with whatever was to their right. If what is immediately to the right of a minus sign happens to be a parenthesis, then the minus sign attacks every term inside the parentheses.  || 
book3_chapter02_2_1	Combining Like terms Combining like terms is permitted because of the distributive law. For example, 3x2 + 5x2 = (3 + 5)x2 = 8x2 What happened here is that the distributive law was used in reverse—we “undistributed” a common factor of x2 from each term. The way to think about this operation is that if you have three x-squareds, and then you get five more x-squareds, you will then have eight x-squareds. Example:  x2 + 2x + 3x2 + 2 + 4x + 7 Starting with the highest power of x, we see that there are four x-squareds in all (1x2 + 3x2). Then we collect the first powers of x, and see that there are six of them (2x + 4x). The only thing left is the constants 2 + 7 = 9. Putting this all together we get x2 + 2x + 3x2 + 2 + 4x + 7 = 4x2 + 6x + 9 Combining Like terms Combining like terms is permitted because of the distributive law. For example, 3x2 + 5x2 = (3 + 5)x2 = 8x2 What happened here is that the distributive law was used in reverse—we “undistributed” a common factor of x2 from each term. The way to think about this operation is that if you have three x-squareds, and then you get five more x-squareds, you will then have eight x-squareds. Example:  x2 + 2x + 3x2 + 2 + 4x + 7 Starting with the highest power of x, we see that there are four x-squareds in all (1x2 + 3x2). Then we collect the first powers of x, and see that there are six of them (2x + 4x). The only thing left is the constants 2 + 7 = 9. Putting this all together we get x2 + 2x + 3x2 + 2 + 4x + 7 = 4x2 + 6x + 9  || 
book3_chapter02_2_2	Parentheses ·        Parentheses must be multiplied out before collecting like terms You cannot combine things in parentheses (or other grouping symbols) with things outside the parentheses. Think of parentheses as opaque—the stuff inside the parentheses can’t “see” the stuff outside the parentheses. If there is some factor multiplying the parentheses, then the only way to get rid of the parentheses is to multiply using the distributive law. Example:  3x + 2(x – 4) = 3x + 2x – 8 = 5x – 8 Parentheses ·        Parentheses must be multiplied out before collecting like terms You cannot combine things in parentheses (or other grouping symbols) with things outside the parentheses. Think of parentheses as opaque—the stuff inside the parentheses can’t “see” the stuff outside the parentheses. If there is some factor multiplying the parentheses, then the only way to get rid of the parentheses is to multiply using the distributive law. Example:  3x + 2(x – 4) = 3x + 2x – 8 = 5x – 8  || 
book3_chapter02_2_3	Minus Signs: Subtraction and Negatives Subtraction can be replaced by adding the opposite 3x – 2 = 3x + (–2) Negative signs in front of parentheses A special case is when a minus sign appears in front of parentheses. At first glance, it looks as though there is no factor multiplying the parentheses, and you may be tempted to just remove the parentheses. What you need to remember is that the minus sign indicating subtraction should always be thought of as adding the opposite. This means that you want to add the opposite of the entire thing inside the parentheses, and so you have to change the sign of each term in the parentheses. Another way of looking at it is to imagine an implied factor of one in front of the parentheses. Then the minus sign makes that factor into a negative one, which can be multiplied by the distributive law: 3x – (2 – x) = 3x + (–1)[2 + (–x)] = 3x + (–1)(2) + (–1)(–x) = 3x – 2 + x = 4x – 2 However, if there is only a plus sign in front of the parentheses, then you can simply erase the parentheses: 3x + (2 – x) = 3x + 2 – x A comment about subtraction and minus signs Although you can always explicitly replace subtraction with adding the opposite, as in this previous example, it is often tedious and inconvenient to do so. Once you get used to thinking that way, it is no longer necessary to actually write it that way. It is helpful to always think of minus signs as being “stuck” to the term directly to their right. That way, as you rearrange terms, collect like terms, and clear parentheses, the “adding the opposite” business will be taken care of because the minus signs will go with whatever was to their right. If what is immediately to the right of a minus sign happens to be a parenthesis, then the minus sign attacks every term inside the parentheses. Minus Signs: Subtraction and Negatives Subtraction can be replaced by adding the opposite 3x – 2 = 3x + (–2) Negative signs in front of parentheses A special case is when a minus sign appears in front of parentheses. At first glance, it looks as though there is no factor multiplying the parentheses, and you may be tempted to just remove the parentheses. What you need to remember is that the minus sign indicating subtraction should always be thought of as adding the opposite. This means that you want to add the opposite of the entire thing inside the parentheses, and so you have to change the sign of each term in the parentheses. Another way of looking at it is to imagine an implied factor of one in front of the parentheses. Then the minus sign makes that factor into a negative one, which can be multiplied by the distributive law: 3x – (2 – x) = 3x + (–1)[2 + (–x)] = 3x + (–1)(2) + (–1)(–x) = 3x – 2 + x = 4x – 2 However, if there is only a plus sign in front of the parentheses, then you can simply erase the parentheses: 3x + (2 – x) = 3x + 2 – x A comment about subtraction and minus signs Although you can always explicitly replace subtraction with adding the opposite, as in this previous example, it is often tedious and inconvenient to do so. Once you get used to thinking that way, it is no longer necessary to actually write it that way. It is helpful to always think of minus signs as being “stuck” to the term directly to their right. That way, as you rearrange terms, collect like terms, and clear parentheses, the “adding the opposite” business will be taken care of because the minus signs will go with whatever was to their right. If what is immediately to the right of a minus sign happens to be a parenthesis, then the minus sign attacks every term inside the parentheses.  || 
book3_chapter02_3	Up until now, we have just been talking about manipulating algebraic expressions. Now it is time to talk about equations. An expression is just a statement like2x + 3This expression might be equal to any number, depending on the choice of x. For example, if x = 3 then the value of this expression is 9. But if we are writing an equation, then we are making a statement about its value. We might say2x + 3 = 7A mathematical equation is either true or false. This equation, 2x + 3 = 7, might be true or it might be false; it depends on the value chosen for x. We call such equations conditional, because their truth depends on choosing the correct value for x. If I choose x = 3, then the equation is clearly false because 2(3) + 3 = 9, not 7. In fact, it is only true if I choose x = 2. Any other value for x produces a false equation. We say that x = 2 is the solution of this equation.Solutions The solution of an equation is the value(s) of the variable(s) that make the equation a true statement. An equation like 2x + 3 = 7 is a simple type called a linear equation in one variable. These will always have one solution, no solutions, or an infinite number of solutions. There are other types of equations, however, that can have several solutions. For example, the equation x2 = 9 is satisfied by both 3 and –3, and so it has two solutions. One Solution This is the normal case, as in our example where the equation 2x + 3 = 7 had exactly one solution, namely x = 2. The other two cases, no solution and an infinite number of solutions, are the oddball cases that you don’t expect to run into very often. Nevertheless, it is important to know that they can happen in case you do encounter one of these situations. Infinite Number of Solutions Consider the equation x = x This equation is obviously true for every possible value of x. This is, of course, a ridiculously simple example, but it makes the point. Equations that have this property are called identities. Some examples of identities would be   2x = x + x 3 = 3 (x – 2)(x + 2) = x2 – 4   All of these equations are true for any value of x. The second example, 3 = 3, is interesting because it does not even contain an x, so obviously its truthfulness cannot depend on the value of x! When you are attempting to solve an equation algebraically and you end up with an obvious identity (like 3 = 3), then you know that the original equation must also be an identity, and therefore it has an infinite number of solutions. No Solutions Now consider the equation x + 4 = x + 3 There is no possible value for x that could make this true. If you take a number and add 4 to it, it will never be the same as if you take the same number and add 3 to it. Such an equation is called a contradiction, because it cannot ever be true. If you are attempting to solve such an equation, you will end up with an extremely obvious contradiction such as 1 = 2. This indicates that the original equation is a contradiction, and has no solution.  In summary, o        An identity is always true, no matter what x is o        A contradiction is never true for any value of x o        A conditional equation is true for some values of xUp until now, we have just been talking about manipulating algebraic expressions. Now it is time to talk about equations. An expression is just a statement like2x + 3This expression might be equal to any number, depending on the choice of x. For example, if x = 3 then the value of this expression is 9. But if we are writing an equation, then we are making a statement about its value. We might say2x + 3 = 7A mathematical equation is either true or false. This equation, 2x + 3 = 7, might be true or it might be false; it depends on the value chosen for x. We call such equations conditional, because their truth depends on choosing the correct value for x. If I choose x = 3, then the equation is clearly false because 2(3) + 3 = 9, not 7. In fact, it is only true if I choose x = 2. Any other value for x produces a false equation. We say that x = 2 is the solution of this equation.Solutions The solution of an equation is the value(s) of the variable(s) that make the equation a true statement. An equation like 2x + 3 = 7 is a simple type called a linear equation in one variable. These will always have one solution, no solutions, or an infinite number of solutions. There are other types of equations, however, that can have several solutions. For example, the equation x2 = 9 is satisfied by both 3 and –3, and so it has two solutions. One Solution This is the normal case, as in our example where the equation 2x + 3 = 7 had exactly one solution, namely x = 2. The other two cases, no solution and an infinite number of solutions, are the oddball cases that you don’t expect to run into very often. Nevertheless, it is important to know that they can happen in case you do encounter one of these situations. Infinite Number of Solutions Consider the equation x = x This equation is obviously true for every possible value of x. This is, of course, a ridiculously simple example, but it makes the point. Equations that have this property are called identities. Some examples of identities would be   2x = x + x 3 = 3 (x – 2)(x + 2) = x2 – 4   All of these equations are true for any value of x. The second example, 3 = 3, is interesting because it does not even contain an x, so obviously its truthfulness cannot depend on the value of x! When you are attempting to solve an equation algebraically and you end up with an obvious identity (like 3 = 3), then you know that the original equation must also be an identity, and therefore it has an infinite number of solutions. No Solutions Now consider the equation x + 4 = x + 3 There is no possible value for x that could make this true. If you take a number and add 4 to it, it will never be the same as if you take the same number and add 3 to it. Such an equation is called a contradiction, because it cannot ever be true. If you are attempting to solve such an equation, you will end up with an extremely obvious contradiction such as 1 = 2. This indicates that the original equation is a contradiction, and has no solution.  In summary, o        An identity is always true, no matter what x is o        A contradiction is never true for any value of x o        A conditional equation is true for some values of x || 
book3_chapter02_4	 || The Addition Principle ·        Adding (or subtracting) the same number to both sides of an equation does not change its solution set. Think of the balance analogy—if both sides of the equation are equal, then increasing both sides by the same amount will change the value of each side, but they will still be equal. For example, if 3 = 3, then 3 + 2 = 3 + 2.   Consequently, if   6 + x = 8   for some value of x (which in this case is x = 2), then we can add any number to both sides of the equation and x = 2 will still be the solution. If we wanted to, we could add a 3 to both sides of the equation, producing the equation   9 + x = 11.   As you can see, x = 2 is still the solution. Of course, this new equation is no simpler than the one we started with, and this maneuver did not help us solve the equation. If we want to solve the equation   6 + x = 8,   the idea is to get x by itself on one side, and so we want to get rid of the 6 that is on the left side. We can do this by subtracting a 6 from both sides of the equation (which of course can be thought of as adding a negative six):   6 – 6 + x = 8 – 6 or x = 2   You can think of this operation as moving the 6 from one side of the equation to the other, which causes it to change sign   ·        The addition principle is useful in solving equations because it allows us to move whole terms from one side of the equal sign to the other. While this is a convenient way to think of it, you should remember that you are not really “moving” the term from one side to the other—you are really adding (or subtracting) the term on both sides of the equation.  || Notation notes In the previous example, we wrote the –6 in-line with the rest of the equation. This is analogous to writing an arithmetic subtraction problem in one line, as in   234 – 56 = 178.   You probably also learned to write subtraction and addition problems in a column format, like We can also use a similar notation for the addition method with algebraic equations. Given the equation   x + 3 = 2, we want to subtract a 3 from both sides in order to isolate the variable. In column format this would look like Here the numbers in the second row are negative 3’s, so we are adding the two rows together to produce the bottom row. The advantage of the column notation is that it makes the operation easier to see and reduces the chances for an error. The disadvantage is that it takes more space, but that is a relatively minor disadvantage. Which notation you prefer to use is not important, as long as you can follow what you are doing and it makes sense to you.  || 
book3_chapter02_4_1	The Addition Principle ·        Adding (or subtracting) the same number to both sides of an equation does not change its solution set. Think of the balance analogy—if both sides of the equation are equal, then increasing both sides by the same amount will change the value of each side, but they will still be equal. For example, if 3 = 3, then 3 + 2 = 3 + 2.   Consequently, if   6 + x = 8   for some value of x (which in this case is x = 2), then we can add any number to both sides of the equation and x = 2 will still be the solution. If we wanted to, we could add a 3 to both sides of the equation, producing the equation   9 + x = 11.   As you can see, x = 2 is still the solution. Of course, this new equation is no simpler than the one we started with, and this maneuver did not help us solve the equation. If we want to solve the equation   6 + x = 8,   the idea is to get x by itself on one side, and so we want to get rid of the 6 that is on the left side. We can do this by subtracting a 6 from both sides of the equation (which of course can be thought of as adding a negative six):   6 – 6 + x = 8 – 6 or x = 2   You can think of this operation as moving the 6 from one side of the equation to the other, which causes it to change sign   ·        The addition principle is useful in solving equations because it allows us to move whole terms from one side of the equal sign to the other. While this is a convenient way to think of it, you should remember that you are not really “moving” the term from one side to the other—you are really adding (or subtracting) the term on both sides of the equation. The Addition Principle ·        Adding (or subtracting) the same number to both sides of an equation does not change its solution set. Think of the balance analogy—if both sides of the equation are equal, then increasing both sides by the same amount will change the value of each side, but they will still be equal. For example, if 3 = 3, then 3 + 2 = 3 + 2.   Consequently, if   6 + x = 8   for some value of x (which in this case is x = 2), then we can add any number to both sides of the equation and x = 2 will still be the solution. If we wanted to, we could add a 3 to both sides of the equation, producing the equation   9 + x = 11.   As you can see, x = 2 is still the solution. Of course, this new equation is no simpler than the one we started with, and this maneuver did not help us solve the equation. If we want to solve the equation   6 + x = 8,   the idea is to get x by itself on one side, and so we want to get rid of the 6 that is on the left side. We can do this by subtracting a 6 from both sides of the equation (which of course can be thought of as adding a negative six):   6 – 6 + x = 8 – 6 or x = 2   You can think of this operation as moving the 6 from one side of the equation to the other, which causes it to change sign   ·        The addition principle is useful in solving equations because it allows us to move whole terms from one side of the equal sign to the other. While this is a convenient way to think of it, you should remember that you are not really “moving” the term from one side to the other—you are really adding (or subtracting) the term on both sides of the equation.  || 
book3_chapter02_4_2	Notation notes In the previous example, we wrote the –6 in-line with the rest of the equation. This is analogous to writing an arithmetic subtraction problem in one line, as in   234 – 56 = 178.   You probably also learned to write subtraction and addition problems in a column format, like We can also use a similar notation for the addition method with algebraic equations. Given the equation   x + 3 = 2, we want to subtract a 3 from both sides in order to isolate the variable. In column format this would look like Here the numbers in the second row are negative 3’s, so we are adding the two rows together to produce the bottom row. The advantage of the column notation is that it makes the operation easier to see and reduces the chances for an error. The disadvantage is that it takes more space, but that is a relatively minor disadvantage. Which notation you prefer to use is not important, as long as you can follow what you are doing and it makes sense to you. Notation notes In the previous example, we wrote the –6 in-line with the rest of the equation. This is analogous to writing an arithmetic subtraction problem in one line, as in   234 – 56 = 178.   You probably also learned to write subtraction and addition problems in a column format, like We can also use a similar notation for the addition method with algebraic equations. Given the equation   x + 3 = 2, we want to subtract a 3 from both sides in order to isolate the variable. In column format this would look like Here the numbers in the second row are negative 3’s, so we are adding the two rows together to produce the bottom row. The advantage of the column notation is that it makes the operation easier to see and reduces the chances for an error. The disadvantage is that it takes more space, but that is a relatively minor disadvantage. Which notation you prefer to use is not important, as long as you can follow what you are doing and it makes sense to you.  || 
book3_chapter02_5	Multiplying (or dividing) the same non-zero number to both sides of an equation does not change its solution set.Example:so if 6x = 12, then 18x = 36 for the same value of x (which in this case is x = 2).The way we use the multiplication principle to solve equations is that it allows us to isolate the variable by getting rid of a factor that is multiplying the variable.Example:  2x = 6To get rid of the 2 that is multiplying the x, we can divide both sides of the equation by 2, or multiply by its reciprocal (one-half).Either divide both sides by 2: or multiply both sides by a half:Whether you prefer to think of it as dividing by the number or multiplying by its reciprocal is not important, although when the coefficient is a fraction it is easier to multiply by the reciprocal:  Example:  Multiply both sides by the reciprocal of the coefficient, or  Multiplying (or dividing) the same non-zero number to both sides of an equation does not change its solution set.Example:so if 6x = 12, then 18x = 36 for the same value of x (which in this case is x = 2).The way we use the multiplication principle to solve equations is that it allows us to isolate the variable by getting rid of a factor that is multiplying the variable.Example:  2x = 6To get rid of the 2 that is multiplying the x, we can divide both sides of the equation by 2, or multiply by its reciprocal (one-half).Either divide both sides by 2: or multiply both sides by a half:Whether you prefer to think of it as dividing by the number or multiplying by its reciprocal is not important, although when the coefficient is a fraction it is easier to multiply by the reciprocal:  Example:  Multiply both sides by the reciprocal of the coefficient, or   || 
book3_chapter02_6	Suppose you were given an equation like 2x – 3 = 5. You will need to use the addition principle to move the –3, and the multiplication principle to remove the coefficient 2. Which one should you use first? Strictly speaking, it does not matter—you will eventually get the right answer. In practice, however, it is usually simpler to use the addition principle first, and then the multiplication principle. The reason for this is that if we divide by 2 first we will turn everything into fractions: Given: 2x – 3 = 5 Suppose we first divide both sides by 2: Now there is nothing wrong with doing arithmetic with fractions, but it is not as simple as working with whole numbers. In this example we would have to add 3/2 to both sides of the equation to isolate the x. It is usually more convenient, though, to use the addition principle first: Given: 2x – 3 = 5 Add 3 to both sides:    At this point all we need to do is divide both sides by 2 to get x = 4.Suppose you were given an equation like 2x – 3 = 5. You will need to use the addition principle to move the –3, and the multiplication principle to remove the coefficient 2. Which one should you use first? Strictly speaking, it does not matter—you will eventually get the right answer. In practice, however, it is usually simpler to use the addition principle first, and then the multiplication principle. The reason for this is that if we divide by 2 first we will turn everything into fractions: Given: 2x – 3 = 5 Suppose we first divide both sides by 2: Now there is nothing wrong with doing arithmetic with fractions, but it is not as simple as working with whole numbers. In this example we would have to add 3/2 to both sides of the equation to isolate the x. It is usually more convenient, though, to use the addition principle first: Given: 2x – 3 = 5 Add 3 to both sides:    At this point all we need to do is divide both sides by 2 to get x = 4. || 
book3_chapter01	 ||  || Whole Numbers Natural Numbers together with “zero” 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, . . .   About the Number Zero What is zero? Is it a number? How can the number of nothing be a number? Is zero nothing, or is it something? Well, before this starts to sound like a Zen koan, let’s look at how we use the numeral “0.” Arab and Indian scholars were the first to use zero to develop the place-value number system that we use today. When we write a number, we use only the ten numerals 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. These numerals can stand for ones, tens, hundreds, or whatever depending on their position in the number. In order for this to work, we have to have a way to mark an empty place in a number, or the place values won’t come out right. This is what the numeral “0” does. Think of it as an empty container, signifying that that place is empty. For example, the number 302 has 3 hundreds, no tens, and 2 ones. So is zero a number? Well, that is a matter of definition, but in mathematics we tend to call it a duck if it acts like a duck, or at least if it’s behavior is mostly duck-like. The number zero obeys most of the same rules of arithmetic that ordinary numbers do, so we call it a number. It is a rather special number, though, because it doesn’t quite obey all the same laws as other numbers—you can’t divide by zero, for example. Note for math purists: In the strict axiomatic field development of the real numbers, both 0 and 1 are singled out for special treatment. Zero is the additive identity, because adding zero to a number does not change the number. Similarly, 1 is the multiplicative identity because multiplying a number by 1 does not change it.     Even more abstract than zero is the idea of negative numbers. If, in addition to not having any sheep, the farmer owes someone 3 sheep, you could say that the number of sheep that the farmer owns is negative 3. It took longer for the idea of negative numbers to be accepted, but eventually they came to be seen as something we could call “numbers.” The expanded set of numbers that we get by including negative versions of the counting numbers is called the integers.  || Integers Whole numbers plus negatives . . . –4, –3, –2, –1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . .   About Negative Numbers How can you have less than zero? Well, do you have a checking account? Having less than zero means that you have to add some to it just to get it up to zero. And if you take more out of it, it will be even further less than zero, meaning that you will have to add even more just to get it up to zero. The strict mathematical definition goes something like this: For every real number n, there exists its opposite, denoted – n, such that the sum of n and – n is zero, or n + (– n) = 0 Note that the negative sign in front of a number is part of the symbol for that number: The symbol “–3” is one object—it stands for “negative three,” the name of the number that is three units less than zero. The number zero is its own opposite, and zero is considered to be neither negative nor positive. Read the discussion of subtraction for more about the meanings of the symbol “–.”     The next generalization that we can make is to include the idea of fractions. While it is unlikely that a farmer owns a fractional number of sheep, many other things in real life are measured in fractions, like a half-cup of sugar. If we add fractions to the set of integers, we get the set of rational numbers.  || Rational Numbers All numbers of the form , where a and b are integers (but b cannot be zero) Rational numbers include what we usually call fractions Notice that the word “rational” contains the word “ratio,” which should remind you of fractions.   The bottom of the fraction is called the denominator. Think of it as the denomination—it tells you what size fraction we are talking about: fourths, fifths, etc.   The top of the fraction is called the numerator. It tells you how many fourths, fifths, or whatever.   RESTRICTION: The denominator cannot be zero! (But the numerator can) If the numerator is zero, then the whole fraction is just equal to zero. If I have zero thirds or zero fourths, than I don’t have anything. However, it makes no sense at all to talk about a fraction measured in “zeroths.” Fractions can be numbers smaller than 1, like 1/2 or 3/4 (called proper fractions), or they can be numbers bigger than 1 (called improper fractions), like two-and-a-half, which we could also write as 5/2 All integers can also be thought of as rational numbers, with a denominator of 1: This means that all the previous sets of numbers (natural numbers, whole numbers, and integers) are subsets of the rational numbers. Now it might seem as though the set of rational numbers would cover every possible case, but that is not so. There are numbers that cannot be expressed as a fraction, and these numbers are called irrational because they are not rational.  || Irrational Numbers Cannot be expressed as a ratio of integers. As decimals they never repeat or terminate (rationals always do one or the other) Examples:  Rational (terminates) Rational (repeats) Rational (repeats) Rational (repeats) Irrational (never repeats or terminates) Irrational (never repeats or terminates)  || More on Irrational Numbers More on Irrational Numbers It might seem that the rational numbers would cover any possible number. After all, if I measure a length with a ruler, it is going to come out to some fraction—maybe 2 and 3/4 inches. Suppose I then measure it with more precision. I will get something like 2 and 5/8 inches, or maybe 2 and 23/32 inches. It seems that however close I look it is going to be some fraction. However, this is not always the case. Imagine a line segment exactly one unit long:     Now draw another line one unit long, perpendicular to the first one, like this:     Now draw the diagonal connecting the two ends: Congratulations! You have just drawn a length that cannot be measured by any rational number. According to the Pythagorean Theorem, the length of this diagonal is the square root of 2; that is, the number which when multiplied by itself gives 2. According to my calculator, But my calculator only stops at eleven decimal places because it can hold no more. This number actually goes on forever past the decimal point, without the pattern ever terminating or repeating. This is because if the pattern ever stopped or repeated, you could write the number as a fraction—and it can be proven that the square root of 2 can never be written as for any choice of integers for a and b. The proof of this was considered quite shocking when it was first demonstrated by the followers of Pythagoras 26 centuries ago.    || The Real Numbers Rationals + Irrationals All points on the number line Or all possible distances on the number line When we put the irrational numbers together with the rational numbers, we finally have the complete set of real numbers. Any number that represents an amount of something, such as a weight, a volume, or the distance between two points, will always be a real number. The following diagram illustrates the relationships of the sets that make up the real numbers.  || An Ordered Set The real numbers have the property that they are ordered, which means that given any two different numbers we can always say that one is greater or less than the other. A more formal way of saying this is: For any two real numbers a and b, one and only one of the following three statements is true: 1.      a is less than b, (expressed as a < b) 2.      a is equal to b, (expressed as a = b) 3.      a is greater than b, (expressed as a > b)  || The Number Line The ordered nature of the real numbers lets us arrange them along a line (imagine that the line is made up of an infinite number of points all packed so closely together that they form a solid line). The points are ordered so that points to the right are greater than points to the left: Every real number corresponds to a distance on the number line, starting at the center (zero). Negative numbers represent distances to the left of zero, and positive numbers are distances to the right. The arrows on the end indicate that it keeps going forever in both directions.  || Absolute Value  When we want to talk about how “large” a number is without regard as to whether it is positive or negative, we use the absolute value function. The absolute value of a number is the distance from that number to the origin (zero) on the number line. That distance is always given as a non-negative number. In short: If a number is positive (or zero), the absolute value function does nothing to it: If a number is negative, the absolute value function makes it positive: WARNING: If there is arithmetic to do inside the absolute value sign, you must do it before taking the absolute value—the absolute value function acts on the result of whatever is inside it. For example, a common error is    (WRONG) The correct result is  ||  || Addition of Negative Numbers What does it mean to add negative numbers? We view a negative number as a displacement to the left on the number line, so we follow the same procedure as before but when we add a negative number we take that many steps to the left instead of the right. Examples:  2 + (–3) = –1 First we move two steps to the right, and then three steps to the left: (–2) + 3 = 1 We move two steps to the left, and then three steps to the right:  (–2) + (–3) = –5 Two steps to the left, and then three more steps to the left:   From these examples, we can make the following observations: 1.      If we add two positive numbers together, the result will be positive 2.      If we add two negative numbers together, the result will be negative 3.      If we add a positive and a negative number together, the result could be positive or negative, depending on which number represents the biggest step.  ||  Subtraction There are two ways to define subtraction: by a related addition statement, or as adding the opposite. Subtraction as Related Addition a – b = c if and only if a = b + c Subtraction as Adding the Opposite For every real number b there exists its opposite –b, and we can define subtraction as adding the opposite: a – b = a + (-b) ·        In algebra it usually best to always think of subtraction as adding the opposite  || Distinction Between Subtraction and Negation The symbol “–” means two different things in math. If it is between two numbers it means subtraction, but if it is in front of one number it means the opposite (or negative) of that number. Subtraction is binary (acts on two numbers), but negation is unary (acts on only one number).           Calculators have two different keys to perform these functions. The key with a plain minus sign is only for subtraction:   Negation is performed by a key that looks like one of these: Remember that subtraction can always be thought of as adding the opposite. In fact, we could get along just fine without ever using subtraction.  || Subtraction on the Number Line Addition of a positive number moves to the right, and adding a negative moves to the left. Subtraction is just the opposite: Subtraction of a positive number moves to the left, and subtracting a negative moves to the right. ·     Notice that subtracting a negative is the same thing as adding a positive.  ||  || Multiplication with Signed Numbers We can apply this same rule to make sense out of what we mean by a positive number times a negative number. For example, 3 × (–4) just means to take 3 of the number “negative four” and add them together: 3 × (–4) = (–4) + (–4) + (–4) = –12 Unfortunately, this scheme breaks down when we try to multiply a negative number times a number. It doesn’t make sense to try to write down a number a negative number of times. There are two ways to look at this problem. One way is to use the fact that multiplication obeys the commutative law, which means that the order of multiplication does not matter: a × b = b × a. This lets us write a negative times a positive as a positive times a negative and proceed as before: (–3) × 4 = 4 × (–3) = (–3) + (–3) + (–3) + (–3) = –12 However, we are still in trouble when it comes to multiplying a negative times a negative. A better way to look at this problem is to demand that multiplication obey a consistent pattern. If we look at a multiplication table for positive numbers and then extend it to include negative numbers, the results in the table should continue to change in the same pattern. For example, consider the following multiplication table: a b a × b 3 2 6 2 2 4 1 2 2 0 2 0 The numbers in the last column are decreasing by 2 each time, so if we let the values for a continue into the negative numbers we should keep decreasing the product by 2: a b a × b 3 2 6 2 2 4 1 2 2 0 2 0 –1 2 –2 –2 2 –4 –3 2 –6 We can make a bigger multiplication table that shows many different possibilities. By keeping the step sizes the same in each row and column, even as we extend into the negative numbers, we see that the following sign rules hold for multiplication:  || Sign Rules for Multiplication (+)(+) = (+) (–)(–) = (+) (–)(+) = (–) (+)(–) = (–) Multiplication Table Notice how the step size in each row or column remains consistent, regardless of whether we are multiplying positive or negative numbers.   -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 -5 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 -20 -25 -4 20 16 12 8 4 0 -4 -8 -12 -16 -20 -3 15 12 9 6 3 0 -3 -6 -9 -12 -15 -2 10 8 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 -10 -1 5 4 3 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 -4 -5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 2 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 3 -15 -12 -9 -6 -3 0 3 6 9 12 15 4 -20 -16 -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 16 20 5 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25   For math purists, here’s the real reason: The Real Reason It should be obvious that the presentation of the rules of arithmetic given here is just a collection of motivational arguments, not a formal development. The formal development of the real number system starts with the field axioms. The field axioms are postulated, and then all the other properties follow from them. The field axioms are The associative and commutative laws for addition and multiplication The existence of the additive and multiplicative identities (0 and 1) The existence of the additive inverse (opposites, or negatives) and the multiplicative inverse (the reciprocal) The distributive law All of these are essential, but the distributive law is particularly important because it is what distinguishes the behavior of multiplication from addition. Namely, multiplication distributes over addition but not vice-versa. The rules of arithmetic like “a negative times a negative gives a positive” are what they are because that is the only way the field axioms would still hold. For example, the distributive law requires that –2(3 – 2) = (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) We can evaluate the left side of this equation by following the order of operations, which says to do what is in parentheses first, so –2(3 – 2) = –2(1) = –2. Now for the distributive law to be true, the right side must also be equal to -2, so (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) = –2 If we use our sign rules for multiplication then it works out the way it should: (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) = –6 + 4 = –2    || Notation for Multiplication We are used to using the symbol “×” to represent multiplication in arithmetic, but in algebra we prefer to avoid that symbol because we like to use the letter “x” to represent a variable, and the two symbols can be easily confused. So instead, we adopt the following notation for multiplication: 1.      Multiplication is implied if two quantities are written side-by-side with no other symbol between them. Example:  ab means a × b. 2.      If a symbol is needed to prevent confusion, we use a dot.   Example:  If we need to show 3 times 5, we cannot just write them next to each other or it would look like the number thirty-five, so we write 3 · 5. We can also use parentheses to separate factors. 3 times 5 could be written as 3(5) or (3)5 or (3)(5).  || Division There are two ways to think of division: as implying a related multiplication, or as multiplying by the reciprocal. Division as Related Multiplication The statement “12 ÷ 3 = 4” is true only because 3 × 4 = 12. A division problem is really asking the question “What number can I multiply the divisor by to get the dividend?”; and so every division equation implies an equivalent multiplication equation. In general: a ÷ b = c if and only if a = b × c This also shows why you cannot divide by zero. If we asked “What is six divided by zero?” we would mean “What number times zero is equal to six?”, but any number times zero gives zero, so there is no answer to this question.  || Multiplicative Inverse (The Reciprocal) For every real number a (except zero) there exists a real number denoted by 1/a such that a(1/a) = 1 The number 1/a is called the reciprocal or multiplicative inverse of a. Note that the reciprocal of 1/a is a. The reciprocal of the reciprocal gives you back what you started with. This allows us to define division as multiplication by the reciprocal: a ÷ b = a × (1/b) This is usually the most convenient way to think of division when you are doing algebra.  || Notation for Division Instead of using the symbol “ ¸ ” to represent division, we prefer to write it using the fraction notation:  || Sign Rules for Division Because division can always be written as a multiplication by the reciprocal, it obeys the same sign rules as multiplication. If a positive is divided by a negative, or a negative divided by a positive, the result is negative: but if both numbers are the same sign, the result is positive:  ||  || Rules Product of Different Powers:    aman = am + n IMPORTANT: all the numbers must have the same bases  (the same ‘a’) Example:  (42)(43) = 45   This is easy to see if you write out the exponents:   (42)(43) = (4 · 4) · (4 · 4 · 4) = 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 = 45    WARNING: Do not attempt to use this rule for addition:   42 + 43 is NOT 45. In fact there is no way to simplify xn + xm if n and m are different powers. Power Raised to a Power:      Example:  (42)3 = 46   This is also easy to see if you expand the exponents:   (42)3 = (42)(42)(42) = (4 · 4) (4 · 4) (4 · 4) = 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 = 46   There are more rules for combining numbers with exponents, but this is enough for now.  || When we encounter an expression such as 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 22+3, it makes quite a difference how we choose which operations to perform first. We need a set of rules that would guide anyone to one unique value for this kind of expression. Some of these rules are simply based on convention, while others are forced on us by mathematical logic. In the chapter on the Properties of Real Numbers, you will see how the distributive law is consistent with these rules. The universally agreed-upon order in which to evaluate a mathematical expression is as follows:1. Parentheses from Inside OutBy “parentheses” we mean anything that acts as a grouping symbol, including anything inside symbols such as [ ], { }, |  | and . Any expression in the numerator or denominator of a fraction or in an exponent are also considered grouped and should be simplified before carrying out further operations. ·        If there are nested parentheses (parentheses inside parentheses), you work from the innermost parentheses outward.2. ExponentsAlso other special functions such as log, sin, cos, etc.3. Multiplication and Division, left to rightThe left-to-right order does not matter if only multiplication is involved, but it matters for division.4. Addition and Subtraction, left to rightThe left-to-right order does not matter if only addition is involved, but it matters for subtraction.Example:  Going back to our original example, 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 22+3Given: 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 22+3 The exponent is an implied grouping, so the 2 + 3 must be evaluated first: = 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 25 Now the exponent is carried out: = 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 32 Now the multiplication and division, left to right, using 15 ¸ 3 = 5 and 5 ´ 32 = 160: = 3 + 5 + 160 Now the addition, left to right: = 168  Calculator Note: Most modern calculators “know” the order of operations, and you can enter expressions pretty much as they are written. Some older calculators will carry out each operation as soon as its key is pushed, which can result in the operations being carried out in the wrong order. Try some examples if you are not sure how your calculator behaves.For example, if you enter3 + 4 × 5 =The correct answer should be 23, because the multiplication should be performed before the addition, giving 3 + 20. But if your calculator carries out the “3 + 4” before getting to the “ × 5”, it will show a result of 35 because it will see it as 7 × 5.  Calculator  Note: Use the parenthesis keys to force grouping. If you are evaluating an expression such asthe denominator needs to be simplified before doing the division. If you enter it into your calculator as 4 ÷ 3 + 5, it will evaluate the “ 4 ÷ 3 “ first, and then add 5 to the result, giving the incorrect answer of 6.3333. To make it perform the addition first, use parentheses:4 ÷ (3 + 5) = 0.5 In our example problem above, the “2 + 3” in the exponent is an implied grouping, and you would need to use parentheses. To enter that expression in your calculator, you would enter it as3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 2 ^ (2 + 3) =(on some calculators the exponent button is labeled “ ^ ”, while on others it is labeled “ yx ”) ||  || Mixed Number  Notation One way of expressing the improper fraction 5/4 is as the mixed number , which is read as “one and one-fourth.” This notation is potentially confusing and is not advised in algebra. One cause of confusion is that in algebra we use the convention that multiplication is implied when two quantities are written next to each other with no symbols in between. However, the mixed number notation implies addition, not multiplication. For example, means 1 plus one-quarter, and 3 1/2 = 3 + 1/2. It is possible to do arithmetic with mixed numbers by treating the whole number parts and the fractional parts separately, but it is generally more convenient in algebra to always write improper fractions. When you encounter a problem with mixed numbers, the first thing you should do is convert them to improper fractions.  || Conversion Mixed Number to Improper Fraction A.     Multiply the integer part with the bottom of the fraction part. B.     Add the result to the top of the fraction. The general formula is Improper Fraction to Mixed Number Do the division to get the integer part Put the remainder over the old denominator to get the fractional part.  || Equivalent Fractions Equivalent fractions are fractions that have the same value, for example     etc. Although all these fractions are written differently, they all represent the same quantity. You can measure a half-cup of sugar or two quarter-cups of sugar, or even four eighth-cups of sugar, and you will still have the same amount of sugar. ·       Multiply by a form of One A fraction can be converted into an equivalent fraction by multiplying it by a form of 1. The number 1 can be represented as a fraction because any number divided by itself is equal to 1 (remember that the fraction notation means the same thing as division). In other words,   etc. Now if you multiply a number by 1 it does not change its value, so if we multiply a fraction by another fraction that is equal to 1, we will not be changing the value of the original fraction. For example, In this case, 2/3 represents exactly the same quantity as 4/6, because all we did was to multiply 2/3 by the number 1, represented as the fraction 2/2. Multiplying the numerator and denominator by the same number to produce an equivalent fraction is called building up the fraction.  || Reduced Form Numerator and Denominator Have No Common Factors Procedure: 1.      Write out prime factorization of Numerator and Denominator 2.      Cancel all common factors This procedure is just the opposite of building up a fraction by multiplying it by a fraction equivalent to 1.   Prime Factors A number is prime if it has no whole number factors other than 1 times itself, that is, the number cannot be written as a product of two whole numbers (except 1 times itself). Example:  6 is not prime because it can be written as 2 × 3 Example:  7 is prime because the only way to write it as a product of whole numbers is 1 × 7 The first few prime numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, . . . There are an infinite number of prime numbers (the list goes on forever).  Any non-prime number can be decomposed into a product of prime numbers Example:  4 = 2 × 2 Example:  12 = 2 × 2 × 3 The Branching Method This method works well for larger numbers that might have many factors. All you need to do is think of any two numbers that multiply to give your original number, and write them below it. Continue this process for each number until each branch ends in a prime number. The factors of the original number are the prime numbers on the ends of all the branches. Example:  Factor the number 60     60 = 2 × 2 × 3 × 5 Notes Notice how I started with the smallest numbers: first 2’s, then 3’s, and so on. This is not required but it keeps the result nicely in order. If a number is even, then it is divisible by 2. If a number ends in 0 or 5, then it is divisible by 5. If the digits of a number add up to a number divisible by 3, then the number is divisible by 3. In this example 15 gives 1 + 5 = 6, which is divisible by 3, and therefore 15 is divisible by 3. Large numbers with large prime factors are notoriously hard to factor—it is mainly just a matter of trial and error. The public-key encryption system for sending secure computer data uses very large numbers that need to be factored in order to break the code. The code is essentially unbreakable because it would take an enormous amount of computer time to try every possible prime factor.      || Multiplying Fractions Multiply Numerators and Denominators Example:      And reduce result if needed   Canceling common factors first makes multiplication easier If you don’t reduce the factors before multiplying, the answer will have to be reduced. Example:  Remember that canceling always leaves a “1” behind, because you are really dividing the numerator and the denominator by the same number.  || Adding and Subtracting Fractions ·            Add Numerators when Denominators Are the Same ·        If the denominators are not the same, make them the same by building up the fractions so that they both have a common denominator. ·        Any common denominator will work, but the answer will have to be reduced if it is not the Least Common Denominator. ·        The product of all the denominators is always a common denominator (but not necessarily the Least Common Denominator).  || Least Common Denominator (LCD) By Inspection The smallest number that is evenly divisible by all the denominators In General The LCD is the product of all the prime factors of all the denominators, each factor taken the greatest number of times that it appears in any single denominator. Example:    Factor the denominators:     Assemble LCD:   Note that the three only appears once, because it is only needed once to make either the 12 or the 15:   Now that you have found the LCD, multiply each fraction (top and bottom) by whatever is needed to build up the denominator to the LCD:   Then add the numerators and reduce if needed (using the LCD does not guarantee that you won’t have to reduce):    ||  || Converting Decimals to Fractions Because all the denominators are powers of 10, it is very easy to add these fractions by finding a common denominator. In this example, the common denominator is 1000, and we get This suggests a general rule for converting a decimal number to its fraction form: Put all the digits over the denominator that corresponds to the last decimal place value. In the number 2.345, the last decimal place value is the thousandths place, so we put the digits 2345 over the denominator 1000. Of course we would usually want to reduce the resulting fraction to its simplest form. In this case  || Repeating Fractions The only time this method does not work is for repeating fractions. We know that 1/3 = 0.3333333... but how could we go from 0.3333333... back to 1/3? There is no ‘last decimal place’ because the decimals repeat forever. Fortunately, there is a simple trick for this: ·         Put the repeating digit over a denominator of 9. So we see that in the case of 0.3333333...., the repeating digit is 3, and we make the fraction 3/9, which reduces to 1/3. If there is a group of more than one digit that repeats, Put the repeating group of digits over as many 9’s as there are digits. For example, in the fraction we see that the group of digits ‘15’ repeats, so we put ‘15’ over a denominator of ‘99’ to get o        One warning: This only works for the repeating fraction part of a number. If you have a number like 2.33333..., you should just work with the decimal part and rejoin it with the whole part after you have converted it to a fraction. o        Irrational numbers like p or  have non-repeating decimals, and so they cannot be written as fractions. You can, however, round them off at some point and produce an approximate fraction for them.   Why This Trick Works  If you have learned enough algebra to follow these steps, it is not difficult to see why this works. Let’s start with the simple example 0.3333333... Since we already know that the answer is 1/3, we can concentrate on the procedure, not the answer. Let x = 0.3333333... Multiply both sides by 10 to get 10x = 3.33333... Notice that the decimal part (.33333…) is still the same. In fact, it is the very thing that we called x in the first place, so we can say that 10x= 3 + x Now solve for x: This method will also work for repeating fractions that contain a group of repeating digits, but you have to multiply by a higher power of 10 in order to make the decimal portion stay the same as it was before. For example, suppose we had 0.345345345.... Let x = 0.345345345.... Multiply both sides by 1000 to get 1000x = 345.345345345.... Notice that the decimal part is still the same. In fact, it is still the thing that we called x in the first place, so we can say that 1000x = 345 + x Now solve for x:      || Converting Fractions to Decimals We know the decimal equivalents for some common fractions without having to think about it: 1/2 = 0.5, 3/4 = 0.75, etc. But how do we arrive at these numbers? Remember that the fraction bar means the same thing as division. To convert a fraction to a decimal, do the division. For example, You can do the division with a calculator or by hand with long division.  || Rounding Look only one digit to the right ‘5’s or higher round up (there is some dispute about this rule, but it is good enough for most purposes)   Rounding 5’s Why round fives up? The number 3.5 is exactly halfway between 3.0 and 4.0, so it makes just as much sense to round it down as it does to round it up. Most of the time there is no harm in using the ‘always round fives up’ rule. This is the rule that the United States Internal Revenue Service advises you to use on your taxes, and who is going to argue with them? Sometimes, though, it can cause problems. Suppose you are adding a very large number of values that have all been rounded by this rule. The sum that you get will be a little bit bigger than it ought to be. This can be a very serious problem in computer programs. When thousands or even millions of additions are being performed, the accumulated roundoff error can be quite large. One way of dealing with this problem is the even-odd rule. This rule says that: If the five is the last significant digit and the round-off digit (the one to the left of the 5) is odd, round up. If the five is the last significant digit and the round-off digit is even, don’t round up. Actually, you could reverse even and odd in this rule. All that matters is that about half the time you will be rounding up on a 5, and half the time down. The reason it matters that the five is the last significant digit is because if there are any other non-zero digits past the five then you must round up, because the part that you are chopping off is more than 50% of the roundoff place-value. For example, suppose you want to round 3.351 to the nearest tenth. The decimal part represents the fraction 351/1000, which is 1/1000 closer to 400/1000 than it is to 300/100. Therefore you would always round this up to 3.4.     Example:  Round 11.3826 to the nearest hundredth. Solution: The hundredths place is where the ‘8’ is. We look one digit to the right and see a ‘2’, so we do not round up, leaving us with 11.38. Example:  Round 11.3826 to the nearest thousandth. Solution: The thousandths place is where the ‘2’ is. We look one place to the right and see a ‘6’, so we round the ‘2’ up, getting 11.383. Trouble with ‘9’s. If the digit you are rounding up is a ‘9’, then rounding it up will make it a ‘10’, which is too big for one place. What happens is that the extra ‘1’ gets added to the place to the left. Example:  Round 3.49721 to the nearest hundredth. Solution: The hundredth place has a ‘9’ in it. One step to the right is a ‘7’, so we have to round up. This makes the ‘9’ into a ‘10’, but we really can’t write the new number as 3.4(10). Instead, the extra ‘1’ moves one place to the left and is added to the ‘4’, giving us 3.50. It can happen that the place to the left contains another ‘9’, in which case the extra ‘1’ will cause it to become a ‘10’, which pushes the ‘1’ still further on to the next place to the left. Example:  Round 75.69996217 to the nearest ten-thousandth Solution: The ten-thousandths place is the last ‘9’ in the number, and the place to its right is a ‘6’, which means we round up. This makes the ‘9’ into a ‘10’, like this: 75.699(10) But of course we cannot put a ‘10’ in that place, so the ‘1’ moves to the left and gets added to the ‘9’ there, making it into a ‘10’: 75.69(10)0 This leaves us with the same problem, a ‘10’ in one decimal place, so the extra ‘1’ moves one more step to the left, turning that ‘9’ into a ‘10’: 75.6(10)00 Well, we still have the same problem, so we move the ‘1’ yet another step to the left, where it adds on to the ‘6’, finally leaving us with an acceptable answer: 75.7000 In general, ·        The extra ‘1’ migrates to the left until it finds a resting-place. This means that the ‘1’ moves to the left until it can be added to a digit less than ‘9’, or until it falls off the end as a new digit out in front. Example:  Round 999.96 to the nearest tenth. The digit to the right of the tenths place is a ‘6’, so we have to round up. But when we round up the ‘9’ it becomes a ‘10’, forcing the one to be added to the left. Unfortunately, we find another ‘9’ there and the process is repeated for each of the ‘9’s until we reach the leading ‘9’, which becomes a ‘10’ resulting in 1000.0  || Arithmetic with Decimals Although calculators have made it much easier to do arithmetic with decimal numbers, it is nice to know that you can still do it without a calculator. Addition and Subtraction To add or subtract decimal numbers, you use the familiar column method that you learned back in grade school. To use this method, the place values of the two numbers must be lined up. This means that the decimal points must be lined up, and you can fill in with zeros if one number has more decimal places than the other.   Example:     5.46 + 11.2   Becomes:   Multiplication To multiply two decimal numbers, you can use the column method just as you would with whole numbers. You ignore the decimal points as you carry out the multiplication, and then you put the decimal point in the result at the correct place. The product will have the number of decimal places as the total number of decimal places in the factors. In the following example, the first factor has 2 decimal places and the second factor has 1 decimal place, so the product must have 3 decimal places:   Division You can divide decimal numbers using the familiar (?) technique of long division. This can be awkward, though, because it is hard to guess at products of decimals (long division, you may recall, is basically a guess-and-check technique). It can be made easier by multiplying both the dividend and divisor by ‘10’s to make the divisor a whole number. This will not change the result of the division, because division is the same thing as fractions, and multiplying both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same number will not change the value of the fraction. For example, consider This is the same as the fraction , which is equivalent to the fraction , obtained by multiplying the numerator and denominator by 10. Thus   ,   which can be attacked with long division:      ||  || To convert a decimal to a percent Multiply the decimal number by 100 (or move the decimal point two places to the right). Since x% = x/100, it is also true that 100 x% = x. Another way to look at is to consider that in order to convert a number into a percent, you have to express it in hundredths. Recall that the hundredths place is the second place to the right of the decimal, so this is the digit that gives the units digit of the percent. Of course, all this means is that you move the decimal point two places to the right. WARNING: If you just remember these rules as “move the decimal two places to the left” and “move the decimal two places to the right,” you are very likely to get them confused. If you accidentally move the decimal in the wrong direction it will end up four places off from where it should be, which means that your answer will be either ten-thousand times too big or ten-thousand times too small. This is generally not an acceptable range of error. It is much better to remember these rules by simply remembering the meaning of the percent sign, namely that “ % “ means “ /100.” If you just write the problem that way, you should be able to see what you need to do in order to solve it. Converting between percents and their decimal equivalents is so simple that it is usually best to express all percents in decimal form when you are working percent problems. The decimal numbers are what you will need to put in your calculator, and you can always express the result as a percent if you need to.   Calculator  note: Some calculators have a percent key that essentially just divides by 100, but it can do other useful things that might save you a few keystrokes. For instance, if you need to add 5% to a number (perhaps to include the sales tax on a purchase), on most calculators you can enter the original number and then press “ + 5 % = “. Just make sure you understand what it does before you blindly trust it. What it is doing in this example is multiplying the original number by 0.05 and then adding the result onto the original number. You should be able to work any percent problem without using this key, but once you understand what is going on it can be a convenient short-cut.  || To convert a percent to a fraction ·        Put the percentage over a denominator of 100 and reduce Writing a percent as a fraction is very simple if you remember that the percent is the numerator of a fraction with a denominator equal to 100. Examples:  In this last example, the first fraction has a decimal in it, which is not a proper way to represent a fraction. To clear the decimal, just multiply both the numerator and the denominator by 10 to produce an equivalent fraction written with whole numbers.  || To convert a fraction to a percent ·         Divide the numerator by the denominator and multiply by 100 To write a fraction as a percent you need to convert the fraction into hundredths. Sometimes this is easy to do without a calculator. For example, if you saw the fraction , you should notice that doubling the numerator and the denominator will produce an equivalent fraction that has a denominator of 100. Then the numerator will be the percent that you are seeking: With other fractions, though, it is not always so easy. It is not at all obvious how to convert a fraction like 5/7 into something over 100. In this case, the best thing to do is to convert the fraction into its decimal form, and then convert the decimal into a percent. To convert the fraction to a decimal, remember that the fraction bar indicates division: The “approximately equal to” sign () is used because the decimal parts have been rounded off. Because it is understood that approximate numbers are rounded, we will not continue to use the approximately equal sign. It is more conventional to just use the standard equal sign with approximate numbers, even though it is not entirely accurate.  || Working percent problems In percent problems, just as in fraction problems, the word “of” implies multiplication: “x percent of a number” means “x% times a number” Example:  What is 12% of 345? 12% is 12/100, which we can express in decimal form as 0.12. 12% of 345 means 12% times 345, or Notice how it is easier to just move the decimal over two places instead of explicitly dividing by 100. We solve a problem like this by translating the question into mathematical symbols, using x to stand for the unknown “what” and that the “of” means “times”: Example:  What percent of 2342 is 319? Once again we translate this into mathematical symbols: Solving this equation involves a little bit of algebra. To isolate the x% on one side of the equation we must divide both sides by 2342: The calculator tells us that x% = 0.1362 Now the right-hand side of this equation is the decimal equivalent that is equal to x%, which means that x = 13.62, or 319 is 13.62% of 2342 If that last step confused you, remember that the percent symbol means “over 100”, so the equation x% = 0.1362 really says or x = 100(0.1362) x = 13.62 Example:  2.4 is what percent of 19.7? Translating into math symbols: Solving for x: 2.4 = x% (19.7) x% = 0.1218 x = 12.18 So we can say that 2.4 is 12% of 19.7 (rounding to 2 significant figures) Example:  46 is 3.2% of what? Translating into math symbols: Solving for x: 46 = 3.2% (x) 46 = 0.032x x = 1437.5 Therefore, we can say that 46 is 3.2% of 1400 (rounding to 2 significant figures). Notice that in the second step the percentage (3.2%) is converted into its decimal form (0.032).  || The following table lists the defining properties of the real numbers (technically called the field axioms). These laws define how the things we call numbers should behave. Addition Multiplication Commutative For all real a, b a + b = b + a Commutative For all real a, b ab = ba Associative For all real a, b, c a + (b + c) = (a + b) + c Associative For all real a, b, c (ab)c = a(bc) Identity There exists a real number 0 such that for every real a a + 0 = a Identity There exists a real number 1 such that for every real a a × 1 = a Additive Inverse (Opposite) For every real number a there exist a real number, denoted (-a), such that a + (–a) = 0 Multiplicative Inverse (Reciprocal) For every real number a except 0 there exist a real number, denoted , such that a ×  = 1 Distributive Law For all real a, b, c a(b + c) = ab + ac, and (a + b)c = ac + bcThe commutative and associative laws do not hold for subtraction or division:a – b is not equal to b – aa ÷ b is not equal to b ÷ aa – (b – c) is not equal to (a – b) – ca ÷ (b ÷ c) is not equal to (a ÷ b) ÷ cTry some examples with numbers and you will see that they do not work.What these laws mean is that order and grouping don't matter for addition and multiplication, but they certainly do matter for subtraction and division. In this way, addition and multiplication are “cleaner” than subtraction and division. This will become important when we start talking about algebraic expressions. Often what we will want to do with an algebraic expression will involve rearranging it somehow. If the operations are all addition and multiplication, we don't have to worry so much that we might be changing the value of an expression by rearranging its terms or factors. Fortunately, we can always think of subtraction as an addition problem (adding the opposite), and we can always think of division as a multiplication (multiplying by the reciprocal).You may have noticed that the commutative and associative laws read exactly the same way for addition and multiplication, as if there was no difference between them other than notation. The law that makes them behave differently is the distributive law, because multiplication distributes over addition, not vice-versa.. The distributive law is extremely important, and it is impossible to understand algebra without being thoroughly familiar with this law.Example:  2(3 + 4)According to the order of operations rules, we should evaluate this expression by first doing the addition inside the parentheses, giving us2(3 + 4) = 2(7) = 14But we can also look at this problem with the distributive law, and of course still get the same answer. The distributive law says that || 
book3_chapter01_1	 || Whole Numbers Natural Numbers together with “zero” 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, . . .   About the Number Zero What is zero? Is it a number? How can the number of nothing be a number? Is zero nothing, or is it something? Well, before this starts to sound like a Zen koan, let’s look at how we use the numeral “0.” Arab and Indian scholars were the first to use zero to develop the place-value number system that we use today. When we write a number, we use only the ten numerals 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. These numerals can stand for ones, tens, hundreds, or whatever depending on their position in the number. In order for this to work, we have to have a way to mark an empty place in a number, or the place values won’t come out right. This is what the numeral “0” does. Think of it as an empty container, signifying that that place is empty. For example, the number 302 has 3 hundreds, no tens, and 2 ones. So is zero a number? Well, that is a matter of definition, but in mathematics we tend to call it a duck if it acts like a duck, or at least if it’s behavior is mostly duck-like. The number zero obeys most of the same rules of arithmetic that ordinary numbers do, so we call it a number. It is a rather special number, though, because it doesn’t quite obey all the same laws as other numbers—you can’t divide by zero, for example. Note for math purists: In the strict axiomatic field development of the real numbers, both 0 and 1 are singled out for special treatment. Zero is the additive identity, because adding zero to a number does not change the number. Similarly, 1 is the multiplicative identity because multiplying a number by 1 does not change it.     Even more abstract than zero is the idea of negative numbers. If, in addition to not having any sheep, the farmer owes someone 3 sheep, you could say that the number of sheep that the farmer owns is negative 3. It took longer for the idea of negative numbers to be accepted, but eventually they came to be seen as something we could call “numbers.” The expanded set of numbers that we get by including negative versions of the counting numbers is called the integers.  || Integers Whole numbers plus negatives . . . –4, –3, –2, –1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . .   About Negative Numbers How can you have less than zero? Well, do you have a checking account? Having less than zero means that you have to add some to it just to get it up to zero. And if you take more out of it, it will be even further less than zero, meaning that you will have to add even more just to get it up to zero. The strict mathematical definition goes something like this: For every real number n, there exists its opposite, denoted – n, such that the sum of n and – n is zero, or n + (– n) = 0 Note that the negative sign in front of a number is part of the symbol for that number: The symbol “–3” is one object—it stands for “negative three,” the name of the number that is three units less than zero. The number zero is its own opposite, and zero is considered to be neither negative nor positive. Read the discussion of subtraction for more about the meanings of the symbol “–.”     The next generalization that we can make is to include the idea of fractions. While it is unlikely that a farmer owns a fractional number of sheep, many other things in real life are measured in fractions, like a half-cup of sugar. If we add fractions to the set of integers, we get the set of rational numbers.  || Rational Numbers All numbers of the form , where a and b are integers (but b cannot be zero) Rational numbers include what we usually call fractions Notice that the word “rational” contains the word “ratio,” which should remind you of fractions.   The bottom of the fraction is called the denominator. Think of it as the denomination—it tells you what size fraction we are talking about: fourths, fifths, etc.   The top of the fraction is called the numerator. It tells you how many fourths, fifths, or whatever.   RESTRICTION: The denominator cannot be zero! (But the numerator can) If the numerator is zero, then the whole fraction is just equal to zero. If I have zero thirds or zero fourths, than I don’t have anything. However, it makes no sense at all to talk about a fraction measured in “zeroths.” Fractions can be numbers smaller than 1, like 1/2 or 3/4 (called proper fractions), or they can be numbers bigger than 1 (called improper fractions), like two-and-a-half, which we could also write as 5/2 All integers can also be thought of as rational numbers, with a denominator of 1: This means that all the previous sets of numbers (natural numbers, whole numbers, and integers) are subsets of the rational numbers. Now it might seem as though the set of rational numbers would cover every possible case, but that is not so. There are numbers that cannot be expressed as a fraction, and these numbers are called irrational because they are not rational.  || Irrational Numbers Cannot be expressed as a ratio of integers. As decimals they never repeat or terminate (rationals always do one or the other) Examples:  Rational (terminates) Rational (repeats) Rational (repeats) Rational (repeats) Irrational (never repeats or terminates) Irrational (never repeats or terminates)  || More on Irrational Numbers More on Irrational Numbers It might seem that the rational numbers would cover any possible number. After all, if I measure a length with a ruler, it is going to come out to some fraction—maybe 2 and 3/4 inches. Suppose I then measure it with more precision. I will get something like 2 and 5/8 inches, or maybe 2 and 23/32 inches. It seems that however close I look it is going to be some fraction. However, this is not always the case. Imagine a line segment exactly one unit long:     Now draw another line one unit long, perpendicular to the first one, like this:     Now draw the diagonal connecting the two ends: Congratulations! You have just drawn a length that cannot be measured by any rational number. According to the Pythagorean Theorem, the length of this diagonal is the square root of 2; that is, the number which when multiplied by itself gives 2. According to my calculator, But my calculator only stops at eleven decimal places because it can hold no more. This number actually goes on forever past the decimal point, without the pattern ever terminating or repeating. This is because if the pattern ever stopped or repeated, you could write the number as a fraction—and it can be proven that the square root of 2 can never be written as for any choice of integers for a and b. The proof of this was considered quite shocking when it was first demonstrated by the followers of Pythagoras 26 centuries ago.    || The Real Numbers Rationals + Irrationals All points on the number line Or all possible distances on the number line When we put the irrational numbers together with the rational numbers, we finally have the complete set of real numbers. Any number that represents an amount of something, such as a weight, a volume, or the distance between two points, will always be a real number. The following diagram illustrates the relationships of the sets that make up the real numbers.  || An Ordered Set The real numbers have the property that they are ordered, which means that given any two different numbers we can always say that one is greater or less than the other. A more formal way of saying this is: For any two real numbers a and b, one and only one of the following three statements is true: 1.      a is less than b, (expressed as a < b) 2.      a is equal to b, (expressed as a = b) 3.      a is greater than b, (expressed as a > b)  || The Number Line The ordered nature of the real numbers lets us arrange them along a line (imagine that the line is made up of an infinite number of points all packed so closely together that they form a solid line). The points are ordered so that points to the right are greater than points to the left: Every real number corresponds to a distance on the number line, starting at the center (zero). Negative numbers represent distances to the left of zero, and positive numbers are distances to the right. The arrows on the end indicate that it keeps going forever in both directions.  || Absolute Value  When we want to talk about how “large” a number is without regard as to whether it is positive or negative, we use the absolute value function. The absolute value of a number is the distance from that number to the origin (zero) on the number line. That distance is always given as a non-negative number. In short: If a number is positive (or zero), the absolute value function does nothing to it: If a number is negative, the absolute value function makes it positive: WARNING: If there is arithmetic to do inside the absolute value sign, you must do it before taking the absolute value—the absolute value function acts on the result of whatever is inside it. For example, a common error is    (WRONG) The correct result is  || 
book3_chapter01_1_1	Whole Numbers Natural Numbers together with “zero” 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, . . .   About the Number Zero What is zero? Is it a number? How can the number of nothing be a number? Is zero nothing, or is it something? Well, before this starts to sound like a Zen koan, let’s look at how we use the numeral “0.” Arab and Indian scholars were the first to use zero to develop the place-value number system that we use today. When we write a number, we use only the ten numerals 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. These numerals can stand for ones, tens, hundreds, or whatever depending on their position in the number. In order for this to work, we have to have a way to mark an empty place in a number, or the place values won’t come out right. This is what the numeral “0” does. Think of it as an empty container, signifying that that place is empty. For example, the number 302 has 3 hundreds, no tens, and 2 ones. So is zero a number? Well, that is a matter of definition, but in mathematics we tend to call it a duck if it acts like a duck, or at least if it’s behavior is mostly duck-like. The number zero obeys most of the same rules of arithmetic that ordinary numbers do, so we call it a number. It is a rather special number, though, because it doesn’t quite obey all the same laws as other numbers—you can’t divide by zero, for example. Note for math purists: In the strict axiomatic field development of the real numbers, both 0 and 1 are singled out for special treatment. Zero is the additive identity, because adding zero to a number does not change the number. Similarly, 1 is the multiplicative identity because multiplying a number by 1 does not change it.     Even more abstract than zero is the idea of negative numbers. If, in addition to not having any sheep, the farmer owes someone 3 sheep, you could say that the number of sheep that the farmer owns is negative 3. It took longer for the idea of negative numbers to be accepted, but eventually they came to be seen as something we could call “numbers.” The expanded set of numbers that we get by including negative versions of the counting numbers is called the integers. Whole Numbers Natural Numbers together with “zero” 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, . . .   About the Number Zero What is zero? Is it a number? How can the number of nothing be a number? Is zero nothing, or is it something? Well, before this starts to sound like a Zen koan, let’s look at how we use the numeral “0.” Arab and Indian scholars were the first to use zero to develop the place-value number system that we use today. When we write a number, we use only the ten numerals 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. These numerals can stand for ones, tens, hundreds, or whatever depending on their position in the number. In order for this to work, we have to have a way to mark an empty place in a number, or the place values won’t come out right. This is what the numeral “0” does. Think of it as an empty container, signifying that that place is empty. For example, the number 302 has 3 hundreds, no tens, and 2 ones. So is zero a number? Well, that is a matter of definition, but in mathematics we tend to call it a duck if it acts like a duck, or at least if it’s behavior is mostly duck-like. The number zero obeys most of the same rules of arithmetic that ordinary numbers do, so we call it a number. It is a rather special number, though, because it doesn’t quite obey all the same laws as other numbers—you can’t divide by zero, for example. Note for math purists: In the strict axiomatic field development of the real numbers, both 0 and 1 are singled out for special treatment. Zero is the additive identity, because adding zero to a number does not change the number. Similarly, 1 is the multiplicative identity because multiplying a number by 1 does not change it.     Even more abstract than zero is the idea of negative numbers. If, in addition to not having any sheep, the farmer owes someone 3 sheep, you could say that the number of sheep that the farmer owns is negative 3. It took longer for the idea of negative numbers to be accepted, but eventually they came to be seen as something we could call “numbers.” The expanded set of numbers that we get by including negative versions of the counting numbers is called the integers.  || 
book3_chapter01_1_2	Integers Whole numbers plus negatives . . . –4, –3, –2, –1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . .   About Negative Numbers How can you have less than zero? Well, do you have a checking account? Having less than zero means that you have to add some to it just to get it up to zero. And if you take more out of it, it will be even further less than zero, meaning that you will have to add even more just to get it up to zero. The strict mathematical definition goes something like this: For every real number n, there exists its opposite, denoted – n, such that the sum of n and – n is zero, or n + (– n) = 0 Note that the negative sign in front of a number is part of the symbol for that number: The symbol “–3” is one object—it stands for “negative three,” the name of the number that is three units less than zero. The number zero is its own opposite, and zero is considered to be neither negative nor positive. Read the discussion of subtraction for more about the meanings of the symbol “–.”     The next generalization that we can make is to include the idea of fractions. While it is unlikely that a farmer owns a fractional number of sheep, many other things in real life are measured in fractions, like a half-cup of sugar. If we add fractions to the set of integers, we get the set of rational numbers. Integers Whole numbers plus negatives . . . –4, –3, –2, –1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . .   About Negative Numbers How can you have less than zero? Well, do you have a checking account? Having less than zero means that you have to add some to it just to get it up to zero. And if you take more out of it, it will be even further less than zero, meaning that you will have to add even more just to get it up to zero. The strict mathematical definition goes something like this: For every real number n, there exists its opposite, denoted – n, such that the sum of n and – n is zero, or n + (– n) = 0 Note that the negative sign in front of a number is part of the symbol for that number: The symbol “–3” is one object—it stands for “negative three,” the name of the number that is three units less than zero. The number zero is its own opposite, and zero is considered to be neither negative nor positive. Read the discussion of subtraction for more about the meanings of the symbol “–.”     The next generalization that we can make is to include the idea of fractions. While it is unlikely that a farmer owns a fractional number of sheep, many other things in real life are measured in fractions, like a half-cup of sugar. If we add fractions to the set of integers, we get the set of rational numbers.  || 
book3_chapter01_1_3	Rational Numbers All numbers of the form , where a and b are integers (but b cannot be zero) Rational numbers include what we usually call fractions Notice that the word “rational” contains the word “ratio,” which should remind you of fractions.   The bottom of the fraction is called the denominator. Think of it as the denomination—it tells you what size fraction we are talking about: fourths, fifths, etc.   The top of the fraction is called the numerator. It tells you how many fourths, fifths, or whatever.   RESTRICTION: The denominator cannot be zero! (But the numerator can) If the numerator is zero, then the whole fraction is just equal to zero. If I have zero thirds or zero fourths, than I don’t have anything. However, it makes no sense at all to talk about a fraction measured in “zeroths.” Fractions can be numbers smaller than 1, like 1/2 or 3/4 (called proper fractions), or they can be numbers bigger than 1 (called improper fractions), like two-and-a-half, which we could also write as 5/2 All integers can also be thought of as rational numbers, with a denominator of 1: This means that all the previous sets of numbers (natural numbers, whole numbers, and integers) are subsets of the rational numbers. Now it might seem as though the set of rational numbers would cover every possible case, but that is not so. There are numbers that cannot be expressed as a fraction, and these numbers are called irrational because they are not rational. Rational Numbers All numbers of the form , where a and b are integers (but b cannot be zero) Rational numbers include what we usually call fractions Notice that the word “rational” contains the word “ratio,” which should remind you of fractions.   The bottom of the fraction is called the denominator. Think of it as the denomination—it tells you what size fraction we are talking about: fourths, fifths, etc.   The top of the fraction is called the numerator. It tells you how many fourths, fifths, or whatever.   RESTRICTION: The denominator cannot be zero! (But the numerator can) If the numerator is zero, then the whole fraction is just equal to zero. If I have zero thirds or zero fourths, than I don’t have anything. However, it makes no sense at all to talk about a fraction measured in “zeroths.” Fractions can be numbers smaller than 1, like 1/2 or 3/4 (called proper fractions), or they can be numbers bigger than 1 (called improper fractions), like two-and-a-half, which we could also write as 5/2 All integers can also be thought of as rational numbers, with a denominator of 1: This means that all the previous sets of numbers (natural numbers, whole numbers, and integers) are subsets of the rational numbers. Now it might seem as though the set of rational numbers would cover every possible case, but that is not so. There are numbers that cannot be expressed as a fraction, and these numbers are called irrational because they are not rational.  || 
book3_chapter01_1_4	Irrational Numbers Cannot be expressed as a ratio of integers. As decimals they never repeat or terminate (rationals always do one or the other) Examples:  Rational (terminates) Rational (repeats) Rational (repeats) Rational (repeats) Irrational (never repeats or terminates) Irrational (never repeats or terminates) Irrational Numbers Cannot be expressed as a ratio of integers. As decimals they never repeat or terminate (rationals always do one or the other) Examples:  Rational (terminates) Rational (repeats) Rational (repeats) Rational (repeats) Irrational (never repeats or terminates) Irrational (never repeats or terminates)  || 
book3_chapter01_1_5	More on Irrational Numbers More on Irrational Numbers It might seem that the rational numbers would cover any possible number. After all, if I measure a length with a ruler, it is going to come out to some fraction—maybe 2 and 3/4 inches. Suppose I then measure it with more precision. I will get something like 2 and 5/8 inches, or maybe 2 and 23/32 inches. It seems that however close I look it is going to be some fraction. However, this is not always the case. Imagine a line segment exactly one unit long:     Now draw another line one unit long, perpendicular to the first one, like this:     Now draw the diagonal connecting the two ends: Congratulations! You have just drawn a length that cannot be measured by any rational number. According to the Pythagorean Theorem, the length of this diagonal is the square root of 2; that is, the number which when multiplied by itself gives 2. According to my calculator, But my calculator only stops at eleven decimal places because it can hold no more. This number actually goes on forever past the decimal point, without the pattern ever terminating or repeating. This is because if the pattern ever stopped or repeated, you could write the number as a fraction—and it can be proven that the square root of 2 can never be written as for any choice of integers for a and b. The proof of this was considered quite shocking when it was first demonstrated by the followers of Pythagoras 26 centuries ago.   More on Irrational Numbers More on Irrational Numbers It might seem that the rational numbers would cover any possible number. After all, if I measure a length with a ruler, it is going to come out to some fraction—maybe 2 and 3/4 inches. Suppose I then measure it with more precision. I will get something like 2 and 5/8 inches, or maybe 2 and 23/32 inches. It seems that however close I look it is going to be some fraction. However, this is not always the case. Imagine a line segment exactly one unit long:     Now draw another line one unit long, perpendicular to the first one, like this:     Now draw the diagonal connecting the two ends: Congratulations! You have just drawn a length that cannot be measured by any rational number. According to the Pythagorean Theorem, the length of this diagonal is the square root of 2; that is, the number which when multiplied by itself gives 2. According to my calculator, But my calculator only stops at eleven decimal places because it can hold no more. This number actually goes on forever past the decimal point, without the pattern ever terminating or repeating. This is because if the pattern ever stopped or repeated, you could write the number as a fraction—and it can be proven that the square root of 2 can never be written as for any choice of integers for a and b. The proof of this was considered quite shocking when it was first demonstrated by the followers of Pythagoras 26 centuries ago.    || 
book3_chapter01_1_6	The Real Numbers Rationals + Irrationals All points on the number line Or all possible distances on the number line When we put the irrational numbers together with the rational numbers, we finally have the complete set of real numbers. Any number that represents an amount of something, such as a weight, a volume, or the distance between two points, will always be a real number. The following diagram illustrates the relationships of the sets that make up the real numbers. The Real Numbers Rationals + Irrationals All points on the number line Or all possible distances on the number line When we put the irrational numbers together with the rational numbers, we finally have the complete set of real numbers. Any number that represents an amount of something, such as a weight, a volume, or the distance between two points, will always be a real number. The following diagram illustrates the relationships of the sets that make up the real numbers.  || 
book3_chapter01_1_7	An Ordered Set The real numbers have the property that they are ordered, which means that given any two different numbers we can always say that one is greater or less than the other. A more formal way of saying this is: For any two real numbers a and b, one and only one of the following three statements is true: 1.      a is less than b, (expressed as a < b) 2.      a is equal to b, (expressed as a = b) 3.      a is greater than b, (expressed as a > b) An Ordered Set The real numbers have the property that they are ordered, which means that given any two different numbers we can always say that one is greater or less than the other. A more formal way of saying this is: For any two real numbers a and b, one and only one of the following three statements is true: 1.      a is less than b, (expressed as a < b) 2.      a is equal to b, (expressed as a = b) 3.      a is greater than b, (expressed as a > b)  || 
book3_chapter01_1_8	The Number Line The ordered nature of the real numbers lets us arrange them along a line (imagine that the line is made up of an infinite number of points all packed so closely together that they form a solid line). The points are ordered so that points to the right are greater than points to the left: Every real number corresponds to a distance on the number line, starting at the center (zero). Negative numbers represent distances to the left of zero, and positive numbers are distances to the right. The arrows on the end indicate that it keeps going forever in both directions. The Number Line The ordered nature of the real numbers lets us arrange them along a line (imagine that the line is made up of an infinite number of points all packed so closely together that they form a solid line). The points are ordered so that points to the right are greater than points to the left: Every real number corresponds to a distance on the number line, starting at the center (zero). Negative numbers represent distances to the left of zero, and positive numbers are distances to the right. The arrows on the end indicate that it keeps going forever in both directions.  || 
book3_chapter01_1_9	Absolute Value  When we want to talk about how “large” a number is without regard as to whether it is positive or negative, we use the absolute value function. The absolute value of a number is the distance from that number to the origin (zero) on the number line. That distance is always given as a non-negative number. In short: If a number is positive (or zero), the absolute value function does nothing to it: If a number is negative, the absolute value function makes it positive: WARNING: If there is arithmetic to do inside the absolute value sign, you must do it before taking the absolute value—the absolute value function acts on the result of whatever is inside it. For example, a common error is    (WRONG) The correct result is Absolute Value  When we want to talk about how “large” a number is without regard as to whether it is positive or negative, we use the absolute value function. The absolute value of a number is the distance from that number to the origin (zero) on the number line. That distance is always given as a non-negative number. In short: If a number is positive (or zero), the absolute value function does nothing to it: If a number is negative, the absolute value function makes it positive: WARNING: If there is arithmetic to do inside the absolute value sign, you must do it before taking the absolute value—the absolute value function acts on the result of whatever is inside it. For example, a common error is    (WRONG) The correct result is  || 
book3_chapter01_2	 || Addition of Negative Numbers What does it mean to add negative numbers? We view a negative number as a displacement to the left on the number line, so we follow the same procedure as before but when we add a negative number we take that many steps to the left instead of the right. Examples:  2 + (–3) = –1 First we move two steps to the right, and then three steps to the left: (–2) + 3 = 1 We move two steps to the left, and then three steps to the right:  (–2) + (–3) = –5 Two steps to the left, and then three more steps to the left:   From these examples, we can make the following observations: 1.      If we add two positive numbers together, the result will be positive 2.      If we add two negative numbers together, the result will be negative 3.      If we add a positive and a negative number together, the result could be positive or negative, depending on which number represents the biggest step.  ||  Subtraction There are two ways to define subtraction: by a related addition statement, or as adding the opposite. Subtraction as Related Addition a – b = c if and only if a = b + c Subtraction as Adding the Opposite For every real number b there exists its opposite –b, and we can define subtraction as adding the opposite: a – b = a + (-b) ·        In algebra it usually best to always think of subtraction as adding the opposite  || Distinction Between Subtraction and Negation The symbol “–” means two different things in math. If it is between two numbers it means subtraction, but if it is in front of one number it means the opposite (or negative) of that number. Subtraction is binary (acts on two numbers), but negation is unary (acts on only one number).           Calculators have two different keys to perform these functions. The key with a plain minus sign is only for subtraction:   Negation is performed by a key that looks like one of these: Remember that subtraction can always be thought of as adding the opposite. In fact, we could get along just fine without ever using subtraction.  || Subtraction on the Number Line Addition of a positive number moves to the right, and adding a negative moves to the left. Subtraction is just the opposite: Subtraction of a positive number moves to the left, and subtracting a negative moves to the right. ·     Notice that subtracting a negative is the same thing as adding a positive.  || 
book3_chapter01_2_1	Addition of Negative Numbers What does it mean to add negative numbers? We view a negative number as a displacement to the left on the number line, so we follow the same procedure as before but when we add a negative number we take that many steps to the left instead of the right. Examples:  2 + (–3) = –1 First we move two steps to the right, and then three steps to the left: (–2) + 3 = 1 We move two steps to the left, and then three steps to the right:  (–2) + (–3) = –5 Two steps to the left, and then three more steps to the left:   From these examples, we can make the following observations: 1.      If we add two positive numbers together, the result will be positive 2.      If we add two negative numbers together, the result will be negative 3.      If we add a positive and a negative number together, the result could be positive or negative, depending on which number represents the biggest step. Addition of Negative Numbers What does it mean to add negative numbers? We view a negative number as a displacement to the left on the number line, so we follow the same procedure as before but when we add a negative number we take that many steps to the left instead of the right. Examples:  2 + (–3) = –1 First we move two steps to the right, and then three steps to the left: (–2) + 3 = 1 We move two steps to the left, and then three steps to the right:  (–2) + (–3) = –5 Two steps to the left, and then three more steps to the left:   From these examples, we can make the following observations: 1.      If we add two positive numbers together, the result will be positive 2.      If we add two negative numbers together, the result will be negative 3.      If we add a positive and a negative number together, the result could be positive or negative, depending on which number represents the biggest step.  || 
book3_chapter01_2_2	 Subtraction There are two ways to define subtraction: by a related addition statement, or as adding the opposite. Subtraction as Related Addition a – b = c if and only if a = b + c Subtraction as Adding the Opposite For every real number b there exists its opposite –b, and we can define subtraction as adding the opposite: a – b = a + (-b) ·        In algebra it usually best to always think of subtraction as adding the opposite  Subtraction There are two ways to define subtraction: by a related addition statement, or as adding the opposite. Subtraction as Related Addition a – b = c if and only if a = b + c Subtraction as Adding the Opposite For every real number b there exists its opposite –b, and we can define subtraction as adding the opposite: a – b = a + (-b) ·        In algebra it usually best to always think of subtraction as adding the opposite  || 
book3_chapter01_2_3	Distinction Between Subtraction and Negation The symbol “–” means two different things in math. If it is between two numbers it means subtraction, but if it is in front of one number it means the opposite (or negative) of that number. Subtraction is binary (acts on two numbers), but negation is unary (acts on only one number).           Calculators have two different keys to perform these functions. The key with a plain minus sign is only for subtraction:   Negation is performed by a key that looks like one of these: Remember that subtraction can always be thought of as adding the opposite. In fact, we could get along just fine without ever using subtraction. Distinction Between Subtraction and Negation The symbol “–” means two different things in math. If it is between two numbers it means subtraction, but if it is in front of one number it means the opposite (or negative) of that number. Subtraction is binary (acts on two numbers), but negation is unary (acts on only one number).           Calculators have two different keys to perform these functions. The key with a plain minus sign is only for subtraction:   Negation is performed by a key that looks like one of these: Remember that subtraction can always be thought of as adding the opposite. In fact, we could get along just fine without ever using subtraction.  || 
book3_chapter01_2_4	Subtraction on the Number Line Addition of a positive number moves to the right, and adding a negative moves to the left. Subtraction is just the opposite: Subtraction of a positive number moves to the left, and subtracting a negative moves to the right. ·     Notice that subtracting a negative is the same thing as adding a positive. Subtraction on the Number Line Addition of a positive number moves to the right, and adding a negative moves to the left. Subtraction is just the opposite: Subtraction of a positive number moves to the left, and subtracting a negative moves to the right. ·     Notice that subtracting a negative is the same thing as adding a positive.  || 
book3_chapter01_3	 || Multiplication with Signed Numbers We can apply this same rule to make sense out of what we mean by a positive number times a negative number. For example, 3 × (–4) just means to take 3 of the number “negative four” and add them together: 3 × (–4) = (–4) + (–4) + (–4) = –12 Unfortunately, this scheme breaks down when we try to multiply a negative number times a number. It doesn’t make sense to try to write down a number a negative number of times. There are two ways to look at this problem. One way is to use the fact that multiplication obeys the commutative law, which means that the order of multiplication does not matter: a × b = b × a. This lets us write a negative times a positive as a positive times a negative and proceed as before: (–3) × 4 = 4 × (–3) = (–3) + (–3) + (–3) + (–3) = –12 However, we are still in trouble when it comes to multiplying a negative times a negative. A better way to look at this problem is to demand that multiplication obey a consistent pattern. If we look at a multiplication table for positive numbers and then extend it to include negative numbers, the results in the table should continue to change in the same pattern. For example, consider the following multiplication table: a b a × b 3 2 6 2 2 4 1 2 2 0 2 0 The numbers in the last column are decreasing by 2 each time, so if we let the values for a continue into the negative numbers we should keep decreasing the product by 2: a b a × b 3 2 6 2 2 4 1 2 2 0 2 0 –1 2 –2 –2 2 –4 –3 2 –6 We can make a bigger multiplication table that shows many different possibilities. By keeping the step sizes the same in each row and column, even as we extend into the negative numbers, we see that the following sign rules hold for multiplication:  || Sign Rules for Multiplication (+)(+) = (+) (–)(–) = (+) (–)(+) = (–) (+)(–) = (–) Multiplication Table Notice how the step size in each row or column remains consistent, regardless of whether we are multiplying positive or negative numbers.   -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 -5 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 -20 -25 -4 20 16 12 8 4 0 -4 -8 -12 -16 -20 -3 15 12 9 6 3 0 -3 -6 -9 -12 -15 -2 10 8 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 -10 -1 5 4 3 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 -4 -5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 2 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 3 -15 -12 -9 -6 -3 0 3 6 9 12 15 4 -20 -16 -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 16 20 5 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25   For math purists, here’s the real reason: The Real Reason It should be obvious that the presentation of the rules of arithmetic given here is just a collection of motivational arguments, not a formal development. The formal development of the real number system starts with the field axioms. The field axioms are postulated, and then all the other properties follow from them. The field axioms are The associative and commutative laws for addition and multiplication The existence of the additive and multiplicative identities (0 and 1) The existence of the additive inverse (opposites, or negatives) and the multiplicative inverse (the reciprocal) The distributive law All of these are essential, but the distributive law is particularly important because it is what distinguishes the behavior of multiplication from addition. Namely, multiplication distributes over addition but not vice-versa. The rules of arithmetic like “a negative times a negative gives a positive” are what they are because that is the only way the field axioms would still hold. For example, the distributive law requires that –2(3 – 2) = (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) We can evaluate the left side of this equation by following the order of operations, which says to do what is in parentheses first, so –2(3 – 2) = –2(1) = –2. Now for the distributive law to be true, the right side must also be equal to -2, so (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) = –2 If we use our sign rules for multiplication then it works out the way it should: (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) = –6 + 4 = –2    || Notation for Multiplication We are used to using the symbol “×” to represent multiplication in arithmetic, but in algebra we prefer to avoid that symbol because we like to use the letter “x” to represent a variable, and the two symbols can be easily confused. So instead, we adopt the following notation for multiplication: 1.      Multiplication is implied if two quantities are written side-by-side with no other symbol between them. Example:  ab means a × b. 2.      If a symbol is needed to prevent confusion, we use a dot.   Example:  If we need to show 3 times 5, we cannot just write them next to each other or it would look like the number thirty-five, so we write 3 · 5. We can also use parentheses to separate factors. 3 times 5 could be written as 3(5) or (3)5 or (3)(5).  || Division There are two ways to think of division: as implying a related multiplication, or as multiplying by the reciprocal. Division as Related Multiplication The statement “12 ÷ 3 = 4” is true only because 3 × 4 = 12. A division problem is really asking the question “What number can I multiply the divisor by to get the dividend?”; and so every division equation implies an equivalent multiplication equation. In general: a ÷ b = c if and only if a = b × c This also shows why you cannot divide by zero. If we asked “What is six divided by zero?” we would mean “What number times zero is equal to six?”, but any number times zero gives zero, so there is no answer to this question.  || Multiplicative Inverse (The Reciprocal) For every real number a (except zero) there exists a real number denoted by 1/a such that a(1/a) = 1 The number 1/a is called the reciprocal or multiplicative inverse of a. Note that the reciprocal of 1/a is a. The reciprocal of the reciprocal gives you back what you started with. This allows us to define division as multiplication by the reciprocal: a ÷ b = a × (1/b) This is usually the most convenient way to think of division when you are doing algebra.  || Notation for Division Instead of using the symbol “ ¸ ” to represent division, we prefer to write it using the fraction notation:  || Sign Rules for Division Because division can always be written as a multiplication by the reciprocal, it obeys the same sign rules as multiplication. If a positive is divided by a negative, or a negative divided by a positive, the result is negative: but if both numbers are the same sign, the result is positive:  || 
book3_chapter01_3_1	Multiplication with Signed Numbers We can apply this same rule to make sense out of what we mean by a positive number times a negative number. For example, 3 × (–4) just means to take 3 of the number “negative four” and add them together: 3 × (–4) = (–4) + (–4) + (–4) = –12 Unfortunately, this scheme breaks down when we try to multiply a negative number times a number. It doesn’t make sense to try to write down a number a negative number of times. There are two ways to look at this problem. One way is to use the fact that multiplication obeys the commutative law, which means that the order of multiplication does not matter: a × b = b × a. This lets us write a negative times a positive as a positive times a negative and proceed as before: (–3) × 4 = 4 × (–3) = (–3) + (–3) + (–3) + (–3) = –12 However, we are still in trouble when it comes to multiplying a negative times a negative. A better way to look at this problem is to demand that multiplication obey a consistent pattern. If we look at a multiplication table for positive numbers and then extend it to include negative numbers, the results in the table should continue to change in the same pattern. For example, consider the following multiplication table: a b a × b 3 2 6 2 2 4 1 2 2 0 2 0 The numbers in the last column are decreasing by 2 each time, so if we let the values for a continue into the negative numbers we should keep decreasing the product by 2: a b a × b 3 2 6 2 2 4 1 2 2 0 2 0 –1 2 –2 –2 2 –4 –3 2 –6 We can make a bigger multiplication table that shows many different possibilities. By keeping the step sizes the same in each row and column, even as we extend into the negative numbers, we see that the following sign rules hold for multiplication: Multiplication with Signed Numbers We can apply this same rule to make sense out of what we mean by a positive number times a negative number. For example, 3 × (–4) just means to take 3 of the number “negative four” and add them together: 3 × (–4) = (–4) + (–4) + (–4) = –12 Unfortunately, this scheme breaks down when we try to multiply a negative number times a number. It doesn’t make sense to try to write down a number a negative number of times. There are two ways to look at this problem. One way is to use the fact that multiplication obeys the commutative law, which means that the order of multiplication does not matter: a × b = b × a. This lets us write a negative times a positive as a positive times a negative and proceed as before: (–3) × 4 = 4 × (–3) = (–3) + (–3) + (–3) + (–3) = –12 However, we are still in trouble when it comes to multiplying a negative times a negative. A better way to look at this problem is to demand that multiplication obey a consistent pattern. If we look at a multiplication table for positive numbers and then extend it to include negative numbers, the results in the table should continue to change in the same pattern. For example, consider the following multiplication table: a b a × b 3 2 6 2 2 4 1 2 2 0 2 0 The numbers in the last column are decreasing by 2 each time, so if we let the values for a continue into the negative numbers we should keep decreasing the product by 2: a b a × b 3 2 6 2 2 4 1 2 2 0 2 0 –1 2 –2 –2 2 –4 –3 2 –6 We can make a bigger multiplication table that shows many different possibilities. By keeping the step sizes the same in each row and column, even as we extend into the negative numbers, we see that the following sign rules hold for multiplication:  || 
book3_chapter01_3_2	Sign Rules for Multiplication (+)(+) = (+) (–)(–) = (+) (–)(+) = (–) (+)(–) = (–) Multiplication Table Notice how the step size in each row or column remains consistent, regardless of whether we are multiplying positive or negative numbers.   -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 -5 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 -20 -25 -4 20 16 12 8 4 0 -4 -8 -12 -16 -20 -3 15 12 9 6 3 0 -3 -6 -9 -12 -15 -2 10 8 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 -10 -1 5 4 3 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 -4 -5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 2 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 3 -15 -12 -9 -6 -3 0 3 6 9 12 15 4 -20 -16 -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 16 20 5 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25   For math purists, here’s the real reason: The Real Reason It should be obvious that the presentation of the rules of arithmetic given here is just a collection of motivational arguments, not a formal development. The formal development of the real number system starts with the field axioms. The field axioms are postulated, and then all the other properties follow from them. The field axioms are The associative and commutative laws for addition and multiplication The existence of the additive and multiplicative identities (0 and 1) The existence of the additive inverse (opposites, or negatives) and the multiplicative inverse (the reciprocal) The distributive law All of these are essential, but the distributive law is particularly important because it is what distinguishes the behavior of multiplication from addition. Namely, multiplication distributes over addition but not vice-versa. The rules of arithmetic like “a negative times a negative gives a positive” are what they are because that is the only way the field axioms would still hold. For example, the distributive law requires that –2(3 – 2) = (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) We can evaluate the left side of this equation by following the order of operations, which says to do what is in parentheses first, so –2(3 – 2) = –2(1) = –2. Now for the distributive law to be true, the right side must also be equal to -2, so (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) = –2 If we use our sign rules for multiplication then it works out the way it should: (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) = –6 + 4 = –2   Sign Rules for Multiplication (+)(+) = (+) (–)(–) = (+) (–)(+) = (–) (+)(–) = (–) Multiplication Table Notice how the step size in each row or column remains consistent, regardless of whether we are multiplying positive or negative numbers.   -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 -5 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 -20 -25 -4 20 16 12 8 4 0 -4 -8 -12 -16 -20 -3 15 12 9 6 3 0 -3 -6 -9 -12 -15 -2 10 8 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 -10 -1 5 4 3 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 -4 -5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 2 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 3 -15 -12 -9 -6 -3 0 3 6 9 12 15 4 -20 -16 -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 16 20 5 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25   For math purists, here’s the real reason: The Real Reason It should be obvious that the presentation of the rules of arithmetic given here is just a collection of motivational arguments, not a formal development. The formal development of the real number system starts with the field axioms. The field axioms are postulated, and then all the other properties follow from them. The field axioms are The associative and commutative laws for addition and multiplication The existence of the additive and multiplicative identities (0 and 1) The existence of the additive inverse (opposites, or negatives) and the multiplicative inverse (the reciprocal) The distributive law All of these are essential, but the distributive law is particularly important because it is what distinguishes the behavior of multiplication from addition. Namely, multiplication distributes over addition but not vice-versa. The rules of arithmetic like “a negative times a negative gives a positive” are what they are because that is the only way the field axioms would still hold. For example, the distributive law requires that –2(3 – 2) = (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) We can evaluate the left side of this equation by following the order of operations, which says to do what is in parentheses first, so –2(3 – 2) = –2(1) = –2. Now for the distributive law to be true, the right side must also be equal to -2, so (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) = –2 If we use our sign rules for multiplication then it works out the way it should: (–2)(3) + (–2)(–2) = –6 + 4 = –2    || 
book3_chapter01_3_3	Notation for Multiplication We are used to using the symbol “×” to represent multiplication in arithmetic, but in algebra we prefer to avoid that symbol because we like to use the letter “x” to represent a variable, and the two symbols can be easily confused. So instead, we adopt the following notation for multiplication: 1.      Multiplication is implied if two quantities are written side-by-side with no other symbol between them. Example:  ab means a × b. 2.      If a symbol is needed to prevent confusion, we use a dot.   Example:  If we need to show 3 times 5, we cannot just write them next to each other or it would look like the number thirty-five, so we write 3 · 5. We can also use parentheses to separate factors. 3 times 5 could be written as 3(5) or (3)5 or (3)(5). Notation for Multiplication We are used to using the symbol “×” to represent multiplication in arithmetic, but in algebra we prefer to avoid that symbol because we like to use the letter “x” to represent a variable, and the two symbols can be easily confused. So instead, we adopt the following notation for multiplication: 1.      Multiplication is implied if two quantities are written side-by-side with no other symbol between them. Example:  ab means a × b. 2.      If a symbol is needed to prevent confusion, we use a dot.   Example:  If we need to show 3 times 5, we cannot just write them next to each other or it would look like the number thirty-five, so we write 3 · 5. We can also use parentheses to separate factors. 3 times 5 could be written as 3(5) or (3)5 or (3)(5).  || 
book3_chapter01_3_4	Division There are two ways to think of division: as implying a related multiplication, or as multiplying by the reciprocal. Division as Related Multiplication The statement “12 ÷ 3 = 4” is true only because 3 × 4 = 12. A division problem is really asking the question “What number can I multiply the divisor by to get the dividend?”; and so every division equation implies an equivalent multiplication equation. In general: a ÷ b = c if and only if a = b × c This also shows why you cannot divide by zero. If we asked “What is six divided by zero?” we would mean “What number times zero is equal to six?”, but any number times zero gives zero, so there is no answer to this question. Division There are two ways to think of division: as implying a related multiplication, or as multiplying by the reciprocal. Division as Related Multiplication The statement “12 ÷ 3 = 4” is true only because 3 × 4 = 12. A division problem is really asking the question “What number can I multiply the divisor by to get the dividend?”; and so every division equation implies an equivalent multiplication equation. In general: a ÷ b = c if and only if a = b × c This also shows why you cannot divide by zero. If we asked “What is six divided by zero?” we would mean “What number times zero is equal to six?”, but any number times zero gives zero, so there is no answer to this question.  || 
book3_chapter01_3_5	Multiplicative Inverse (The Reciprocal) For every real number a (except zero) there exists a real number denoted by 1/a such that a(1/a) = 1 The number 1/a is called the reciprocal or multiplicative inverse of a. Note that the reciprocal of 1/a is a. The reciprocal of the reciprocal gives you back what you started with. This allows us to define division as multiplication by the reciprocal: a ÷ b = a × (1/b) This is usually the most convenient way to think of division when you are doing algebra. Multiplicative Inverse (The Reciprocal) For every real number a (except zero) there exists a real number denoted by 1/a such that a(1/a) = 1 The number 1/a is called the reciprocal or multiplicative inverse of a. Note that the reciprocal of 1/a is a. The reciprocal of the reciprocal gives you back what you started with. This allows us to define division as multiplication by the reciprocal: a ÷ b = a × (1/b) This is usually the most convenient way to think of division when you are doing algebra.  || 
book3_chapter01_3_6	Notation for Division Instead of using the symbol “ ¸ ” to represent division, we prefer to write it using the fraction notation: Notation for Division Instead of using the symbol “ ¸ ” to represent division, we prefer to write it using the fraction notation:  || 
book3_chapter01_3_7	Sign Rules for Division Because division can always be written as a multiplication by the reciprocal, it obeys the same sign rules as multiplication. If a positive is divided by a negative, or a negative divided by a positive, the result is negative: but if both numbers are the same sign, the result is positive: Sign Rules for Division Because division can always be written as a multiplication by the reciprocal, it obeys the same sign rules as multiplication. If a positive is divided by a negative, or a negative divided by a positive, the result is negative: but if both numbers are the same sign, the result is positive:  || 
book3_chapter01_4	 || Rules Product of Different Powers:    aman = am + n IMPORTANT: all the numbers must have the same bases  (the same ‘a’) Example:  (42)(43) = 45   This is easy to see if you write out the exponents:   (42)(43) = (4 · 4) · (4 · 4 · 4) = 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 = 45    WARNING: Do not attempt to use this rule for addition:   42 + 43 is NOT 45. In fact there is no way to simplify xn + xm if n and m are different powers. Power Raised to a Power:      Example:  (42)3 = 46   This is also easy to see if you expand the exponents:   (42)3 = (42)(42)(42) = (4 · 4) (4 · 4) (4 · 4) = 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 = 46   There are more rules for combining numbers with exponents, but this is enough for now.  || 
book3_chapter01_4_1	Rules Product of Different Powers:    aman = am + n IMPORTANT: all the numbers must have the same bases  (the same ‘a’) Example:  (42)(43) = 45   This is easy to see if you write out the exponents:   (42)(43) = (4 · 4) · (4 · 4 · 4) = 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 = 45    WARNING: Do not attempt to use this rule for addition:   42 + 43 is NOT 45. In fact there is no way to simplify xn + xm if n and m are different powers. Power Raised to a Power:      Example:  (42)3 = 46   This is also easy to see if you expand the exponents:   (42)3 = (42)(42)(42) = (4 · 4) (4 · 4) (4 · 4) = 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 = 46   There are more rules for combining numbers with exponents, but this is enough for now. Rules Product of Different Powers:    aman = am + n IMPORTANT: all the numbers must have the same bases  (the same ‘a’) Example:  (42)(43) = 45   This is easy to see if you write out the exponents:   (42)(43) = (4 · 4) · (4 · 4 · 4) = 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 = 45    WARNING: Do not attempt to use this rule for addition:   42 + 43 is NOT 45. In fact there is no way to simplify xn + xm if n and m are different powers. Power Raised to a Power:      Example:  (42)3 = 46   This is also easy to see if you expand the exponents:   (42)3 = (42)(42)(42) = (4 · 4) (4 · 4) (4 · 4) = 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 = 46   There are more rules for combining numbers with exponents, but this is enough for now.  || 
book3_chapter01_5	When we encounter an expression such as 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 22+3, it makes quite a difference how we choose which operations to perform first. We need a set of rules that would guide anyone to one unique value for this kind of expression. Some of these rules are simply based on convention, while others are forced on us by mathematical logic. In the chapter on the Properties of Real Numbers, you will see how the distributive law is consistent with these rules. The universally agreed-upon order in which to evaluate a mathematical expression is as follows:1. Parentheses from Inside OutBy “parentheses” we mean anything that acts as a grouping symbol, including anything inside symbols such as [ ], { }, |  | and . Any expression in the numerator or denominator of a fraction or in an exponent are also considered grouped and should be simplified before carrying out further operations. ·        If there are nested parentheses (parentheses inside parentheses), you work from the innermost parentheses outward.2. ExponentsAlso other special functions such as log, sin, cos, etc.3. Multiplication and Division, left to rightThe left-to-right order does not matter if only multiplication is involved, but it matters for division.4. Addition and Subtraction, left to rightThe left-to-right order does not matter if only addition is involved, but it matters for subtraction.Example:  Going back to our original example, 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 22+3Given: 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 22+3 The exponent is an implied grouping, so the 2 + 3 must be evaluated first: = 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 25 Now the exponent is carried out: = 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 32 Now the multiplication and division, left to right, using 15 ¸ 3 = 5 and 5 ´ 32 = 160: = 3 + 5 + 160 Now the addition, left to right: = 168  Calculator Note: Most modern calculators “know” the order of operations, and you can enter expressions pretty much as they are written. Some older calculators will carry out each operation as soon as its key is pushed, which can result in the operations being carried out in the wrong order. Try some examples if you are not sure how your calculator behaves.For example, if you enter3 + 4 × 5 =The correct answer should be 23, because the multiplication should be performed before the addition, giving 3 + 20. But if your calculator carries out the “3 + 4” before getting to the “ × 5”, it will show a result of 35 because it will see it as 7 × 5.  Calculator  Note: Use the parenthesis keys to force grouping. If you are evaluating an expression such asthe denominator needs to be simplified before doing the division. If you enter it into your calculator as 4 ÷ 3 + 5, it will evaluate the “ 4 ÷ 3 “ first, and then add 5 to the result, giving the incorrect answer of 6.3333. To make it perform the addition first, use parentheses:4 ÷ (3 + 5) = 0.5 In our example problem above, the “2 + 3” in the exponent is an implied grouping, and you would need to use parentheses. To enter that expression in your calculator, you would enter it as3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 2 ^ (2 + 3) =(on some calculators the exponent button is labeled “ ^ ”, while on others it is labeled “ yx ”)When we encounter an expression such as 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 22+3, it makes quite a difference how we choose which operations to perform first. We need a set of rules that would guide anyone to one unique value for this kind of expression. Some of these rules are simply based on convention, while others are forced on us by mathematical logic. In the chapter on the Properties of Real Numbers, you will see how the distributive law is consistent with these rules. The universally agreed-upon order in which to evaluate a mathematical expression is as follows:1. Parentheses from Inside OutBy “parentheses” we mean anything that acts as a grouping symbol, including anything inside symbols such as [ ], { }, |  | and . Any expression in the numerator or denominator of a fraction or in an exponent are also considered grouped and should be simplified before carrying out further operations. ·        If there are nested parentheses (parentheses inside parentheses), you work from the innermost parentheses outward.2. ExponentsAlso other special functions such as log, sin, cos, etc.3. Multiplication and Division, left to rightThe left-to-right order does not matter if only multiplication is involved, but it matters for division.4. Addition and Subtraction, left to rightThe left-to-right order does not matter if only addition is involved, but it matters for subtraction.Example:  Going back to our original example, 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 22+3Given: 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 22+3 The exponent is an implied grouping, so the 2 + 3 must be evaluated first: = 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 25 Now the exponent is carried out: = 3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 32 Now the multiplication and division, left to right, using 15 ¸ 3 = 5 and 5 ´ 32 = 160: = 3 + 5 + 160 Now the addition, left to right: = 168  Calculator Note: Most modern calculators “know” the order of operations, and you can enter expressions pretty much as they are written. Some older calculators will carry out each operation as soon as its key is pushed, which can result in the operations being carried out in the wrong order. Try some examples if you are not sure how your calculator behaves.For example, if you enter3 + 4 × 5 =The correct answer should be 23, because the multiplication should be performed before the addition, giving 3 + 20. But if your calculator carries out the “3 + 4” before getting to the “ × 5”, it will show a result of 35 because it will see it as 7 × 5.  Calculator  Note: Use the parenthesis keys to force grouping. If you are evaluating an expression such asthe denominator needs to be simplified before doing the division. If you enter it into your calculator as 4 ÷ 3 + 5, it will evaluate the “ 4 ÷ 3 “ first, and then add 5 to the result, giving the incorrect answer of 6.3333. To make it perform the addition first, use parentheses:4 ÷ (3 + 5) = 0.5 In our example problem above, the “2 + 3” in the exponent is an implied grouping, and you would need to use parentheses. To enter that expression in your calculator, you would enter it as3 + 15 ÷ 3 + 5 × 2 ^ (2 + 3) =(on some calculators the exponent button is labeled “ ^ ”, while on others it is labeled “ yx ”) || 
book3_chapter01_6	 || Mixed Number  Notation One way of expressing the improper fraction 5/4 is as the mixed number , which is read as “one and one-fourth.” This notation is potentially confusing and is not advised in algebra. One cause of confusion is that in algebra we use the convention that multiplication is implied when two quantities are written next to each other with no symbols in between. However, the mixed number notation implies addition, not multiplication. For example, means 1 plus one-quarter, and 3 1/2 = 3 + 1/2. It is possible to do arithmetic with mixed numbers by treating the whole number parts and the fractional parts separately, but it is generally more convenient in algebra to always write improper fractions. When you encounter a problem with mixed numbers, the first thing you should do is convert them to improper fractions.  || Conversion Mixed Number to Improper Fraction A.     Multiply the integer part with the bottom of the fraction part. B.     Add the result to the top of the fraction. The general formula is Improper Fraction to Mixed Number Do the division to get the integer part Put the remainder over the old denominator to get the fractional part.  || Equivalent Fractions Equivalent fractions are fractions that have the same value, for example     etc. Although all these fractions are written differently, they all represent the same quantity. You can measure a half-cup of sugar or two quarter-cups of sugar, or even four eighth-cups of sugar, and you will still have the same amount of sugar. ·       Multiply by a form of One A fraction can be converted into an equivalent fraction by multiplying it by a form of 1. The number 1 can be represented as a fraction because any number divided by itself is equal to 1 (remember that the fraction notation means the same thing as division). In other words,   etc. Now if you multiply a number by 1 it does not change its value, so if we multiply a fraction by another fraction that is equal to 1, we will not be changing the value of the original fraction. For example, In this case, 2/3 represents exactly the same quantity as 4/6, because all we did was to multiply 2/3 by the number 1, represented as the fraction 2/2. Multiplying the numerator and denominator by the same number to produce an equivalent fraction is called building up the fraction.  || Reduced Form Numerator and Denominator Have No Common Factors Procedure: 1.      Write out prime factorization of Numerator and Denominator 2.      Cancel all common factors This procedure is just the opposite of building up a fraction by multiplying it by a fraction equivalent to 1.   Prime Factors A number is prime if it has no whole number factors other than 1 times itself, that is, the number cannot be written as a product of two whole numbers (except 1 times itself). Example:  6 is not prime because it can be written as 2 × 3 Example:  7 is prime because the only way to write it as a product of whole numbers is 1 × 7 The first few prime numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, . . . There are an infinite number of prime numbers (the list goes on forever).  Any non-prime number can be decomposed into a product of prime numbers Example:  4 = 2 × 2 Example:  12 = 2 × 2 × 3 The Branching Method This method works well for larger numbers that might have many factors. All you need to do is think of any two numbers that multiply to give your original number, and write them below it. Continue this process for each number until each branch ends in a prime number. The factors of the original number are the prime numbers on the ends of all the branches. Example:  Factor the number 60     60 = 2 × 2 × 3 × 5 Notes Notice how I started with the smallest numbers: first 2’s, then 3’s, and so on. This is not required but it keeps the result nicely in order. If a number is even, then it is divisible by 2. If a number ends in 0 or 5, then it is divisible by 5. If the digits of a number add up to a number divisible by 3, then the number is divisible by 3. In this example 15 gives 1 + 5 = 6, which is divisible by 3, and therefore 15 is divisible by 3. Large numbers with large prime factors are notoriously hard to factor—it is mainly just a matter of trial and error. The public-key encryption system for sending secure computer data uses very large numbers that need to be factored in order to break the code. The code is essentially unbreakable because it would take an enormous amount of computer time to try every possible prime factor.      || Multiplying Fractions Multiply Numerators and Denominators Example:      And reduce result if needed   Canceling common factors first makes multiplication easier If you don’t reduce the factors before multiplying, the answer will have to be reduced. Example:  Remember that canceling always leaves a “1” behind, because you are really dividing the numerator and the denominator by the same number.  || Adding and Subtracting Fractions ·            Add Numerators when Denominators Are the Same ·        If the denominators are not the same, make them the same by building up the fractions so that they both have a common denominator. ·        Any common denominator will work, but the answer will have to be reduced if it is not the Least Common Denominator. ·        The product of all the denominators is always a common denominator (but not necessarily the Least Common Denominator).  || Least Common Denominator (LCD) By Inspection The smallest number that is evenly divisible by all the denominators In General The LCD is the product of all the prime factors of all the denominators, each factor taken the greatest number of times that it appears in any single denominator. Example:    Factor the denominators:     Assemble LCD:   Note that the three only appears once, because it is only needed once to make either the 12 or the 15:   Now that you have found the LCD, multiply each fraction (top and bottom) by whatever is needed to build up the denominator to the LCD:   Then add the numerators and reduce if needed (using the LCD does not guarantee that you won’t have to reduce):    || 
book3_chapter01_6_1	Mixed Number  Notation One way of expressing the improper fraction 5/4 is as the mixed number , which is read as “one and one-fourth.” This notation is potentially confusing and is not advised in algebra. One cause of confusion is that in algebra we use the convention that multiplication is implied when two quantities are written next to each other with no symbols in between. However, the mixed number notation implies addition, not multiplication. For example, means 1 plus one-quarter, and 3 1/2 = 3 + 1/2. It is possible to do arithmetic with mixed numbers by treating the whole number parts and the fractional parts separately, but it is generally more convenient in algebra to always write improper fractions. When you encounter a problem with mixed numbers, the first thing you should do is convert them to improper fractions. Mixed Number  Notation One way of expressing the improper fraction 5/4 is as the mixed number , which is read as “one and one-fourth.” This notation is potentially confusing and is not advised in algebra. One cause of confusion is that in algebra we use the convention that multiplication is implied when two quantities are written next to each other with no symbols in between. However, the mixed number notation implies addition, not multiplication. For example, means 1 plus one-quarter, and 3 1/2 = 3 + 1/2. It is possible to do arithmetic with mixed numbers by treating the whole number parts and the fractional parts separately, but it is generally more convenient in algebra to always write improper fractions. When you encounter a problem with mixed numbers, the first thing you should do is convert them to improper fractions.  || 
book3_chapter01_6_2	Conversion Mixed Number to Improper Fraction A.     Multiply the integer part with the bottom of the fraction part. B.     Add the result to the top of the fraction. The general formula is Improper Fraction to Mixed Number Do the division to get the integer part Put the remainder over the old denominator to get the fractional part. Conversion Mixed Number to Improper Fraction A.     Multiply the integer part with the bottom of the fraction part. B.     Add the result to the top of the fraction. The general formula is Improper Fraction to Mixed Number Do the division to get the integer part Put the remainder over the old denominator to get the fractional part.  || 
book3_chapter01_6_3	Equivalent Fractions Equivalent fractions are fractions that have the same value, for example     etc. Although all these fractions are written differently, they all represent the same quantity. You can measure a half-cup of sugar or two quarter-cups of sugar, or even four eighth-cups of sugar, and you will still have the same amount of sugar. ·       Multiply by a form of One A fraction can be converted into an equivalent fraction by multiplying it by a form of 1. The number 1 can be represented as a fraction because any number divided by itself is equal to 1 (remember that the fraction notation means the same thing as division). In other words,   etc. Now if you multiply a number by 1 it does not change its value, so if we multiply a fraction by another fraction that is equal to 1, we will not be changing the value of the original fraction. For example, In this case, 2/3 represents exactly the same quantity as 4/6, because all we did was to multiply 2/3 by the number 1, represented as the fraction 2/2. Multiplying the numerator and denominator by the same number to produce an equivalent fraction is called building up the fraction. Equivalent Fractions Equivalent fractions are fractions that have the same value, for example     etc. Although all these fractions are written differently, they all represent the same quantity. You can measure a half-cup of sugar or two quarter-cups of sugar, or even four eighth-cups of sugar, and you will still have the same amount of sugar. ·       Multiply by a form of One A fraction can be converted into an equivalent fraction by multiplying it by a form of 1. The number 1 can be represented as a fraction because any number divided by itself is equal to 1 (remember that the fraction notation means the same thing as division). In other words,   etc. Now if you multiply a number by 1 it does not change its value, so if we multiply a fraction by another fraction that is equal to 1, we will not be changing the value of the original fraction. For example, In this case, 2/3 represents exactly the same quantity as 4/6, because all we did was to multiply 2/3 by the number 1, represented as the fraction 2/2. Multiplying the numerator and denominator by the same number to produce an equivalent fraction is called building up the fraction.  || 
book3_chapter01_6_4	Reduced Form Numerator and Denominator Have No Common Factors Procedure: 1.      Write out prime factorization of Numerator and Denominator 2.      Cancel all common factors This procedure is just the opposite of building up a fraction by multiplying it by a fraction equivalent to 1.   Prime Factors A number is prime if it has no whole number factors other than 1 times itself, that is, the number cannot be written as a product of two whole numbers (except 1 times itself). Example:  6 is not prime because it can be written as 2 × 3 Example:  7 is prime because the only way to write it as a product of whole numbers is 1 × 7 The first few prime numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, . . . There are an infinite number of prime numbers (the list goes on forever).  Any non-prime number can be decomposed into a product of prime numbers Example:  4 = 2 × 2 Example:  12 = 2 × 2 × 3 The Branching Method This method works well for larger numbers that might have many factors. All you need to do is think of any two numbers that multiply to give your original number, and write them below it. Continue this process for each number until each branch ends in a prime number. The factors of the original number are the prime numbers on the ends of all the branches. Example:  Factor the number 60     60 = 2 × 2 × 3 × 5 Notes Notice how I started with the smallest numbers: first 2’s, then 3’s, and so on. This is not required but it keeps the result nicely in order. If a number is even, then it is divisible by 2. If a number ends in 0 or 5, then it is divisible by 5. If the digits of a number add up to a number divisible by 3, then the number is divisible by 3. In this example 15 gives 1 + 5 = 6, which is divisible by 3, and therefore 15 is divisible by 3. Large numbers with large prime factors are notoriously hard to factor—it is mainly just a matter of trial and error. The public-key encryption system for sending secure computer data uses very large numbers that need to be factored in order to break the code. The code is essentially unbreakable because it would take an enormous amount of computer time to try every possible prime factor.     Reduced Form Numerator and Denominator Have No Common Factors Procedure: 1.      Write out prime factorization of Numerator and Denominator 2.      Cancel all common factors This procedure is just the opposite of building up a fraction by multiplying it by a fraction equivalent to 1.   Prime Factors A number is prime if it has no whole number factors other than 1 times itself, that is, the number cannot be written as a product of two whole numbers (except 1 times itself). Example:  6 is not prime because it can be written as 2 × 3 Example:  7 is prime because the only way to write it as a product of whole numbers is 1 × 7 The first few prime numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, . . . There are an infinite number of prime numbers (the list goes on forever).  Any non-prime number can be decomposed into a product of prime numbers Example:  4 = 2 × 2 Example:  12 = 2 × 2 × 3 The Branching Method This method works well for larger numbers that might have many factors. All you need to do is think of any two numbers that multiply to give your original number, and write them below it. Continue this process for each number until each branch ends in a prime number. The factors of the original number are the prime numbers on the ends of all the branches. Example:  Factor the number 60     60 = 2 × 2 × 3 × 5 Notes Notice how I started with the smallest numbers: first 2’s, then 3’s, and so on. This is not required but it keeps the result nicely in order. If a number is even, then it is divisible by 2. If a number ends in 0 or 5, then it is divisible by 5. If the digits of a number add up to a number divisible by 3, then the number is divisible by 3. In this example 15 gives 1 + 5 = 6, which is divisible by 3, and therefore 15 is divisible by 3. Large numbers with large prime factors are notoriously hard to factor—it is mainly just a matter of trial and error. The public-key encryption system for sending secure computer data uses very large numbers that need to be factored in order to break the code. The code is essentially unbreakable because it would take an enormous amount of computer time to try every possible prime factor.      || 
book3_chapter01_6_5	Multiplying Fractions Multiply Numerators and Denominators Example:      And reduce result if needed   Canceling common factors first makes multiplication easier If you don’t reduce the factors before multiplying, the answer will have to be reduced. Example:  Remember that canceling always leaves a “1” behind, because you are really dividing the numerator and the denominator by the same number. Multiplying Fractions Multiply Numerators and Denominators Example:      And reduce result if needed   Canceling common factors first makes multiplication easier If you don’t reduce the factors before multiplying, the answer will have to be reduced. Example:  Remember that canceling always leaves a “1” behind, because you are really dividing the numerator and the denominator by the same number.  || 
book3_chapter01_6_6	Adding and Subtracting Fractions ·            Add Numerators when Denominators Are the Same ·        If the denominators are not the same, make them the same by building up the fractions so that they both have a common denominator. ·        Any common denominator will work, but the answer will have to be reduced if it is not the Least Common Denominator. ·        The product of all the denominators is always a common denominator (but not necessarily the Least Common Denominator). Adding and Subtracting Fractions ·            Add Numerators when Denominators Are the Same ·        If the denominators are not the same, make them the same by building up the fractions so that they both have a common denominator. ·        Any common denominator will work, but the answer will have to be reduced if it is not the Least Common Denominator. ·        The product of all the denominators is always a common denominator (but not necessarily the Least Common Denominator).  || 
book3_chapter01_6_7	Least Common Denominator (LCD) By Inspection The smallest number that is evenly divisible by all the denominators In General The LCD is the product of all the prime factors of all the denominators, each factor taken the greatest number of times that it appears in any single denominator. Example:    Factor the denominators:     Assemble LCD:   Note that the three only appears once, because it is only needed once to make either the 12 or the 15:   Now that you have found the LCD, multiply each fraction (top and bottom) by whatever is needed to build up the denominator to the LCD:   Then add the numerators and reduce if needed (using the LCD does not guarantee that you won’t have to reduce):   Least Common Denominator (LCD) By Inspection The smallest number that is evenly divisible by all the denominators In General The LCD is the product of all the prime factors of all the denominators, each factor taken the greatest number of times that it appears in any single denominator. Example:    Factor the denominators:     Assemble LCD:   Note that the three only appears once, because it is only needed once to make either the 12 or the 15:   Now that you have found the LCD, multiply each fraction (top and bottom) by whatever is needed to build up the denominator to the LCD:   Then add the numerators and reduce if needed (using the LCD does not guarantee that you won’t have to reduce):    || 
book3_chapter01_7	 || Converting Decimals to Fractions Because all the denominators are powers of 10, it is very easy to add these fractions by finding a common denominator. In this example, the common denominator is 1000, and we get This suggests a general rule for converting a decimal number to its fraction form: Put all the digits over the denominator that corresponds to the last decimal place value. In the number 2.345, the last decimal place value is the thousandths place, so we put the digits 2345 over the denominator 1000. Of course we would usually want to reduce the resulting fraction to its simplest form. In this case  || Repeating Fractions The only time this method does not work is for repeating fractions. We know that 1/3 = 0.3333333... but how could we go from 0.3333333... back to 1/3? There is no ‘last decimal place’ because the decimals repeat forever. Fortunately, there is a simple trick for this: ·         Put the repeating digit over a denominator of 9. So we see that in the case of 0.3333333...., the repeating digit is 3, and we make the fraction 3/9, which reduces to 1/3. If there is a group of more than one digit that repeats, Put the repeating group of digits over as many 9’s as there are digits. For example, in the fraction we see that the group of digits ‘15’ repeats, so we put ‘15’ over a denominator of ‘99’ to get o        One warning: This only works for the repeating fraction part of a number. If you have a number like 2.33333..., you should just work with the decimal part and rejoin it with the whole part after you have converted it to a fraction. o        Irrational numbers like p or  have non-repeating decimals, and so they cannot be written as fractions. You can, however, round them off at some point and produce an approximate fraction for them.   Why This Trick Works  If you have learned enough algebra to follow these steps, it is not difficult to see why this works. Let’s start with the simple example 0.3333333... Since we already know that the answer is 1/3, we can concentrate on the procedure, not the answer. Let x = 0.3333333... Multiply both sides by 10 to get 10x = 3.33333... Notice that the decimal part (.33333…) is still the same. In fact, it is the very thing that we called x in the first place, so we can say that 10x= 3 + x Now solve for x: This method will also work for repeating fractions that contain a group of repeating digits, but you have to multiply by a higher power of 10 in order to make the decimal portion stay the same as it was before. For example, suppose we had 0.345345345.... Let x = 0.345345345.... Multiply both sides by 1000 to get 1000x = 345.345345345.... Notice that the decimal part is still the same. In fact, it is still the thing that we called x in the first place, so we can say that 1000x = 345 + x Now solve for x:      || Converting Fractions to Decimals We know the decimal equivalents for some common fractions without having to think about it: 1/2 = 0.5, 3/4 = 0.75, etc. But how do we arrive at these numbers? Remember that the fraction bar means the same thing as division. To convert a fraction to a decimal, do the division. For example, You can do the division with a calculator or by hand with long division.  || Rounding Look only one digit to the right ‘5’s or higher round up (there is some dispute about this rule, but it is good enough for most purposes)   Rounding 5’s Why round fives up? The number 3.5 is exactly halfway between 3.0 and 4.0, so it makes just as much sense to round it down as it does to round it up. Most of the time there is no harm in using the ‘always round fives up’ rule. This is the rule that the United States Internal Revenue Service advises you to use on your taxes, and who is going to argue with them? Sometimes, though, it can cause problems. Suppose you are adding a very large number of values that have all been rounded by this rule. The sum that you get will be a little bit bigger than it ought to be. This can be a very serious problem in computer programs. When thousands or even millions of additions are being performed, the accumulated roundoff error can be quite large. One way of dealing with this problem is the even-odd rule. This rule says that: If the five is the last significant digit and the round-off digit (the one to the left of the 5) is odd, round up. If the five is the last significant digit and the round-off digit is even, don’t round up. Actually, you could reverse even and odd in this rule. All that matters is that about half the time you will be rounding up on a 5, and half the time down. The reason it matters that the five is the last significant digit is because if there are any other non-zero digits past the five then you must round up, because the part that you are chopping off is more than 50% of the roundoff place-value. For example, suppose you want to round 3.351 to the nearest tenth. The decimal part represents the fraction 351/1000, which is 1/1000 closer to 400/1000 than it is to 300/100. Therefore you would always round this up to 3.4.     Example:  Round 11.3826 to the nearest hundredth. Solution: The hundredths place is where the ‘8’ is. We look one digit to the right and see a ‘2’, so we do not round up, leaving us with 11.38. Example:  Round 11.3826 to the nearest thousandth. Solution: The thousandths place is where the ‘2’ is. We look one place to the right and see a ‘6’, so we round the ‘2’ up, getting 11.383. Trouble with ‘9’s. If the digit you are rounding up is a ‘9’, then rounding it up will make it a ‘10’, which is too big for one place. What happens is that the extra ‘1’ gets added to the place to the left. Example:  Round 3.49721 to the nearest hundredth. Solution: The hundredth place has a ‘9’ in it. One step to the right is a ‘7’, so we have to round up. This makes the ‘9’ into a ‘10’, but we really can’t write the new number as 3.4(10). Instead, the extra ‘1’ moves one place to the left and is added to the ‘4’, giving us 3.50. It can happen that the place to the left contains another ‘9’, in which case the extra ‘1’ will cause it to become a ‘10’, which pushes the ‘1’ still further on to the next place to the left. Example:  Round 75.69996217 to the nearest ten-thousandth Solution: The ten-thousandths place is the last ‘9’ in the number, and the place to its right is a ‘6’, which means we round up. This makes the ‘9’ into a ‘10’, like this: 75.699(10) But of course we cannot put a ‘10’ in that place, so the ‘1’ moves to the left and gets added to the ‘9’ there, making it into a ‘10’: 75.69(10)0 This leaves us with the same problem, a ‘10’ in one decimal place, so the extra ‘1’ moves one more step to the left, turning that ‘9’ into a ‘10’: 75.6(10)00 Well, we still have the same problem, so we move the ‘1’ yet another step to the left, where it adds on to the ‘6’, finally leaving us with an acceptable answer: 75.7000 In general, ·        The extra ‘1’ migrates to the left until it finds a resting-place. This means that the ‘1’ moves to the left until it can be added to a digit less than ‘9’, or until it falls off the end as a new digit out in front. Example:  Round 999.96 to the nearest tenth. The digit to the right of the tenths place is a ‘6’, so we have to round up. But when we round up the ‘9’ it becomes a ‘10’, forcing the one to be added to the left. Unfortunately, we find another ‘9’ there and the process is repeated for each of the ‘9’s until we reach the leading ‘9’, which becomes a ‘10’ resulting in 1000.0  || Arithmetic with Decimals Although calculators have made it much easier to do arithmetic with decimal numbers, it is nice to know that you can still do it without a calculator. Addition and Subtraction To add or subtract decimal numbers, you use the familiar column method that you learned back in grade school. To use this method, the place values of the two numbers must be lined up. This means that the decimal points must be lined up, and you can fill in with zeros if one number has more decimal places than the other.   Example:     5.46 + 11.2   Becomes:   Multiplication To multiply two decimal numbers, you can use the column method just as you would with whole numbers. You ignore the decimal points as you carry out the multiplication, and then you put the decimal point in the result at the correct place. The product will have the number of decimal places as the total number of decimal places in the factors. In the following example, the first factor has 2 decimal places and the second factor has 1 decimal place, so the product must have 3 decimal places:   Division You can divide decimal numbers using the familiar (?) technique of long division. This can be awkward, though, because it is hard to guess at products of decimals (long division, you may recall, is basically a guess-and-check technique). It can be made easier by multiplying both the dividend and divisor by ‘10’s to make the divisor a whole number. This will not change the result of the division, because division is the same thing as fractions, and multiplying both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same number will not change the value of the fraction. For example, consider This is the same as the fraction , which is equivalent to the fraction , obtained by multiplying the numerator and denominator by 10. Thus   ,   which can be attacked with long division:      || 
book3_chapter01_7_1	Converting Decimals to Fractions Because all the denominators are powers of 10, it is very easy to add these fractions by finding a common denominator. In this example, the common denominator is 1000, and we get This suggests a general rule for converting a decimal number to its fraction form: Put all the digits over the denominator that corresponds to the last decimal place value. In the number 2.345, the last decimal place value is the thousandths place, so we put the digits 2345 over the denominator 1000. Of course we would usually want to reduce the resulting fraction to its simplest form. In this case Converting Decimals to Fractions Because all the denominators are powers of 10, it is very easy to add these fractions by finding a common denominator. In this example, the common denominator is 1000, and we get This suggests a general rule for converting a decimal number to its fraction form: Put all the digits over the denominator that corresponds to the last decimal place value. In the number 2.345, the last decimal place value is the thousandths place, so we put the digits 2345 over the denominator 1000. Of course we would usually want to reduce the resulting fraction to its simplest form. In this case  || 
book3_chapter01_7_2	Repeating Fractions The only time this method does not work is for repeating fractions. We know that 1/3 = 0.3333333... but how could we go from 0.3333333... back to 1/3? There is no ‘last decimal place’ because the decimals repeat forever. Fortunately, there is a simple trick for this: ·         Put the repeating digit over a denominator of 9. So we see that in the case of 0.3333333...., the repeating digit is 3, and we make the fraction 3/9, which reduces to 1/3. If there is a group of more than one digit that repeats, Put the repeating group of digits over as many 9’s as there are digits. For example, in the fraction we see that the group of digits ‘15’ repeats, so we put ‘15’ over a denominator of ‘99’ to get o        One warning: This only works for the repeating fraction part of a number. If you have a number like 2.33333..., you should just work with the decimal part and rejoin it with the whole part after you have converted it to a fraction. o        Irrational numbers like p or  have non-repeating decimals, and so they cannot be written as fractions. You can, however, round them off at some point and produce an approximate fraction for them.   Why This Trick Works  If you have learned enough algebra to follow these steps, it is not difficult to see why this works. Let’s start with the simple example 0.3333333... Since we already know that the answer is 1/3, we can concentrate on the procedure, not the answer. Let x = 0.3333333... Multiply both sides by 10 to get 10x = 3.33333... Notice that the decimal part (.33333…) is still the same. In fact, it is the very thing that we called x in the first place, so we can say that 10x= 3 + x Now solve for x: This method will also work for repeating fractions that contain a group of repeating digits, but you have to multiply by a higher power of 10 in order to make the decimal portion stay the same as it was before. For example, suppose we had 0.345345345.... Let x = 0.345345345.... Multiply both sides by 1000 to get 1000x = 345.345345345.... Notice that the decimal part is still the same. In fact, it is still the thing that we called x in the first place, so we can say that 1000x = 345 + x Now solve for x:     Repeating Fractions The only time this method does not work is for repeating fractions. We know that 1/3 = 0.3333333... but how could we go from 0.3333333... back to 1/3? There is no ‘last decimal place’ because the decimals repeat forever. Fortunately, there is a simple trick for this: ·         Put the repeating digit over a denominator of 9. So we see that in the case of 0.3333333...., the repeating digit is 3, and we make the fraction 3/9, which reduces to 1/3. If there is a group of more than one digit that repeats, Put the repeating group of digits over as many 9’s as there are digits. For example, in the fraction we see that the group of digits ‘15’ repeats, so we put ‘15’ over a denominator of ‘99’ to get o        One warning: This only works for the repeating fraction part of a number. If you have a number like 2.33333..., you should just work with the decimal part and rejoin it with the whole part after you have converted it to a fraction. o        Irrational numbers like p or  have non-repeating decimals, and so they cannot be written as fractions. You can, however, round them off at some point and produce an approximate fraction for them.   Why This Trick Works  If you have learned enough algebra to follow these steps, it is not difficult to see why this works. Let’s start with the simple example 0.3333333... Since we already know that the answer is 1/3, we can concentrate on the procedure, not the answer. Let x = 0.3333333... Multiply both sides by 10 to get 10x = 3.33333... Notice that the decimal part (.33333…) is still the same. In fact, it is the very thing that we called x in the first place, so we can say that 10x= 3 + x Now solve for x: This method will also work for repeating fractions that contain a group of repeating digits, but you have to multiply by a higher power of 10 in order to make the decimal portion stay the same as it was before. For example, suppose we had 0.345345345.... Let x = 0.345345345.... Multiply both sides by 1000 to get 1000x = 345.345345345.... Notice that the decimal part is still the same. In fact, it is still the thing that we called x in the first place, so we can say that 1000x = 345 + x Now solve for x:      || 
book3_chapter01_7_3	Converting Fractions to Decimals We know the decimal equivalents for some common fractions without having to think about it: 1/2 = 0.5, 3/4 = 0.75, etc. But how do we arrive at these numbers? Remember that the fraction bar means the same thing as division. To convert a fraction to a decimal, do the division. For example, You can do the division with a calculator or by hand with long division. Converting Fractions to Decimals We know the decimal equivalents for some common fractions without having to think about it: 1/2 = 0.5, 3/4 = 0.75, etc. But how do we arrive at these numbers? Remember that the fraction bar means the same thing as division. To convert a fraction to a decimal, do the division. For example, You can do the division with a calculator or by hand with long division.  || 
book3_chapter01_7_4	Rounding Look only one digit to the right ‘5’s or higher round up (there is some dispute about this rule, but it is good enough for most purposes)   Rounding 5’s Why round fives up? The number 3.5 is exactly halfway between 3.0 and 4.0, so it makes just as much sense to round it down as it does to round it up. Most of the time there is no harm in using the ‘always round fives up’ rule. This is the rule that the United States Internal Revenue Service advises you to use on your taxes, and who is going to argue with them? Sometimes, though, it can cause problems. Suppose you are adding a very large number of values that have all been rounded by this rule. The sum that you get will be a little bit bigger than it ought to be. This can be a very serious problem in computer programs. When thousands or even millions of additions are being performed, the accumulated roundoff error can be quite large. One way of dealing with this problem is the even-odd rule. This rule says that: If the five is the last significant digit and the round-off digit (the one to the left of the 5) is odd, round up. If the five is the last significant digit and the round-off digit is even, don’t round up. Actually, you could reverse even and odd in this rule. All that matters is that about half the time you will be rounding up on a 5, and half the time down. The reason it matters that the five is the last significant digit is because if there are any other non-zero digits past the five then you must round up, because the part that you are chopping off is more than 50% of the roundoff place-value. For example, suppose you want to round 3.351 to the nearest tenth. The decimal part represents the fraction 351/1000, which is 1/1000 closer to 400/1000 than it is to 300/100. Therefore you would always round this up to 3.4.     Example:  Round 11.3826 to the nearest hundredth. Solution: The hundredths place is where the ‘8’ is. We look one digit to the right and see a ‘2’, so we do not round up, leaving us with 11.38. Example:  Round 11.3826 to the nearest thousandth. Solution: The thousandths place is where the ‘2’ is. We look one place to the right and see a ‘6’, so we round the ‘2’ up, getting 11.383. Trouble with ‘9’s. If the digit you are rounding up is a ‘9’, then rounding it up will make it a ‘10’, which is too big for one place. What happens is that the extra ‘1’ gets added to the place to the left. Example:  Round 3.49721 to the nearest hundredth. Solution: The hundredth place has a ‘9’ in it. One step to the right is a ‘7’, so we have to round up. This makes the ‘9’ into a ‘10’, but we really can’t write the new number as 3.4(10). Instead, the extra ‘1’ moves one place to the left and is added to the ‘4’, giving us 3.50. It can happen that the place to the left contains another ‘9’, in which case the extra ‘1’ will cause it to become a ‘10’, which pushes the ‘1’ still further on to the next place to the left. Example:  Round 75.69996217 to the nearest ten-thousandth Solution: The ten-thousandths place is the last ‘9’ in the number, and the place to its right is a ‘6’, which means we round up. This makes the ‘9’ into a ‘10’, like this: 75.699(10) But of course we cannot put a ‘10’ in that place, so the ‘1’ moves to the left and gets added to the ‘9’ there, making it into a ‘10’: 75.69(10)0 This leaves us with the same problem, a ‘10’ in one decimal place, so the extra ‘1’ moves one more step to the left, turning that ‘9’ into a ‘10’: 75.6(10)00 Well, we still have the same problem, so we move the ‘1’ yet another step to the left, where it adds on to the ‘6’, finally leaving us with an acceptable answer: 75.7000 In general, ·        The extra ‘1’ migrates to the left until it finds a resting-place. This means that the ‘1’ moves to the left until it can be added to a digit less than ‘9’, or until it falls off the end as a new digit out in front. Example:  Round 999.96 to the nearest tenth. The digit to the right of the tenths place is a ‘6’, so we have to round up. But when we round up the ‘9’ it becomes a ‘10’, forcing the one to be added to the left. Unfortunately, we find another ‘9’ there and the process is repeated for each of the ‘9’s until we reach the leading ‘9’, which becomes a ‘10’ resulting in 1000.0 Rounding Look only one digit to the right ‘5’s or higher round up (there is some dispute about this rule, but it is good enough for most purposes)   Rounding 5’s Why round fives up? The number 3.5 is exactly halfway between 3.0 and 4.0, so it makes just as much sense to round it down as it does to round it up. Most of the time there is no harm in using the ‘always round fives up’ rule. This is the rule that the United States Internal Revenue Service advises you to use on your taxes, and who is going to argue with them? Sometimes, though, it can cause problems. Suppose you are adding a very large number of values that have all been rounded by this rule. The sum that you get will be a little bit bigger than it ought to be. This can be a very serious problem in computer programs. When thousands or even millions of additions are being performed, the accumulated roundoff error can be quite large. One way of dealing with this problem is the even-odd rule. This rule says that: If the five is the last significant digit and the round-off digit (the one to the left of the 5) is odd, round up. If the five is the last significant digit and the round-off digit is even, don’t round up. Actually, you could reverse even and odd in this rule. All that matters is that about half the time you will be rounding up on a 5, and half the time down. The reason it matters that the five is the last significant digit is because if there are any other non-zero digits past the five then you must round up, because the part that you are chopping off is more than 50% of the roundoff place-value. For example, suppose you want to round 3.351 to the nearest tenth. The decimal part represents the fraction 351/1000, which is 1/1000 closer to 400/1000 than it is to 300/100. Therefore you would always round this up to 3.4.     Example:  Round 11.3826 to the nearest hundredth. Solution: The hundredths place is where the ‘8’ is. We look one digit to the right and see a ‘2’, so we do not round up, leaving us with 11.38. Example:  Round 11.3826 to the nearest thousandth. Solution: The thousandths place is where the ‘2’ is. We look one place to the right and see a ‘6’, so we round the ‘2’ up, getting 11.383. Trouble with ‘9’s. If the digit you are rounding up is a ‘9’, then rounding it up will make it a ‘10’, which is too big for one place. What happens is that the extra ‘1’ gets added to the place to the left. Example:  Round 3.49721 to the nearest hundredth. Solution: The hundredth place has a ‘9’ in it. One step to the right is a ‘7’, so we have to round up. This makes the ‘9’ into a ‘10’, but we really can’t write the new number as 3.4(10). Instead, the extra ‘1’ moves one place to the left and is added to the ‘4’, giving us 3.50. It can happen that the place to the left contains another ‘9’, in which case the extra ‘1’ will cause it to become a ‘10’, which pushes the ‘1’ still further on to the next place to the left. Example:  Round 75.69996217 to the nearest ten-thousandth Solution: The ten-thousandths place is the last ‘9’ in the number, and the place to its right is a ‘6’, which means we round up. This makes the ‘9’ into a ‘10’, like this: 75.699(10) But of course we cannot put a ‘10’ in that place, so the ‘1’ moves to the left and gets added to the ‘9’ there, making it into a ‘10’: 75.69(10)0 This leaves us with the same problem, a ‘10’ in one decimal place, so the extra ‘1’ moves one more step to the left, turning that ‘9’ into a ‘10’: 75.6(10)00 Well, we still have the same problem, so we move the ‘1’ yet another step to the left, where it adds on to the ‘6’, finally leaving us with an acceptable answer: 75.7000 In general, ·        The extra ‘1’ migrates to the left until it finds a resting-place. This means that the ‘1’ moves to the left until it can be added to a digit less than ‘9’, or until it falls off the end as a new digit out in front. Example:  Round 999.96 to the nearest tenth. The digit to the right of the tenths place is a ‘6’, so we have to round up. But when we round up the ‘9’ it becomes a ‘10’, forcing the one to be added to the left. Unfortunately, we find another ‘9’ there and the process is repeated for each of the ‘9’s until we reach the leading ‘9’, which becomes a ‘10’ resulting in 1000.0  || 
book3_chapter01_7_5	Arithmetic with Decimals Although calculators have made it much easier to do arithmetic with decimal numbers, it is nice to know that you can still do it without a calculator. Addition and Subtraction To add or subtract decimal numbers, you use the familiar column method that you learned back in grade school. To use this method, the place values of the two numbers must be lined up. This means that the decimal points must be lined up, and you can fill in with zeros if one number has more decimal places than the other.   Example:     5.46 + 11.2   Becomes:   Multiplication To multiply two decimal numbers, you can use the column method just as you would with whole numbers. You ignore the decimal points as you carry out the multiplication, and then you put the decimal point in the result at the correct place. The product will have the number of decimal places as the total number of decimal places in the factors. In the following example, the first factor has 2 decimal places and the second factor has 1 decimal place, so the product must have 3 decimal places:   Division You can divide decimal numbers using the familiar (?) technique of long division. This can be awkward, though, because it is hard to guess at products of decimals (long division, you may recall, is basically a guess-and-check technique). It can be made easier by multiplying both the dividend and divisor by ‘10’s to make the divisor a whole number. This will not change the result of the division, because division is the same thing as fractions, and multiplying both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same number will not change the value of the fraction. For example, consider This is the same as the fraction , which is equivalent to the fraction , obtained by multiplying the numerator and denominator by 10. Thus   ,   which can be attacked with long division:     Arithmetic with Decimals Although calculators have made it much easier to do arithmetic with decimal numbers, it is nice to know that you can still do it without a calculator. Addition and Subtraction To add or subtract decimal numbers, you use the familiar column method that you learned back in grade school. To use this method, the place values of the two numbers must be lined up. This means that the decimal points must be lined up, and you can fill in with zeros if one number has more decimal places than the other.   Example:     5.46 + 11.2   Becomes:   Multiplication To multiply two decimal numbers, you can use the column method just as you would with whole numbers. You ignore the decimal points as you carry out the multiplication, and then you put the decimal point in the result at the correct place. The product will have the number of decimal places as the total number of decimal places in the factors. In the following example, the first factor has 2 decimal places and the second factor has 1 decimal place, so the product must have 3 decimal places:   Division You can divide decimal numbers using the familiar (?) technique of long division. This can be awkward, though, because it is hard to guess at products of decimals (long division, you may recall, is basically a guess-and-check technique). It can be made easier by multiplying both the dividend and divisor by ‘10’s to make the divisor a whole number. This will not change the result of the division, because division is the same thing as fractions, and multiplying both the numerator and denominator of a fraction by the same number will not change the value of the fraction. For example, consider This is the same as the fraction , which is equivalent to the fraction , obtained by multiplying the numerator and denominator by 10. Thus   ,   which can be attacked with long division:      || 
book3_chapter01_8	 || To convert a decimal to a percent Multiply the decimal number by 100 (or move the decimal point two places to the right). Since x% = x/100, it is also true that 100 x% = x. Another way to look at is to consider that in order to convert a number into a percent, you have to express it in hundredths. Recall that the hundredths place is the second place to the right of the decimal, so this is the digit that gives the units digit of the percent. Of course, all this means is that you move the decimal point two places to the right. WARNING: If you just remember these rules as “move the decimal two places to the left” and “move the decimal two places to the right,” you are very likely to get them confused. If you accidentally move the decimal in the wrong direction it will end up four places off from where it should be, which means that your answer will be either ten-thousand times too big or ten-thousand times too small. This is generally not an acceptable range of error. It is much better to remember these rules by simply remembering the meaning of the percent sign, namely that “ % “ means “ /100.” If you just write the problem that way, you should be able to see what you need to do in order to solve it. Converting between percents and their decimal equivalents is so simple that it is usually best to express all percents in decimal form when you are working percent problems. The decimal numbers are what you will need to put in your calculator, and you can always express the result as a percent if you need to.   Calculator  note: Some calculators have a percent key that essentially just divides by 100, but it can do other useful things that might save you a few keystrokes. For instance, if you need to add 5% to a number (perhaps to include the sales tax on a purchase), on most calculators you can enter the original number and then press “ + 5 % = “. Just make sure you understand what it does before you blindly trust it. What it is doing in this example is multiplying the original number by 0.05 and then adding the result onto the original number. You should be able to work any percent problem without using this key, but once you understand what is going on it can be a convenient short-cut.  || To convert a percent to a fraction ·        Put the percentage over a denominator of 100 and reduce Writing a percent as a fraction is very simple if you remember that the percent is the numerator of a fraction with a denominator equal to 100. Examples:  In this last example, the first fraction has a decimal in it, which is not a proper way to represent a fraction. To clear the decimal, just multiply both the numerator and the denominator by 10 to produce an equivalent fraction written with whole numbers.  || To convert a fraction to a percent ·         Divide the numerator by the denominator and multiply by 100 To write a fraction as a percent you need to convert the fraction into hundredths. Sometimes this is easy to do without a calculator. For example, if you saw the fraction , you should notice that doubling the numerator and the denominator will produce an equivalent fraction that has a denominator of 100. Then the numerator will be the percent that you are seeking: With other fractions, though, it is not always so easy. It is not at all obvious how to convert a fraction like 5/7 into something over 100. In this case, the best thing to do is to convert the fraction into its decimal form, and then convert the decimal into a percent. To convert the fraction to a decimal, remember that the fraction bar indicates division: The “approximately equal to” sign () is used because the decimal parts have been rounded off. Because it is understood that approximate numbers are rounded, we will not continue to use the approximately equal sign. It is more conventional to just use the standard equal sign with approximate numbers, even though it is not entirely accurate.  || Working percent problems In percent problems, just as in fraction problems, the word “of” implies multiplication: “x percent of a number” means “x% times a number” Example:  What is 12% of 345? 12% is 12/100, which we can express in decimal form as 0.12. 12% of 345 means 12% times 345, or Notice how it is easier to just move the decimal over two places instead of explicitly dividing by 100. We solve a problem like this by translating the question into mathematical symbols, using x to stand for the unknown “what” and that the “of” means “times”: Example:  What percent of 2342 is 319? Once again we translate this into mathematical symbols: Solving this equation involves a little bit of algebra. To isolate the x% on one side of the equation we must divide both sides by 2342: The calculator tells us that x% = 0.1362 Now the right-hand side of this equation is the decimal equivalent that is equal to x%, which means that x = 13.62, or 319 is 13.62% of 2342 If that last step confused you, remember that the percent symbol means “over 100”, so the equation x% = 0.1362 really says or x = 100(0.1362) x = 13.62 Example:  2.4 is what percent of 19.7? Translating into math symbols: Solving for x: 2.4 = x% (19.7) x% = 0.1218 x = 12.18 So we can say that 2.4 is 12% of 19.7 (rounding to 2 significant figures) Example:  46 is 3.2% of what? Translating into math symbols: Solving for x: 46 = 3.2% (x) 46 = 0.032x x = 1437.5 Therefore, we can say that 46 is 3.2% of 1400 (rounding to 2 significant figures). Notice that in the second step the percentage (3.2%) is converted into its decimal form (0.032).  || 
book3_chapter01_8_1	To convert a decimal to a percent Multiply the decimal number by 100 (or move the decimal point two places to the right). Since x% = x/100, it is also true that 100 x% = x. Another way to look at is to consider that in order to convert a number into a percent, you have to express it in hundredths. Recall that the hundredths place is the second place to the right of the decimal, so this is the digit that gives the units digit of the percent. Of course, all this means is that you move the decimal point two places to the right. WARNING: If you just remember these rules as “move the decimal two places to the left” and “move the decimal two places to the right,” you are very likely to get them confused. If you accidentally move the decimal in the wrong direction it will end up four places off from where it should be, which means that your answer will be either ten-thousand times too big or ten-thousand times too small. This is generally not an acceptable range of error. It is much better to remember these rules by simply remembering the meaning of the percent sign, namely that “ % “ means “ /100.” If you just write the problem that way, you should be able to see what you need to do in order to solve it. Converting between percents and their decimal equivalents is so simple that it is usually best to express all percents in decimal form when you are working percent problems. The decimal numbers are what you will need to put in your calculator, and you can always express the result as a percent if you need to.   Calculator  note: Some calculators have a percent key that essentially just divides by 100, but it can do other useful things that might save you a few keystrokes. For instance, if you need to add 5% to a number (perhaps to include the sales tax on a purchase), on most calculators you can enter the original number and then press “ + 5 % = “. Just make sure you understand what it does before you blindly trust it. What it is doing in this example is multiplying the original number by 0.05 and then adding the result onto the original number. You should be able to work any percent problem without using this key, but once you understand what is going on it can be a convenient short-cut. To convert a decimal to a percent Multiply the decimal number by 100 (or move the decimal point two places to the right). Since x% = x/100, it is also true that 100 x% = x. Another way to look at is to consider that in order to convert a number into a percent, you have to express it in hundredths. Recall that the hundredths place is the second place to the right of the decimal, so this is the digit that gives the units digit of the percent. Of course, all this means is that you move the decimal point two places to the right. WARNING: If you just remember these rules as “move the decimal two places to the left” and “move the decimal two places to the right,” you are very likely to get them confused. If you accidentally move the decimal in the wrong direction it will end up four places off from where it should be, which means that your answer will be either ten-thousand times too big or ten-thousand times too small. This is generally not an acceptable range of error. It is much better to remember these rules by simply remembering the meaning of the percent sign, namely that “ % “ means “ /100.” If you just write the problem that way, you should be able to see what you need to do in order to solve it. Converting between percents and their decimal equivalents is so simple that it is usually best to express all percents in decimal form when you are working percent problems. The decimal numbers are what you will need to put in your calculator, and you can always express the result as a percent if you need to.   Calculator  note: Some calculators have a percent key that essentially just divides by 100, but it can do other useful things that might save you a few keystrokes. For instance, if you need to add 5% to a number (perhaps to include the sales tax on a purchase), on most calculators you can enter the original number and then press “ + 5 % = “. Just make sure you understand what it does before you blindly trust it. What it is doing in this example is multiplying the original number by 0.05 and then adding the result onto the original number. You should be able to work any percent problem without using this key, but once you understand what is going on it can be a convenient short-cut.  || 
book3_chapter01_8_2	To convert a percent to a fraction ·        Put the percentage over a denominator of 100 and reduce Writing a percent as a fraction is very simple if you remember that the percent is the numerator of a fraction with a denominator equal to 100. Examples:  In this last example, the first fraction has a decimal in it, which is not a proper way to represent a fraction. To clear the decimal, just multiply both the numerator and the denominator by 10 to produce an equivalent fraction written with whole numbers. To convert a percent to a fraction ·        Put the percentage over a denominator of 100 and reduce Writing a percent as a fraction is very simple if you remember that the percent is the numerator of a fraction with a denominator equal to 100. Examples:  In this last example, the first fraction has a decimal in it, which is not a proper way to represent a fraction. To clear the decimal, just multiply both the numerator and the denominator by 10 to produce an equivalent fraction written with whole numbers.  || 
book3_chapter01_8_3	To convert a fraction to a percent ·         Divide the numerator by the denominator and multiply by 100 To write a fraction as a percent you need to convert the fraction into hundredths. Sometimes this is easy to do without a calculator. For example, if you saw the fraction , you should notice that doubling the numerator and the denominator will produce an equivalent fraction that has a denominator of 100. Then the numerator will be the percent that you are seeking: With other fractions, though, it is not always so easy. It is not at all obvious how to convert a fraction like 5/7 into something over 100. In this case, the best thing to do is to convert the fraction into its decimal form, and then convert the decimal into a percent. To convert the fraction to a decimal, remember that the fraction bar indicates division: The “approximately equal to” sign () is used because the decimal parts have been rounded off. Because it is understood that approximate numbers are rounded, we will not continue to use the approximately equal sign. It is more conventional to just use the standard equal sign with approximate numbers, even though it is not entirely accurate. To convert a fraction to a percent ·         Divide the numerator by the denominator and multiply by 100 To write a fraction as a percent you need to convert the fraction into hundredths. Sometimes this is easy to do without a calculator. For example, if you saw the fraction , you should notice that doubling the numerator and the denominator will produce an equivalent fraction that has a denominator of 100. Then the numerator will be the percent that you are seeking: With other fractions, though, it is not always so easy. It is not at all obvious how to convert a fraction like 5/7 into something over 100. In this case, the best thing to do is to convert the fraction into its decimal form, and then convert the decimal into a percent. To convert the fraction to a decimal, remember that the fraction bar indicates division: The “approximately equal to” sign () is used because the decimal parts have been rounded off. Because it is understood that approximate numbers are rounded, we will not continue to use the approximately equal sign. It is more conventional to just use the standard equal sign with approximate numbers, even though it is not entirely accurate.  || 
book3_chapter01_8_4	Working percent problems In percent problems, just as in fraction problems, the word “of” implies multiplication: “x percent of a number” means “x% times a number” Example:  What is 12% of 345? 12% is 12/100, which we can express in decimal form as 0.12. 12% of 345 means 12% times 345, or Notice how it is easier to just move the decimal over two places instead of explicitly dividing by 100. We solve a problem like this by translating the question into mathematical symbols, using x to stand for the unknown “what” and that the “of” means “times”: Example:  What percent of 2342 is 319? Once again we translate this into mathematical symbols: Solving this equation involves a little bit of algebra. To isolate the x% on one side of the equation we must divide both sides by 2342: The calculator tells us that x% = 0.1362 Now the right-hand side of this equation is the decimal equivalent that is equal to x%, which means that x = 13.62, or 319 is 13.62% of 2342 If that last step confused you, remember that the percent symbol means “over 100”, so the equation x% = 0.1362 really says or x = 100(0.1362) x = 13.62 Example:  2.4 is what percent of 19.7? Translating into math symbols: Solving for x: 2.4 = x% (19.7) x% = 0.1218 x = 12.18 So we can say that 2.4 is 12% of 19.7 (rounding to 2 significant figures) Example:  46 is 3.2% of what? Translating into math symbols: Solving for x: 46 = 3.2% (x) 46 = 0.032x x = 1437.5 Therefore, we can say that 46 is 3.2% of 1400 (rounding to 2 significant figures). Notice that in the second step the percentage (3.2%) is converted into its decimal form (0.032). Working percent problems In percent problems, just as in fraction problems, the word “of” implies multiplication: “x percent of a number” means “x% times a number” Example:  What is 12% of 345? 12% is 12/100, which we can express in decimal form as 0.12. 12% of 345 means 12% times 345, or Notice how it is easier to just move the decimal over two places instead of explicitly dividing by 100. We solve a problem like this by translating the question into mathematical symbols, using x to stand for the unknown “what” and that the “of” means “times”: Example:  What percent of 2342 is 319? Once again we translate this into mathematical symbols: Solving this equation involves a little bit of algebra. To isolate the x% on one side of the equation we must divide both sides by 2342: The calculator tells us that x% = 0.1362 Now the right-hand side of this equation is the decimal equivalent that is equal to x%, which means that x = 13.62, or 319 is 13.62% of 2342 If that last step confused you, remember that the percent symbol means “over 100”, so the equation x% = 0.1362 really says or x = 100(0.1362) x = 13.62 Example:  2.4 is what percent of 19.7? Translating into math symbols: Solving for x: 2.4 = x% (19.7) x% = 0.1218 x = 12.18 So we can say that 2.4 is 12% of 19.7 (rounding to 2 significant figures) Example:  46 is 3.2% of what? Translating into math symbols: Solving for x: 46 = 3.2% (x) 46 = 0.032x x = 1437.5 Therefore, we can say that 46 is 3.2% of 1400 (rounding to 2 significant figures). Notice that in the second step the percentage (3.2%) is converted into its decimal form (0.032).  || 
book3_chapter01_9	The following table lists the defining properties of the real numbers (technically called the field axioms). These laws define how the things we call numbers should behave. Addition Multiplication Commutative For all real a, b a + b = b + a Commutative For all real a, b ab = ba Associative For all real a, b, c a + (b + c) = (a + b) + c Associative For all real a, b, c (ab)c = a(bc) Identity There exists a real number 0 such that for every real a a + 0 = a Identity There exists a real number 1 such that for every real a a × 1 = a Additive Inverse (Opposite) For every real number a there exist a real number, denoted (-a), such that a + (–a) = 0 Multiplicative Inverse (Reciprocal) For every real number a except 0 there exist a real number, denoted , such that a ×  = 1 Distributive Law For all real a, b, c a(b + c) = ab + ac, and (a + b)c = ac + bcThe commutative and associative laws do not hold for subtraction or division:a – b is not equal to b – aa ÷ b is not equal to b ÷ aa – (b – c) is not equal to (a – b) – ca ÷ (b ÷ c) is not equal to (a ÷ b) ÷ cTry some examples with numbers and you will see that they do not work.What these laws mean is that order and grouping don't matter for addition and multiplication, but they certainly do matter for subtraction and division. In this way, addition and multiplication are “cleaner” than subtraction and division. This will become important when we start talking about algebraic expressions. Often what we will want to do with an algebraic expression will involve rearranging it somehow. If the operations are all addition and multiplication, we don't have to worry so much that we might be changing the value of an expression by rearranging its terms or factors. Fortunately, we can always think of subtraction as an addition problem (adding the opposite), and we can always think of division as a multiplication (multiplying by the reciprocal).You may have noticed that the commutative and associative laws read exactly the same way for addition and multiplication, as if there was no difference between them other than notation. The law that makes them behave differently is the distributive law, because multiplication distributes over addition, not vice-versa.. The distributive law is extremely important, and it is impossible to understand algebra without being thoroughly familiar with this law.Example:  2(3 + 4)According to the order of operations rules, we should evaluate this expression by first doing the addition inside the parentheses, giving us2(3 + 4) = 2(7) = 14But we can also look at this problem with the distributive law, and of course still get the same answer. The distributive law says thatThe following table lists the defining properties of the real numbers (technically called the field axioms). These laws define how the things we call numbers should behave. Addition Multiplication Commutative For all real a, b a + b = b + a Commutative For all real a, b ab = ba Associative For all real a, b, c a + (b + c) = (a + b) + c Associative For all real a, b, c (ab)c = a(bc) Identity There exists a real number 0 such that for every real a a + 0 = a Identity There exists a real number 1 such that for every real a a × 1 = a Additive Inverse (Opposite) For every real number a there exist a real number, denoted (-a), such that a + (–a) = 0 Multiplicative Inverse (Reciprocal) For every real number a except 0 there exist a real number, denoted , such that a ×  = 1 Distributive Law For all real a, b, c a(b + c) = ab + ac, and (a + b)c = ac + bcThe commutative and associative laws do not hold for subtraction or division:a – b is not equal to b – aa ÷ b is not equal to b ÷ aa – (b – c) is not equal to (a – b) – ca ÷ (b ÷ c) is not equal to (a ÷ b) ÷ cTry some examples with numbers and you will see that they do not work.What these laws mean is that order and grouping don't matter for addition and multiplication, but they certainly do matter for subtraction and division. In this way, addition and multiplication are “cleaner” than subtraction and division. This will become important when we start talking about algebraic expressions. Often what we will want to do with an algebraic expression will involve rearranging it somehow. If the operations are all addition and multiplication, we don't have to worry so much that we might be changing the value of an expression by rearranging its terms or factors. Fortunately, we can always think of subtraction as an addition problem (adding the opposite), and we can always think of division as a multiplication (multiplying by the reciprocal).You may have noticed that the commutative and associative laws read exactly the same way for addition and multiplication, as if there was no difference between them other than notation. The law that makes them behave differently is the distributive law, because multiplication distributes over addition, not vice-versa.. The distributive law is extremely important, and it is impossible to understand algebra without being thoroughly familiar with this law.Example:  2(3 + 4)According to the order of operations rules, we should evaluate this expression by first doing the addition inside the parentheses, giving us2(3 + 4) = 2(7) = 14But we can also look at this problem with the distributive law, and of course still get the same answer. The distributive law says that || 
book3_chapter05	 ||  || 2. Dependent Equations ·        Equations describe the same line ·        Infinite number of solutions Sometimes two equations might look different but actually describe the same line. For example, in The second equation is just two times the first equation, so they are actually equivalent and would both be equations of the same line. Because the two equations describe the same line, they have all their points in common; hence there are an infinite number of solutions to the system. Attempting to solve gives an identity If you try to solve a dependent system by algebraic methods, you will eventually run into an equation that is an identity. An identity is an equation that is always true, independent of the value(s) of any variable(s). For example, you might get an equation that looks like x = x, or 3 = 3. This would tell you that the system is a dependent system, and you could stop right there because you will never find a unique solution.  || 3. Inconsistent Equations Lines do not intersect (Parallel Lines; have the same slope) No solutions If two lines happen to have the same slope, but are not identically the same line, then they will never intersect. There is no pair (x, y) that could satisfy both equations, because there is no point (x, y) that is simultaneously on both lines. Thus these equations are said to be inconsistent, and there is no solution. The fact that they both have the same slope may not be obvious from the equations, because they are not written in one of the standard forms for straight lines. The slope is not readily evident in the form we use for writing systems of equations. (If you think about it you will see that the slope is the negative of the coefficient of x divided by the coefficient of y). Attempting to solve gives a false statement By attempting to solve such a system of equations algebraically, you are operating on a false assumption—namely that a solution exists. This will eventually lead you to a contradiction: a statement that is obviously false, regardless of the value(s) of the variable(s). At some point in your work you would get an obviously false equation like 3 = 4. This would tell you that the system of equations is inconsistent, and there is no solution.     Solution by Graphing For more complex systems, and especially those that contain non-linear equations, finding a solution by algebraic methods can be very difficult or even impossible. Using a graphing calculator (or a computer), you can graph the equations and actually see where they intersect. The calculator can then give you the coordinates of the intersection point. The only drawback to this method is that the solution is only an approximation, whereas the algebraic method gives the exact solution. In most practical situations, though, the precision of the calculator is sufficient. For more demanding scientific and engineering applications there are computer methods that can find approximate solutions to very high precision.    || The whole problem with solving a system of equations is that you cannot solve an equation that has two unknowns in it. You need an equation with only one variable so that you can isolate the variable on one side of the equation. Both methods that we will look at are techniques for eliminating one of the variables to give you an equation in just one unknown, which you can then solve by the usual methods.The first method of solving systems of linear equations is the addition method, in which the two equations are added together to eliminate one of the variables.Adding the equations means that we add the left sides of the two equations together, and we add the right sides together. This is legal because of the Addition Principle, which says that we can add the same amount to both sides of an equation. Since the left and right sides of any equation are equal to each other, we are indeed adding the same amount to both sides of an equation.Consider this simple example:Example:If we add these equations together, the terms containing y will add up to zero (2y plus -2y), and we will getor5x = 5 x = 1However, we are not finished yet—we know x, but we still don’t know y. We can solve for y by substituting the now known value for x into either of our original equations. This will produce an equation that can be solved for y:Now that we know both x and y, we can say that the solution to the system is the pair (1, 1/2).This last example was easy to see because of the fortunate presence of both a positive and a negative 2y. One is not always this lucky. ConsiderExample:Now there is nothing so obvious, but there is still something we can do. If we multiply the first equation by -3, we get(Don’t forget to multiply every term in the equation, on both sides of the equal sign). Now if we add them together the terms containing x will cancel:orAs in the previous example, now that we know y we can solve for x by substituting into either original equation. The first equation looks like the easiest to solve for x, so we will use it:And so the solution point is (-4, 7/2).Now we look at an even less obvious example:Example:Here there is nothing particularly attractive about going after either the x or the y. In either case, both equations will have to be multiplied by some factor to arrive at a common coefficient. This is very much like the situation you face trying to find a least common denominator for adding fractions, except that here we call it a Least Common Multiple (LCM). As a general rule, it is easiest to eliminate the variable with the smallest LCM. In this case that would be the y, because the LCM of 2 and 3 is 6. If we wanted to eliminate the x we would have to use a LCM of 10 (5 times 2). So, we choose to make the coefficients of y into plus and minus 6. To do this, the first equation must be multiplied by 3, and the second equation by 2:orNow adding these two together will eliminate the terms containing y:orx = 2We still need to substitute this value into one of the original equations to solve for y:Thus the solution is the point (2, 2). || When we used the Addition Method to solve a system of equations, we still had to do a substitution to solve for the remaining variable. With the substitution method, we solve one of the equations for one variable in terms of the other, and then substitute that into the other equation. This makes more sense with an example:Example:2y + x = 3 (1) 4y – 3x = 1 (2)Equation 1 looks like it would be easy to solve for x, so we take it and isolate x:2y + x = 3   x = 3 – 2y (3)Now we can use this result and substitute 3 - 2y in for x in equation 2:Now that we have y, we still need to substitute back in to get x. We could substitute back into any of the previous equations, but notice that equation 3 is already conveniently solved for x:And so the solution is (1, 1).As a rule, the substitution method is easier and quicker than the addition method when one of the equations is very simple and can readily be solved for one of the variables. || 
book3_chapter05_1	 || 2. Dependent Equations ·        Equations describe the same line ·        Infinite number of solutions Sometimes two equations might look different but actually describe the same line. For example, in The second equation is just two times the first equation, so they are actually equivalent and would both be equations of the same line. Because the two equations describe the same line, they have all their points in common; hence there are an infinite number of solutions to the system. Attempting to solve gives an identity If you try to solve a dependent system by algebraic methods, you will eventually run into an equation that is an identity. An identity is an equation that is always true, independent of the value(s) of any variable(s). For example, you might get an equation that looks like x = x, or 3 = 3. This would tell you that the system is a dependent system, and you could stop right there because you will never find a unique solution.  || 3. Inconsistent Equations Lines do not intersect (Parallel Lines; have the same slope) No solutions If two lines happen to have the same slope, but are not identically the same line, then they will never intersect. There is no pair (x, y) that could satisfy both equations, because there is no point (x, y) that is simultaneously on both lines. Thus these equations are said to be inconsistent, and there is no solution. The fact that they both have the same slope may not be obvious from the equations, because they are not written in one of the standard forms for straight lines. The slope is not readily evident in the form we use for writing systems of equations. (If you think about it you will see that the slope is the negative of the coefficient of x divided by the coefficient of y). Attempting to solve gives a false statement By attempting to solve such a system of equations algebraically, you are operating on a false assumption—namely that a solution exists. This will eventually lead you to a contradiction: a statement that is obviously false, regardless of the value(s) of the variable(s). At some point in your work you would get an obviously false equation like 3 = 4. This would tell you that the system of equations is inconsistent, and there is no solution.     Solution by Graphing For more complex systems, and especially those that contain non-linear equations, finding a solution by algebraic methods can be very difficult or even impossible. Using a graphing calculator (or a computer), you can graph the equations and actually see where they intersect. The calculator can then give you the coordinates of the intersection point. The only drawback to this method is that the solution is only an approximation, whereas the algebraic method gives the exact solution. In most practical situations, though, the precision of the calculator is sufficient. For more demanding scientific and engineering applications there are computer methods that can find approximate solutions to very high precision.    || 
book3_chapter05_1_1	2. Dependent Equations ·        Equations describe the same line ·        Infinite number of solutions Sometimes two equations might look different but actually describe the same line. For example, in The second equation is just two times the first equation, so they are actually equivalent and would both be equations of the same line. Because the two equations describe the same line, they have all their points in common; hence there are an infinite number of solutions to the system. Attempting to solve gives an identity If you try to solve a dependent system by algebraic methods, you will eventually run into an equation that is an identity. An identity is an equation that is always true, independent of the value(s) of any variable(s). For example, you might get an equation that looks like x = x, or 3 = 3. This would tell you that the system is a dependent system, and you could stop right there because you will never find a unique solution. 2. Dependent Equations ·        Equations describe the same line ·        Infinite number of solutions Sometimes two equations might look different but actually describe the same line. For example, in The second equation is just two times the first equation, so they are actually equivalent and would both be equations of the same line. Because the two equations describe the same line, they have all their points in common; hence there are an infinite number of solutions to the system. Attempting to solve gives an identity If you try to solve a dependent system by algebraic methods, you will eventually run into an equation that is an identity. An identity is an equation that is always true, independent of the value(s) of any variable(s). For example, you might get an equation that looks like x = x, or 3 = 3. This would tell you that the system is a dependent system, and you could stop right there because you will never find a unique solution.  || 
book3_chapter05_1_2	3. Inconsistent Equations Lines do not intersect (Parallel Lines; have the same slope) No solutions If two lines happen to have the same slope, but are not identically the same line, then they will never intersect. There is no pair (x, y) that could satisfy both equations, because there is no point (x, y) that is simultaneously on both lines. Thus these equations are said to be inconsistent, and there is no solution. The fact that they both have the same slope may not be obvious from the equations, because they are not written in one of the standard forms for straight lines. The slope is not readily evident in the form we use for writing systems of equations. (If you think about it you will see that the slope is the negative of the coefficient of x divided by the coefficient of y). Attempting to solve gives a false statement By attempting to solve such a system of equations algebraically, you are operating on a false assumption—namely that a solution exists. This will eventually lead you to a contradiction: a statement that is obviously false, regardless of the value(s) of the variable(s). At some point in your work you would get an obviously false equation like 3 = 4. This would tell you that the system of equations is inconsistent, and there is no solution.     Solution by Graphing For more complex systems, and especially those that contain non-linear equations, finding a solution by algebraic methods can be very difficult or even impossible. Using a graphing calculator (or a computer), you can graph the equations and actually see where they intersect. The calculator can then give you the coordinates of the intersection point. The only drawback to this method is that the solution is only an approximation, whereas the algebraic method gives the exact solution. In most practical situations, though, the precision of the calculator is sufficient. For more demanding scientific and engineering applications there are computer methods that can find approximate solutions to very high precision.   3. Inconsistent Equations Lines do not intersect (Parallel Lines; have the same slope) No solutions If two lines happen to have the same slope, but are not identically the same line, then they will never intersect. There is no pair (x, y) that could satisfy both equations, because there is no point (x, y) that is simultaneously on both lines. Thus these equations are said to be inconsistent, and there is no solution. The fact that they both have the same slope may not be obvious from the equations, because they are not written in one of the standard forms for straight lines. The slope is not readily evident in the form we use for writing systems of equations. (If you think about it you will see that the slope is the negative of the coefficient of x divided by the coefficient of y). Attempting to solve gives a false statement By attempting to solve such a system of equations algebraically, you are operating on a false assumption—namely that a solution exists. This will eventually lead you to a contradiction: a statement that is obviously false, regardless of the value(s) of the variable(s). At some point in your work you would get an obviously false equation like 3 = 4. This would tell you that the system of equations is inconsistent, and there is no solution.     Solution by Graphing For more complex systems, and especially those that contain non-linear equations, finding a solution by algebraic methods can be very difficult or even impossible. Using a graphing calculator (or a computer), you can graph the equations and actually see where they intersect. The calculator can then give you the coordinates of the intersection point. The only drawback to this method is that the solution is only an approximation, whereas the algebraic method gives the exact solution. In most practical situations, though, the precision of the calculator is sufficient. For more demanding scientific and engineering applications there are computer methods that can find approximate solutions to very high precision.    || 
book3_chapter05_2	The whole problem with solving a system of equations is that you cannot solve an equation that has two unknowns in it. You need an equation with only one variable so that you can isolate the variable on one side of the equation. Both methods that we will look at are techniques for eliminating one of the variables to give you an equation in just one unknown, which you can then solve by the usual methods.The first method of solving systems of linear equations is the addition method, in which the two equations are added together to eliminate one of the variables.Adding the equations means that we add the left sides of the two equations together, and we add the right sides together. This is legal because of the Addition Principle, which says that we can add the same amount to both sides of an equation. Since the left and right sides of any equation are equal to each other, we are indeed adding the same amount to both sides of an equation.Consider this simple example:Example:If we add these equations together, the terms containing y will add up to zero (2y plus -2y), and we will getor5x = 5 x = 1However, we are not finished yet—we know x, but we still don’t know y. We can solve for y by substituting the now known value for x into either of our original equations. This will produce an equation that can be solved for y:Now that we know both x and y, we can say that the solution to the system is the pair (1, 1/2).This last example was easy to see because of the fortunate presence of both a positive and a negative 2y. One is not always this lucky. ConsiderExample:Now there is nothing so obvious, but there is still something we can do. If we multiply the first equation by -3, we get(Don’t forget to multiply every term in the equation, on both sides of the equal sign). Now if we add them together the terms containing x will cancel:orAs in the previous example, now that we know y we can solve for x by substituting into either original equation. The first equation looks like the easiest to solve for x, so we will use it:And so the solution point is (-4, 7/2).Now we look at an even less obvious example:Example:Here there is nothing particularly attractive about going after either the x or the y. In either case, both equations will have to be multiplied by some factor to arrive at a common coefficient. This is very much like the situation you face trying to find a least common denominator for adding fractions, except that here we call it a Least Common Multiple (LCM). As a general rule, it is easiest to eliminate the variable with the smallest LCM. In this case that would be the y, because the LCM of 2 and 3 is 6. If we wanted to eliminate the x we would have to use a LCM of 10 (5 times 2). So, we choose to make the coefficients of y into plus and minus 6. To do this, the first equation must be multiplied by 3, and the second equation by 2:orNow adding these two together will eliminate the terms containing y:orx = 2We still need to substitute this value into one of the original equations to solve for y:Thus the solution is the point (2, 2).The whole problem with solving a system of equations is that you cannot solve an equation that has two unknowns in it. You need an equation with only one variable so that you can isolate the variable on one side of the equation. Both methods that we will look at are techniques for eliminating one of the variables to give you an equation in just one unknown, which you can then solve by the usual methods.The first method of solving systems of linear equations is the addition method, in which the two equations are added together to eliminate one of the variables.Adding the equations means that we add the left sides of the two equations together, and we add the right sides together. This is legal because of the Addition Principle, which says that we can add the same amount to both sides of an equation. Since the left and right sides of any equation are equal to each other, we are indeed adding the same amount to both sides of an equation.Consider this simple example:Example:If we add these equations together, the terms containing y will add up to zero (2y plus -2y), and we will getor5x = 5 x = 1However, we are not finished yet—we know x, but we still don’t know y. We can solve for y by substituting the now known value for x into either of our original equations. This will produce an equation that can be solved for y:Now that we know both x and y, we can say that the solution to the system is the pair (1, 1/2).This last example was easy to see because of the fortunate presence of both a positive and a negative 2y. One is not always this lucky. ConsiderExample:Now there is nothing so obvious, but there is still something we can do. If we multiply the first equation by -3, we get(Don’t forget to multiply every term in the equation, on both sides of the equal sign). Now if we add them together the terms containing x will cancel:orAs in the previous example, now that we know y we can solve for x by substituting into either original equation. The first equation looks like the easiest to solve for x, so we will use it:And so the solution point is (-4, 7/2).Now we look at an even less obvious example:Example:Here there is nothing particularly attractive about going after either the x or the y. In either case, both equations will have to be multiplied by some factor to arrive at a common coefficient. This is very much like the situation you face trying to find a least common denominator for adding fractions, except that here we call it a Least Common Multiple (LCM). As a general rule, it is easiest to eliminate the variable with the smallest LCM. In this case that would be the y, because the LCM of 2 and 3 is 6. If we wanted to eliminate the x we would have to use a LCM of 10 (5 times 2). So, we choose to make the coefficients of y into plus and minus 6. To do this, the first equation must be multiplied by 3, and the second equation by 2:orNow adding these two together will eliminate the terms containing y:orx = 2We still need to substitute this value into one of the original equations to solve for y:Thus the solution is the point (2, 2). || 
book3_chapter05_3	When we used the Addition Method to solve a system of equations, we still had to do a substitution to solve for the remaining variable. With the substitution method, we solve one of the equations for one variable in terms of the other, and then substitute that into the other equation. This makes more sense with an example:Example:2y + x = 3 (1) 4y – 3x = 1 (2)Equation 1 looks like it would be easy to solve for x, so we take it and isolate x:2y + x = 3   x = 3 – 2y (3)Now we can use this result and substitute 3 - 2y in for x in equation 2:Now that we have y, we still need to substitute back in to get x. We could substitute back into any of the previous equations, but notice that equation 3 is already conveniently solved for x:And so the solution is (1, 1).As a rule, the substitution method is easier and quicker than the addition method when one of the equations is very simple and can readily be solved for one of the variables.When we used the Addition Method to solve a system of equations, we still had to do a substitution to solve for the remaining variable. With the substitution method, we solve one of the equations for one variable in terms of the other, and then substitute that into the other equation. This makes more sense with an example:Example:2y + x = 3 (1) 4y – 3x = 1 (2)Equation 1 looks like it would be easy to solve for x, so we take it and isolate x:2y + x = 3   x = 3 – 2y (3)Now we can use this result and substitute 3 - 2y in for x in equation 2:Now that we have y, we still need to substitute back in to get x. We could substitute back into any of the previous equations, but notice that equation 3 is already conveniently solved for x:And so the solution is (1, 1).As a rule, the substitution method is easier and quicker than the addition method when one of the equations is very simple and can readily be solved for one of the variables. || 
book3_chapter03	 ||  || Plan 1.      First focus on the objective. What do you need to know in order to answer the question? 2.      Then look at the given information. How can you use that information to get what you need to know to answer the question? 3.      If you do not see a clear logical path leading from the given information to the solution, just try something. Look at the given information and think about what you can find from it, even if it is not what the question is asking for. Often you will find another piece of information that you can then use to answer the question.  || Write equations You need to express mathematically the logical connections between the given information and the answer you are seeking. This involves: 1.      Assigning variable names to the unknown quantities. The letter x is always popular, but it is a good idea to use something that reminds you what it represents, such as d for distance or t for time. The trickiest part of assigning variables is that you want to use a minimum number of different variables (just one if possible). If you know how two quantities are related, then you can express them both with just one variable. For example, if Jim is two years older than John is, you might let x stand for John’s age and (x + 2) stand for Jim’s age. 2.      Translate English into Math. Mathematics is a language, one that is particularly well suited to describing logical relationships. English, on the other hand, is much less precise. The next page is a table of English phrases and their corresponding mathematical meanings, but don’t take it too literally. The meaning of English words has to be taken in context.  || Solve Now you just have to solve the equation(s) for the unknown(s). Remember to answer the question that the problem asks.  || Check Think about your answer. Does your answer come out in the correct units? Is it reasonable? If you made a mistake somewhere, chances are your answer will not just be a little bit off, but will be completely ridiculous  || Note: The English language is notoriously imprecise, and these suggested translations should be taken only as a guide, not as absolutes.Subtraction minus “a number minus 2” x – 2 difference between “the difference between a number and 8” x – 8 from “2 from a number” n – 2 less “a number less 3” n – 3 less than “3 less than a number” y – 3 fewer than “2 fewer than a number” y – 2 decreased by “a number decreased by 2” x – 2 take away “a number take away 2” x – 2 Addition plus “a number plus 2” x + 2 and “3 and a number” 3 + n added to “8 added to a number” x + 8 greater than “3 greater than a number” n + 3 more than “3 more than a number” y + 3 increased by “a number increased by 2” y + 2 total “the total length” l1 + l2 sum of “The sum of length and width” l + w Multiplication times “5 times a number” 5n product “The product of 3 and a number” 3y at “3 at 1.59” 3 ´ 1.59 double, triple, etc. “double a number” 2x twice “twice a number” 2y of (fractions of) “three-fourths of a number” Division quotient of “The quotient of 5 and a number” Half of “half of a number” goes into “a numbergoes into 6 twice” per “The price is $8 per 50”   Equals Is, is the same as, gives, will be, was, is equivalent to   ||  || Number/Geometry Problems Example:  Find a number such that 5 more than one-half the number is three times the number. Let x be the unknown number.   Translating into math: 5 + x/2 = 3x Solving: (First multiply by 2 to clear the fraction) 5 + x/2 = 3x 10 + x = 6x 10 = 5x x = 2 Example:  If the perimeter of a rectangle is 10 inches, and one side is one inch longer than the other, how long are the sides? Let one side be x and the other side be x + 1. Then the given condition may be expressed as x + x + (x + 1) + (x + 1) = 10 Solving: 4x + 2 = 10 4x = 8 x = 2 so the sides have length 2 and 3.  || Rate-Time Problems ·        Rate = Quantity/Time or ·        Quantity = Rate × Time Example:  A fast employee can assemble 7 radios in an hour, and another slower employee can only assemble 5 radios per hour. If both employees work together, how long will it take to assemble 26 radios? The two together will build 7 + 5 = 12 radios in an hour, so their combined rate is 12 radios/hr. Using Time = Quantity/Rate, Time = 26/12 = 2 1/6 h or 2 hours 10 minutes Example:  you are driving along at 55 mph when you are passed by a car doing 85 mph. How long will it take for the car that passed you to be one mile ahead of you? We know the two rates, and we know that the difference between the two distances traveled will be one mile, but we don’t know the actual distances. Let D be the distance that you travel in time t, and D + 1 be the distance that the other car traveled in time t. Using the rate equation in the form distance = speed • time for each car we can write D = 55 t, and D + 1 = 85 t Substituting the first equation into the second, 55t + 1 = 85t -30t = -1 t = 1/30 hr(or 2 minutes)  || Mixture Problems Example:  How much of a 10% vinegar solution should be added to 2 cups of a 30% vinegar solution to make a 20% solution? Let x be the unknown amount of 10% solution. Write an equation for the amount of vinegar in each mixture: (amount of vinegar in first solution) + (amount of vinegar in second solution) = (amount of vinegar in total solution) 0.1x + 0.3(2) = 0.2(x + 2) 0.1x + 0.6 = 0.2x + 0.4 -0.1x = -0.2 x = 2 cups  || 
book3_chapter03_1	 || Plan 1.      First focus on the objective. What do you need to know in order to answer the question? 2.      Then look at the given information. How can you use that information to get what you need to know to answer the question? 3.      If you do not see a clear logical path leading from the given information to the solution, just try something. Look at the given information and think about what you can find from it, even if it is not what the question is asking for. Often you will find another piece of information that you can then use to answer the question.  || Write equations You need to express mathematically the logical connections between the given information and the answer you are seeking. This involves: 1.      Assigning variable names to the unknown quantities. The letter x is always popular, but it is a good idea to use something that reminds you what it represents, such as d for distance or t for time. The trickiest part of assigning variables is that you want to use a minimum number of different variables (just one if possible). If you know how two quantities are related, then you can express them both with just one variable. For example, if Jim is two years older than John is, you might let x stand for John’s age and (x + 2) stand for Jim’s age. 2.      Translate English into Math. Mathematics is a language, one that is particularly well suited to describing logical relationships. English, on the other hand, is much less precise. The next page is a table of English phrases and their corresponding mathematical meanings, but don’t take it too literally. The meaning of English words has to be taken in context.  || Solve Now you just have to solve the equation(s) for the unknown(s). Remember to answer the question that the problem asks.  || Check Think about your answer. Does your answer come out in the correct units? Is it reasonable? If you made a mistake somewhere, chances are your answer will not just be a little bit off, but will be completely ridiculous  || 
book3_chapter03_1_1	Plan 1.      First focus on the objective. What do you need to know in order to answer the question? 2.      Then look at the given information. How can you use that information to get what you need to know to answer the question? 3.      If you do not see a clear logical path leading from the given information to the solution, just try something. Look at the given information and think about what you can find from it, even if it is not what the question is asking for. Often you will find another piece of information that you can then use to answer the question. Plan 1.      First focus on the objective. What do you need to know in order to answer the question? 2.      Then look at the given information. How can you use that information to get what you need to know to answer the question? 3.      If you do not see a clear logical path leading from the given information to the solution, just try something. Look at the given information and think about what you can find from it, even if it is not what the question is asking for. Often you will find another piece of information that you can then use to answer the question.  || 
book3_chapter03_1_2	Write equations You need to express mathematically the logical connections between the given information and the answer you are seeking. This involves: 1.      Assigning variable names to the unknown quantities. The letter x is always popular, but it is a good idea to use something that reminds you what it represents, such as d for distance or t for time. The trickiest part of assigning variables is that you want to use a minimum number of different variables (just one if possible). If you know how two quantities are related, then you can express them both with just one variable. For example, if Jim is two years older than John is, you might let x stand for John’s age and (x + 2) stand for Jim’s age. 2.      Translate English into Math. Mathematics is a language, one that is particularly well suited to describing logical relationships. English, on the other hand, is much less precise. The next page is a table of English phrases and their corresponding mathematical meanings, but don’t take it too literally. The meaning of English words has to be taken in context. Write equations You need to express mathematically the logical connections between the given information and the answer you are seeking. This involves: 1.      Assigning variable names to the unknown quantities. The letter x is always popular, but it is a good idea to use something that reminds you what it represents, such as d for distance or t for time. The trickiest part of assigning variables is that you want to use a minimum number of different variables (just one if possible). If you know how two quantities are related, then you can express them both with just one variable. For example, if Jim is two years older than John is, you might let x stand for John’s age and (x + 2) stand for Jim’s age. 2.      Translate English into Math. Mathematics is a language, one that is particularly well suited to describing logical relationships. English, on the other hand, is much less precise. The next page is a table of English phrases and their corresponding mathematical meanings, but don’t take it too literally. The meaning of English words has to be taken in context.  || 
book3_chapter03_1_3	Solve Now you just have to solve the equation(s) for the unknown(s). Remember to answer the question that the problem asks. Solve Now you just have to solve the equation(s) for the unknown(s). Remember to answer the question that the problem asks.  || 
book3_chapter03_1_4	Check Think about your answer. Does your answer come out in the correct units? Is it reasonable? If you made a mistake somewhere, chances are your answer will not just be a little bit off, but will be completely ridiculous Check Think about your answer. Does your answer come out in the correct units? Is it reasonable? If you made a mistake somewhere, chances are your answer will not just be a little bit off, but will be completely ridiculous  || 
book3_chapter03_2	Note: The English language is notoriously imprecise, and these suggested translations should be taken only as a guide, not as absolutes.Subtraction minus “a number minus 2” x – 2 difference between “the difference between a number and 8” x – 8 from “2 from a number” n – 2 less “a number less 3” n – 3 less than “3 less than a number” y – 3 fewer than “2 fewer than a number” y – 2 decreased by “a number decreased by 2” x – 2 take away “a number take away 2” x – 2 Addition plus “a number plus 2” x + 2 and “3 and a number” 3 + n added to “8 added to a number” x + 8 greater than “3 greater than a number” n + 3 more than “3 more than a number” y + 3 increased by “a number increased by 2” y + 2 total “the total length” l1 + l2 sum of “The sum of length and width” l + w Multiplication times “5 times a number” 5n product “The product of 3 and a number” 3y at “3 at 1.59” 3 ´ 1.59 double, triple, etc. “double a number” 2x twice “twice a number” 2y of (fractions of) “three-fourths of a number” Division quotient of “The quotient of 5 and a number” Half of “half of a number” goes into “a numbergoes into 6 twice” per “The price is $8 per 50”   Equals Is, is the same as, gives, will be, was, is equivalent to  Note: The English language is notoriously imprecise, and these suggested translations should be taken only as a guide, not as absolutes.Subtraction minus “a number minus 2” x – 2 difference between “the difference between a number and 8” x – 8 from “2 from a number” n – 2 less “a number less 3” n – 3 less than “3 less than a number” y – 3 fewer than “2 fewer than a number” y – 2 decreased by “a number decreased by 2” x – 2 take away “a number take away 2” x – 2 Addition plus “a number plus 2” x + 2 and “3 and a number” 3 + n added to “8 added to a number” x + 8 greater than “3 greater than a number” n + 3 more than “3 more than a number” y + 3 increased by “a number increased by 2” y + 2 total “the total length” l1 + l2 sum of “The sum of length and width” l + w Multiplication times “5 times a number” 5n product “The product of 3 and a number” 3y at “3 at 1.59” 3 ´ 1.59 double, triple, etc. “double a number” 2x twice “twice a number” 2y of (fractions of) “three-fourths of a number” Division quotient of “The quotient of 5 and a number” Half of “half of a number” goes into “a numbergoes into 6 twice” per “The price is $8 per 50”   Equals Is, is the same as, gives, will be, was, is equivalent to   || 
book3_chapter03_3	 || Number/Geometry Problems Example:  Find a number such that 5 more than one-half the number is three times the number. Let x be the unknown number.   Translating into math: 5 + x/2 = 3x Solving: (First multiply by 2 to clear the fraction) 5 + x/2 = 3x 10 + x = 6x 10 = 5x x = 2 Example:  If the perimeter of a rectangle is 10 inches, and one side is one inch longer than the other, how long are the sides? Let one side be x and the other side be x + 1. Then the given condition may be expressed as x + x + (x + 1) + (x + 1) = 10 Solving: 4x + 2 = 10 4x = 8 x = 2 so the sides have length 2 and 3.  || Rate-Time Problems ·        Rate = Quantity/Time or ·        Quantity = Rate × Time Example:  A fast employee can assemble 7 radios in an hour, and another slower employee can only assemble 5 radios per hour. If both employees work together, how long will it take to assemble 26 radios? The two together will build 7 + 5 = 12 radios in an hour, so their combined rate is 12 radios/hr. Using Time = Quantity/Rate, Time = 26/12 = 2 1/6 h or 2 hours 10 minutes Example:  you are driving along at 55 mph when you are passed by a car doing 85 mph. How long will it take for the car that passed you to be one mile ahead of you? We know the two rates, and we know that the difference between the two distances traveled will be one mile, but we don’t know the actual distances. Let D be the distance that you travel in time t, and D + 1 be the distance that the other car traveled in time t. Using the rate equation in the form distance = speed • time for each car we can write D = 55 t, and D + 1 = 85 t Substituting the first equation into the second, 55t + 1 = 85t -30t = -1 t = 1/30 hr(or 2 minutes)  || Mixture Problems Example:  How much of a 10% vinegar solution should be added to 2 cups of a 30% vinegar solution to make a 20% solution? Let x be the unknown amount of 10% solution. Write an equation for the amount of vinegar in each mixture: (amount of vinegar in first solution) + (amount of vinegar in second solution) = (amount of vinegar in total solution) 0.1x + 0.3(2) = 0.2(x + 2) 0.1x + 0.6 = 0.2x + 0.4 -0.1x = -0.2 x = 2 cups  || 
book3_chapter03_3_1	Number/Geometry Problems Example:  Find a number such that 5 more than one-half the number is three times the number. Let x be the unknown number.   Translating into math: 5 + x/2 = 3x Solving: (First multiply by 2 to clear the fraction) 5 + x/2 = 3x 10 + x = 6x 10 = 5x x = 2 Example:  If the perimeter of a rectangle is 10 inches, and one side is one inch longer than the other, how long are the sides? Let one side be x and the other side be x + 1. Then the given condition may be expressed as x + x + (x + 1) + (x + 1) = 10 Solving: 4x + 2 = 10 4x = 8 x = 2 so the sides have length 2 and 3. Number/Geometry Problems Example:  Find a number such that 5 more than one-half the number is three times the number. Let x be the unknown number.   Translating into math: 5 + x/2 = 3x Solving: (First multiply by 2 to clear the fraction) 5 + x/2 = 3x 10 + x = 6x 10 = 5x x = 2 Example:  If the perimeter of a rectangle is 10 inches, and one side is one inch longer than the other, how long are the sides? Let one side be x and the other side be x + 1. Then the given condition may be expressed as x + x + (x + 1) + (x + 1) = 10 Solving: 4x + 2 = 10 4x = 8 x = 2 so the sides have length 2 and 3.  || 
book3_chapter03_3_2	Rate-Time Problems ·        Rate = Quantity/Time or ·        Quantity = Rate × Time Example:  A fast employee can assemble 7 radios in an hour, and another slower employee can only assemble 5 radios per hour. If both employees work together, how long will it take to assemble 26 radios? The two together will build 7 + 5 = 12 radios in an hour, so their combined rate is 12 radios/hr. Using Time = Quantity/Rate, Time = 26/12 = 2 1/6 h or 2 hours 10 minutes Example:  you are driving along at 55 mph when you are passed by a car doing 85 mph. How long will it take for the car that passed you to be one mile ahead of you? We know the two rates, and we know that the difference between the two distances traveled will be one mile, but we don’t know the actual distances. Let D be the distance that you travel in time t, and D + 1 be the distance that the other car traveled in time t. Using the rate equation in the form distance = speed • time for each car we can write D = 55 t, and D + 1 = 85 t Substituting the first equation into the second, 55t + 1 = 85t -30t = -1 t = 1/30 hr(or 2 minutes) Rate-Time Problems ·        Rate = Quantity/Time or ·        Quantity = Rate × Time Example:  A fast employee can assemble 7 radios in an hour, and another slower employee can only assemble 5 radios per hour. If both employees work together, how long will it take to assemble 26 radios? The two together will build 7 + 5 = 12 radios in an hour, so their combined rate is 12 radios/hr. Using Time = Quantity/Rate, Time = 26/12 = 2 1/6 h or 2 hours 10 minutes Example:  you are driving along at 55 mph when you are passed by a car doing 85 mph. How long will it take for the car that passed you to be one mile ahead of you? We know the two rates, and we know that the difference between the two distances traveled will be one mile, but we don’t know the actual distances. Let D be the distance that you travel in time t, and D + 1 be the distance that the other car traveled in time t. Using the rate equation in the form distance = speed • time for each car we can write D = 55 t, and D + 1 = 85 t Substituting the first equation into the second, 55t + 1 = 85t -30t = -1 t = 1/30 hr(or 2 minutes)  || 
book3_chapter03_3_3	Mixture Problems Example:  How much of a 10% vinegar solution should be added to 2 cups of a 30% vinegar solution to make a 20% solution? Let x be the unknown amount of 10% solution. Write an equation for the amount of vinegar in each mixture: (amount of vinegar in first solution) + (amount of vinegar in second solution) = (amount of vinegar in total solution) 0.1x + 0.3(2) = 0.2(x + 2) 0.1x + 0.6 = 0.2x + 0.4 -0.1x = -0.2 x = 2 cups Mixture Problems Example:  How much of a 10% vinegar solution should be added to 2 cups of a 30% vinegar solution to make a 20% solution? Let x be the unknown amount of 10% solution. Write an equation for the amount of vinegar in each mixture: (amount of vinegar in first solution) + (amount of vinegar in second solution) = (amount of vinegar in total solution) 0.1x + 0.3(2) = 0.2(x + 2) 0.1x + 0.6 = 0.2x + 0.4 -0.1x = -0.2 x = 2 cups  || 
book3_chapter08	 ||  || Properties The above definition can be extended by requiring other powers (i.e. other than positive integers) to behave like the positive integer powers. For example, we know that xn xm = xn + m for positive integer powers, because we can write out the multiplication. Example:              x2 x5 = (x · x)(x · x · x · x · x) = x · x · x · x · x · x · x = x7 We now require that this rule hold even if n and m are not positive integers, although this means that we can no longer write out the multiplication (How do you multiply something by itself a negative number of times? Or a fractional number of times?). We can find several new properties of exponents by similarly considering the rule for dividing powers: (We will assume without always mentioning it that  x ¹ 0). This rule is quite reasonable when m and n are positive integers and m > n. For example: where indeed 5 – 2 = 3. However, in other cases it leads to situation where we have to define new properties for exponents. First, suppose that m < n. We can simplify it by canceling like factors as before: But following our rule would give In order for these two results to be consistent, it must be true that or, in general, ·        Notice that a minus sign in the exponent does not make the result negative—instead, it makes it the reciprocal of the result with the positive exponent. Now suppose that n = m. The fraction becomes , which is obviously equal to 1. But our rule gives Again, in order to remain consistent we have to say that these two results are equal, and so we define             x0 = 1 for all values of x (except x = 0, because 00 is undefined)    ||  || Square Roots The square root is the inverse function of squaring (strictly speaking only for positive numbers, because sign information can be lost) Principal Root Every positive number has two square roots, one positive and one negative Example:  2 is a square root of 4 because 2 ´ 2 = 4, but –2 is also a square root of 4 because (–2) ´ (–2) = 4 To avoid confusion between the two we define the symbol (this symbol is called a radical) to mean the principal or positive square root. The convention is: For any positive number x,  is the positive root, and  is the negative root. If you mean the negative root, use a minus sign in front of the radical. Example:  Properties  for all non-negative numbers x   for all non-negative numbers x   However, if x happens to be negative, then squaring it will produce a positive number, which will have a positive square root, so   for all real numbers x ·        You don’t need the absolute value sign if you already know that x is positive. For example, , and saying anything about the absolute value of 2 would be superfluous. You only need the absolute value signs when you are taking the square root of a square of a variable, which may be positive or negative. ·        The square root of a negative number is undefined, because anything times itself will give a positive (or zero) result.  (your calculator will probably say ERROR) ·        Note: Zero has only one square root (itself). Zero is considered neither positive nor negative. WARNING: Do not attempt to do something like the distributive law with radicals:    (WRONG) or  (WRONG). This is a violation of the order of operations. The radical operates on the result of everything inside of it, not individual terms. Try it with numbers to see:   (CORRECT) But if we (incorrectly) do the square roots first, we get  (WRONG) However, radicals do distribute over products:   and provided that both a and b are non-negative (otherwise you would have the square root of a negative number).  || Perfect Squares Some numbers are perfect squares, that is, their square roots are integers: 0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, etc. It turns out that all other whole numbers have irrational square roots: , , ,  etc. are all irrational numbers. ·         The square root of an integer is either perfect or irrational  ||  for all real numbers if both x and y are non-negative, and if both x and y are non-negative, and y is not zeroWARNING: Never cancel something inside a radical with something outside of it:  WRONG! If you did this you would be canceling a 3 with, and they are certainly not the same number.The general plan for reducing the radicand is to remove any perfect powers. We are only considering square roots here, so what we are looking for is any factor that is a perfect square. In the following examples we will assume that x is positive.Example: In this case the 16 was recognized as a perfect square and removed from the radical, causing it to become its square root, 4.Example:  Although x3 is not a perfect square, it has a factor of x2, which is the square of x.Example:  Here the perfect square factor is x4, which is the square of x2.Example:  In this example we could take out a 4 and a factor of x2, leaving behind a 2 and one factor of x.·        The basic idea is to factor out anything that is “square-rootable” and then go ahead and square root it. ||  || If the Denominator Contains Two Terms If the denominator contains a square root plus some other terms, a special trick does the job. It makes use of the difference of two squares formula:               (a + b)(a – b) = a2 – b2   Suppose that your denominator looked like a + b, where b was a square root and a represents all the other terms. If you multiply it by a – b, then you will end up with the square of your square root, which means no more square roots. It is called the conjugate when you replace the plus with a minus (or vice-versa). An example would help.   Example:  Given: Multiply numerator and denominator by the conjugate of the denominator: Multiply out:  || 
book3_chapter08_1	 || Properties The above definition can be extended by requiring other powers (i.e. other than positive integers) to behave like the positive integer powers. For example, we know that xn xm = xn + m for positive integer powers, because we can write out the multiplication. Example:              x2 x5 = (x · x)(x · x · x · x · x) = x · x · x · x · x · x · x = x7 We now require that this rule hold even if n and m are not positive integers, although this means that we can no longer write out the multiplication (How do you multiply something by itself a negative number of times? Or a fractional number of times?). We can find several new properties of exponents by similarly considering the rule for dividing powers: (We will assume without always mentioning it that  x ¹ 0). This rule is quite reasonable when m and n are positive integers and m > n. For example: where indeed 5 – 2 = 3. However, in other cases it leads to situation where we have to define new properties for exponents. First, suppose that m < n. We can simplify it by canceling like factors as before: But following our rule would give In order for these two results to be consistent, it must be true that or, in general, ·        Notice that a minus sign in the exponent does not make the result negative—instead, it makes it the reciprocal of the result with the positive exponent. Now suppose that n = m. The fraction becomes , which is obviously equal to 1. But our rule gives Again, in order to remain consistent we have to say that these two results are equal, and so we define             x0 = 1 for all values of x (except x = 0, because 00 is undefined)    || 
book3_chapter08_1_1	Properties The above definition can be extended by requiring other powers (i.e. other than positive integers) to behave like the positive integer powers. For example, we know that xn xm = xn + m for positive integer powers, because we can write out the multiplication. Example:              x2 x5 = (x · x)(x · x · x · x · x) = x · x · x · x · x · x · x = x7 We now require that this rule hold even if n and m are not positive integers, although this means that we can no longer write out the multiplication (How do you multiply something by itself a negative number of times? Or a fractional number of times?). We can find several new properties of exponents by similarly considering the rule for dividing powers: (We will assume without always mentioning it that  x ¹ 0). This rule is quite reasonable when m and n are positive integers and m > n. For example: where indeed 5 – 2 = 3. However, in other cases it leads to situation where we have to define new properties for exponents. First, suppose that m < n. We can simplify it by canceling like factors as before: But following our rule would give In order for these two results to be consistent, it must be true that or, in general, ·        Notice that a minus sign in the exponent does not make the result negative—instead, it makes it the reciprocal of the result with the positive exponent. Now suppose that n = m. The fraction becomes , which is obviously equal to 1. But our rule gives Again, in order to remain consistent we have to say that these two results are equal, and so we define             x0 = 1 for all values of x (except x = 0, because 00 is undefined)   Properties The above definition can be extended by requiring other powers (i.e. other than positive integers) to behave like the positive integer powers. For example, we know that xn xm = xn + m for positive integer powers, because we can write out the multiplication. Example:              x2 x5 = (x · x)(x · x · x · x · x) = x · x · x · x · x · x · x = x7 We now require that this rule hold even if n and m are not positive integers, although this means that we can no longer write out the multiplication (How do you multiply something by itself a negative number of times? Or a fractional number of times?). We can find several new properties of exponents by similarly considering the rule for dividing powers: (We will assume without always mentioning it that  x ¹ 0). This rule is quite reasonable when m and n are positive integers and m > n. For example: where indeed 5 – 2 = 3. However, in other cases it leads to situation where we have to define new properties for exponents. First, suppose that m < n. We can simplify it by canceling like factors as before: But following our rule would give In order for these two results to be consistent, it must be true that or, in general, ·        Notice that a minus sign in the exponent does not make the result negative—instead, it makes it the reciprocal of the result with the positive exponent. Now suppose that n = m. The fraction becomes , which is obviously equal to 1. But our rule gives Again, in order to remain consistent we have to say that these two results are equal, and so we define             x0 = 1 for all values of x (except x = 0, because 00 is undefined)    || 
book3_chapter08_2	 || Square Roots The square root is the inverse function of squaring (strictly speaking only for positive numbers, because sign information can be lost) Principal Root Every positive number has two square roots, one positive and one negative Example:  2 is a square root of 4 because 2 ´ 2 = 4, but –2 is also a square root of 4 because (–2) ´ (–2) = 4 To avoid confusion between the two we define the symbol (this symbol is called a radical) to mean the principal or positive square root. The convention is: For any positive number x,  is the positive root, and  is the negative root. If you mean the negative root, use a minus sign in front of the radical. Example:  Properties  for all non-negative numbers x   for all non-negative numbers x   However, if x happens to be negative, then squaring it will produce a positive number, which will have a positive square root, so   for all real numbers x ·        You don’t need the absolute value sign if you already know that x is positive. For example, , and saying anything about the absolute value of 2 would be superfluous. You only need the absolute value signs when you are taking the square root of a square of a variable, which may be positive or negative. ·        The square root of a negative number is undefined, because anything times itself will give a positive (or zero) result.  (your calculator will probably say ERROR) ·        Note: Zero has only one square root (itself). Zero is considered neither positive nor negative. WARNING: Do not attempt to do something like the distributive law with radicals:    (WRONG) or  (WRONG). This is a violation of the order of operations. The radical operates on the result of everything inside of it, not individual terms. Try it with numbers to see:   (CORRECT) But if we (incorrectly) do the square roots first, we get  (WRONG) However, radicals do distribute over products:   and provided that both a and b are non-negative (otherwise you would have the square root of a negative number).  || Perfect Squares Some numbers are perfect squares, that is, their square roots are integers: 0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, etc. It turns out that all other whole numbers have irrational square roots: , , ,  etc. are all irrational numbers. ·         The square root of an integer is either perfect or irrational  || 
book3_chapter08_2_1	Square Roots The square root is the inverse function of squaring (strictly speaking only for positive numbers, because sign information can be lost) Principal Root Every positive number has two square roots, one positive and one negative Example:  2 is a square root of 4 because 2 ´ 2 = 4, but –2 is also a square root of 4 because (–2) ´ (–2) = 4 To avoid confusion between the two we define the symbol (this symbol is called a radical) to mean the principal or positive square root. The convention is: For any positive number x,  is the positive root, and  is the negative root. If you mean the negative root, use a minus sign in front of the radical. Example:  Properties  for all non-negative numbers x   for all non-negative numbers x   However, if x happens to be negative, then squaring it will produce a positive number, which will have a positive square root, so   for all real numbers x ·        You don’t need the absolute value sign if you already know that x is positive. For example, , and saying anything about the absolute value of 2 would be superfluous. You only need the absolute value signs when you are taking the square root of a square of a variable, which may be positive or negative. ·        The square root of a negative number is undefined, because anything times itself will give a positive (or zero) result.  (your calculator will probably say ERROR) ·        Note: Zero has only one square root (itself). Zero is considered neither positive nor negative. WARNING: Do not attempt to do something like the distributive law with radicals:    (WRONG) or  (WRONG). This is a violation of the order of operations. The radical operates on the result of everything inside of it, not individual terms. Try it with numbers to see:   (CORRECT) But if we (incorrectly) do the square roots first, we get  (WRONG) However, radicals do distribute over products:   and provided that both a and b are non-negative (otherwise you would have the square root of a negative number). Square Roots The square root is the inverse function of squaring (strictly speaking only for positive numbers, because sign information can be lost) Principal Root Every positive number has two square roots, one positive and one negative Example:  2 is a square root of 4 because 2 ´ 2 = 4, but –2 is also a square root of 4 because (–2) ´ (–2) = 4 To avoid confusion between the two we define the symbol (this symbol is called a radical) to mean the principal or positive square root. The convention is: For any positive number x,  is the positive root, and  is the negative root. If you mean the negative root, use a minus sign in front of the radical. Example:  Properties  for all non-negative numbers x   for all non-negative numbers x   However, if x happens to be negative, then squaring it will produce a positive number, which will have a positive square root, so   for all real numbers x ·        You don’t need the absolute value sign if you already know that x is positive. For example, , and saying anything about the absolute value of 2 would be superfluous. You only need the absolute value signs when you are taking the square root of a square of a variable, which may be positive or negative. ·        The square root of a negative number is undefined, because anything times itself will give a positive (or zero) result.  (your calculator will probably say ERROR) ·        Note: Zero has only one square root (itself). Zero is considered neither positive nor negative. WARNING: Do not attempt to do something like the distributive law with radicals:    (WRONG) or  (WRONG). This is a violation of the order of operations. The radical operates on the result of everything inside of it, not individual terms. Try it with numbers to see:   (CORRECT) But if we (incorrectly) do the square roots first, we get  (WRONG) However, radicals do distribute over products:   and provided that both a and b are non-negative (otherwise you would have the square root of a negative number).  || 
book3_chapter08_2_2	Perfect Squares Some numbers are perfect squares, that is, their square roots are integers: 0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, etc. It turns out that all other whole numbers have irrational square roots: , , ,  etc. are all irrational numbers. ·         The square root of an integer is either perfect or irrational Perfect Squares Some numbers are perfect squares, that is, their square roots are integers: 0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, etc. It turns out that all other whole numbers have irrational square roots: , , ,  etc. are all irrational numbers. ·         The square root of an integer is either perfect or irrational  || 
book3_chapter08_3	 for all real numbers if both x and y are non-negative, and if both x and y are non-negative, and y is not zeroWARNING: Never cancel something inside a radical with something outside of it:  WRONG! If you did this you would be canceling a 3 with, and they are certainly not the same number.The general plan for reducing the radicand is to remove any perfect powers. We are only considering square roots here, so what we are looking for is any factor that is a perfect square. In the following examples we will assume that x is positive.Example: In this case the 16 was recognized as a perfect square and removed from the radical, causing it to become its square root, 4.Example:  Although x3 is not a perfect square, it has a factor of x2, which is the square of x.Example:  Here the perfect square factor is x4, which is the square of x2.Example:  In this example we could take out a 4 and a factor of x2, leaving behind a 2 and one factor of x.·        The basic idea is to factor out anything that is “square-rootable” and then go ahead and square root it. for all real numbers if both x and y are non-negative, and if both x and y are non-negative, and y is not zeroWARNING: Never cancel something inside a radical with something outside of it:  WRONG! If you did this you would be canceling a 3 with, and they are certainly not the same number.The general plan for reducing the radicand is to remove any perfect powers. We are only considering square roots here, so what we are looking for is any factor that is a perfect square. In the following examples we will assume that x is positive.Example: In this case the 16 was recognized as a perfect square and removed from the radical, causing it to become its square root, 4.Example:  Although x3 is not a perfect square, it has a factor of x2, which is the square of x.Example:  Here the perfect square factor is x4, which is the square of x2.Example:  In this example we could take out a 4 and a factor of x2, leaving behind a 2 and one factor of x.·        The basic idea is to factor out anything that is “square-rootable” and then go ahead and square root it. || 
book3_chapter08_4	 || If the Denominator Contains Two Terms If the denominator contains a square root plus some other terms, a special trick does the job. It makes use of the difference of two squares formula:               (a + b)(a – b) = a2 – b2   Suppose that your denominator looked like a + b, where b was a square root and a represents all the other terms. If you multiply it by a – b, then you will end up with the square of your square root, which means no more square roots. It is called the conjugate when you replace the plus with a minus (or vice-versa). An example would help.   Example:  Given: Multiply numerator and denominator by the conjugate of the denominator: Multiply out:  || 
book3_chapter08_4_1	If the Denominator Contains Two Terms If the denominator contains a square root plus some other terms, a special trick does the job. It makes use of the difference of two squares formula:               (a + b)(a – b) = a2 – b2   Suppose that your denominator looked like a + b, where b was a square root and a represents all the other terms. If you multiply it by a – b, then you will end up with the square of your square root, which means no more square roots. It is called the conjugate when you replace the plus with a minus (or vice-versa). An example would help.   Example:  Given: Multiply numerator and denominator by the conjugate of the denominator: Multiply out: If the Denominator Contains Two Terms If the denominator contains a square root plus some other terms, a special trick does the job. It makes use of the difference of two squares formula:               (a + b)(a – b) = a2 – b2   Suppose that your denominator looked like a + b, where b was a square root and a represents all the other terms. If you multiply it by a – b, then you will end up with the square of your square root, which means no more square roots. It is called the conjugate when you replace the plus with a minus (or vice-versa). An example would help.   Example:  Given: Multiply numerator and denominator by the conjugate of the denominator: Multiply out:  || 
book3_chapter09	 ||  || Roots Synonyms: Solutions or Zeros  Can have 0, 1, or 2 real roots Consider the graph of quadratic equations. The quadratic equation looks like ax2 + bx + c = 0, but if we take the quadratic expression on the left and set it equal to y, we will have a function: y = ax2 + bx + c When we graph y vs. x, we find that we get a curve called a parabola. The specific values of a, b, and c control where the curve is relative to the origin (left, right, up, or down), and how rapidly it spreads out. Also, if a is negative then the parabola will be upside-down. What does this have to do with finding the solutions to our original quadratic equation? Well, whenever y = 0 then the equation y = ax2 + bx + c is the same as our original equation. Graphically, y is zero whenever the curve crosses the x-axis. Thus, the solutions to the original quadratic equation (ax2 + bx + c = 0) are the values of x where the function (y = ax2 + bx + c) crosses the x-axis. From the figures below, you can see that it can cross the x-axis once, twice, or not at all.    Actually, if you have a graphing calculator this technique can be used to find solutions to any equation, not just quadratics. All you need to do is   Move all the terms to one side, so that it is equal to zero Set the resulting expression equal to y (in place of zero) Enter the function into your calculator and graph it Look for places where the graph crosses the x-axis   Your graphing calculator most likely has a function that will automatically find these intercepts and give you the x-values with great precision. Of course, no matter how many decimal places you have it is still just an approximation of the exact solution. In real life, though, a close approximation is often good enough.  || No First-Degree Term If the quadratic has no linear, or first-degree term (i.e. b = 0), then it can be solved by isolating the x2 and taking square roots of both sides: You need both the positive and negative roots because , so x could be either positive or negative. This is only going to give a real solution if either a or c is negative (but not both) ||  || Trinomials When a quadratic has all three terms, you can still solve it with the zero-product rule if you are able to factor the trinomial. ·                     Remember, not all trinomial quadratics can be factored with integer constants If it can be factored, then it can be written as a product of two binomials. The zero-product rule can then be used to set each of these factors equal to zero, resulting in two equations that are both simple linear equations that can be solved for x. See the above example for the zero-product rule to see how this works. A more thorough discussion of factoring trinomials may be found in the chapter on polynomials, but here is a quick review:  || Tips for Factoring Trinomials 1.                  Clear fractions (by multiplying through by the common denominator) 2.                  Remove common factors if possible 3.                  If the coefficient of the x2 term is 1, then x2 + bx + c = (x + n)(x + m), where n and m                                              i.      Multiply to give c                                            ii.      Add to give b 4.                  If the coefficient of the x2 term is not 1, then use either a.       Guess-and Check                                                    i.      List the factors of the coefficient of the x2 term                                                  ii.      List the factors of the constant term                                                 iii.      Test all the possible binomials you can make from these factors b.      Factoring by Grouping                                                    i.      Find the product ac                                                  ii.      Find two factors of ac that add to give b                                                 iii.      Split the middle term into the sum of two terms, using these two factors                                                iv.      Group the terms into pairs                                                 v.      Factor out the common binomial    ||  || If the Coefficient of x2 is Not 1 First divide through by the coefficient, then proceed with completing the square. Example:   Given Equation: Divide through by coefficient of x2: (in this case a 2) Move constant to other side: Add new constant term: (the square of half the coefficient of x, in this case 9/16): Write as a binomial squared: (the constant in the binomial is half the coefficient of x) Square root both sides: (remember to use plus-or-minus) Solve for x:                  Thus               x = ½  or  x = -2  ||  || Deriving the Quadratic Formula The quadratic formula can be derived by using the technique of completing the square on the general quadratic formula: Given: Divide through by a: Move the constant term to the right side: Add the square of one-half the coefficient of x to both sides: Factor the left side (which is now a perfect square), and rearrange the right side: Get the right side over a common denominator: Take the square root of both sides (remembering to use plus-or-minus): Solve for x:  || 
book3_chapter09_1	 || Roots Synonyms: Solutions or Zeros  Can have 0, 1, or 2 real roots Consider the graph of quadratic equations. The quadratic equation looks like ax2 + bx + c = 0, but if we take the quadratic expression on the left and set it equal to y, we will have a function: y = ax2 + bx + c When we graph y vs. x, we find that we get a curve called a parabola. The specific values of a, b, and c control where the curve is relative to the origin (left, right, up, or down), and how rapidly it spreads out. Also, if a is negative then the parabola will be upside-down. What does this have to do with finding the solutions to our original quadratic equation? Well, whenever y = 0 then the equation y = ax2 + bx + c is the same as our original equation. Graphically, y is zero whenever the curve crosses the x-axis. Thus, the solutions to the original quadratic equation (ax2 + bx + c = 0) are the values of x where the function (y = ax2 + bx + c) crosses the x-axis. From the figures below, you can see that it can cross the x-axis once, twice, or not at all.    Actually, if you have a graphing calculator this technique can be used to find solutions to any equation, not just quadratics. All you need to do is   Move all the terms to one side, so that it is equal to zero Set the resulting expression equal to y (in place of zero) Enter the function into your calculator and graph it Look for places where the graph crosses the x-axis   Your graphing calculator most likely has a function that will automatically find these intercepts and give you the x-values with great precision. Of course, no matter how many decimal places you have it is still just an approximation of the exact solution. In real life, though, a close approximation is often good enough.  || 
book3_chapter09_1_1	Roots Synonyms: Solutions or Zeros  Can have 0, 1, or 2 real roots Consider the graph of quadratic equations. The quadratic equation looks like ax2 + bx + c = 0, but if we take the quadratic expression on the left and set it equal to y, we will have a function: y = ax2 + bx + c When we graph y vs. x, we find that we get a curve called a parabola. The specific values of a, b, and c control where the curve is relative to the origin (left, right, up, or down), and how rapidly it spreads out. Also, if a is negative then the parabola will be upside-down. What does this have to do with finding the solutions to our original quadratic equation? Well, whenever y = 0 then the equation y = ax2 + bx + c is the same as our original equation. Graphically, y is zero whenever the curve crosses the x-axis. Thus, the solutions to the original quadratic equation (ax2 + bx + c = 0) are the values of x where the function (y = ax2 + bx + c) crosses the x-axis. From the figures below, you can see that it can cross the x-axis once, twice, or not at all.    Actually, if you have a graphing calculator this technique can be used to find solutions to any equation, not just quadratics. All you need to do is   Move all the terms to one side, so that it is equal to zero Set the resulting expression equal to y (in place of zero) Enter the function into your calculator and graph it Look for places where the graph crosses the x-axis   Your graphing calculator most likely has a function that will automatically find these intercepts and give you the x-values with great precision. Of course, no matter how many decimal places you have it is still just an approximation of the exact solution. In real life, though, a close approximation is often good enough. Roots Synonyms: Solutions or Zeros  Can have 0, 1, or 2 real roots Consider the graph of quadratic equations. The quadratic equation looks like ax2 + bx + c = 0, but if we take the quadratic expression on the left and set it equal to y, we will have a function: y = ax2 + bx + c When we graph y vs. x, we find that we get a curve called a parabola. The specific values of a, b, and c control where the curve is relative to the origin (left, right, up, or down), and how rapidly it spreads out. Also, if a is negative then the parabola will be upside-down. What does this have to do with finding the solutions to our original quadratic equation? Well, whenever y = 0 then the equation y = ax2 + bx + c is the same as our original equation. Graphically, y is zero whenever the curve crosses the x-axis. Thus, the solutions to the original quadratic equation (ax2 + bx + c = 0) are the values of x where the function (y = ax2 + bx + c) crosses the x-axis. From the figures below, you can see that it can cross the x-axis once, twice, or not at all.    Actually, if you have a graphing calculator this technique can be used to find solutions to any equation, not just quadratics. All you need to do is   Move all the terms to one side, so that it is equal to zero Set the resulting expression equal to y (in place of zero) Enter the function into your calculator and graph it Look for places where the graph crosses the x-axis   Your graphing calculator most likely has a function that will automatically find these intercepts and give you the x-values with great precision. Of course, no matter how many decimal places you have it is still just an approximation of the exact solution. In real life, though, a close approximation is often good enough.  || 
book3_chapter09_2	No First-Degree Term If the quadratic has no linear, or first-degree term (i.e. b = 0), then it can be solved by isolating the x2 and taking square roots of both sides: You need both the positive and negative roots because , so x could be either positive or negative. This is only going to give a real solution if either a or c is negative (but not both)No First-Degree Term If the quadratic has no linear, or first-degree term (i.e. b = 0), then it can be solved by isolating the x2 and taking square roots of both sides: You need both the positive and negative roots because , so x could be either positive or negative. This is only going to give a real solution if either a or c is negative (but not both) || 
book3_chapter09_3	 || Trinomials When a quadratic has all three terms, you can still solve it with the zero-product rule if you are able to factor the trinomial. ·                     Remember, not all trinomial quadratics can be factored with integer constants If it can be factored, then it can be written as a product of two binomials. The zero-product rule can then be used to set each of these factors equal to zero, resulting in two equations that are both simple linear equations that can be solved for x. See the above example for the zero-product rule to see how this works. A more thorough discussion of factoring trinomials may be found in the chapter on polynomials, but here is a quick review:  || Tips for Factoring Trinomials 1.                  Clear fractions (by multiplying through by the common denominator) 2.                  Remove common factors if possible 3.                  If the coefficient of the x2 term is 1, then x2 + bx + c = (x + n)(x + m), where n and m                                              i.      Multiply to give c                                            ii.      Add to give b 4.                  If the coefficient of the x2 term is not 1, then use either a.       Guess-and Check                                                    i.      List the factors of the coefficient of the x2 term                                                  ii.      List the factors of the constant term                                                 iii.      Test all the possible binomials you can make from these factors b.      Factoring by Grouping                                                    i.      Find the product ac                                                  ii.      Find two factors of ac that add to give b                                                 iii.      Split the middle term into the sum of two terms, using these two factors                                                iv.      Group the terms into pairs                                                 v.      Factor out the common binomial    || 
book3_chapter09_3_1	Trinomials When a quadratic has all three terms, you can still solve it with the zero-product rule if you are able to factor the trinomial. ·                     Remember, not all trinomial quadratics can be factored with integer constants If it can be factored, then it can be written as a product of two binomials. The zero-product rule can then be used to set each of these factors equal to zero, resulting in two equations that are both simple linear equations that can be solved for x. See the above example for the zero-product rule to see how this works. A more thorough discussion of factoring trinomials may be found in the chapter on polynomials, but here is a quick review: Trinomials When a quadratic has all three terms, you can still solve it with the zero-product rule if you are able to factor the trinomial. ·                     Remember, not all trinomial quadratics can be factored with integer constants If it can be factored, then it can be written as a product of two binomials. The zero-product rule can then be used to set each of these factors equal to zero, resulting in two equations that are both simple linear equations that can be solved for x. See the above example for the zero-product rule to see how this works. A more thorough discussion of factoring trinomials may be found in the chapter on polynomials, but here is a quick review:  || 
book3_chapter09_3_2	Tips for Factoring Trinomials 1.                  Clear fractions (by multiplying through by the common denominator) 2.                  Remove common factors if possible 3.                  If the coefficient of the x2 term is 1, then x2 + bx + c = (x + n)(x + m), where n and m                                              i.      Multiply to give c                                            ii.      Add to give b 4.                  If the coefficient of the x2 term is not 1, then use either a.       Guess-and Check                                                    i.      List the factors of the coefficient of the x2 term                                                  ii.      List the factors of the constant term                                                 iii.      Test all the possible binomials you can make from these factors b.      Factoring by Grouping                                                    i.      Find the product ac                                                  ii.      Find two factors of ac that add to give b                                                 iii.      Split the middle term into the sum of two terms, using these two factors                                                iv.      Group the terms into pairs                                                 v.      Factor out the common binomial   Tips for Factoring Trinomials 1.                  Clear fractions (by multiplying through by the common denominator) 2.                  Remove common factors if possible 3.                  If the coefficient of the x2 term is 1, then x2 + bx + c = (x + n)(x + m), where n and m                                              i.      Multiply to give c                                            ii.      Add to give b 4.                  If the coefficient of the x2 term is not 1, then use either a.       Guess-and Check                                                    i.      List the factors of the coefficient of the x2 term                                                  ii.      List the factors of the constant term                                                 iii.      Test all the possible binomials you can make from these factors b.      Factoring by Grouping                                                    i.      Find the product ac                                                  ii.      Find two factors of ac that add to give b                                                 iii.      Split the middle term into the sum of two terms, using these two factors                                                iv.      Group the terms into pairs                                                 v.      Factor out the common binomial    || 
book3_chapter09_4	 || If the Coefficient of x2 is Not 1 First divide through by the coefficient, then proceed with completing the square. Example:   Given Equation: Divide through by coefficient of x2: (in this case a 2) Move constant to other side: Add new constant term: (the square of half the coefficient of x, in this case 9/16): Write as a binomial squared: (the constant in the binomial is half the coefficient of x) Square root both sides: (remember to use plus-or-minus) Solve for x:                  Thus               x = ½  or  x = -2  || 
book3_chapter09_4_1	If the Coefficient of x2 is Not 1 First divide through by the coefficient, then proceed with completing the square. Example:   Given Equation: Divide through by coefficient of x2: (in this case a 2) Move constant to other side: Add new constant term: (the square of half the coefficient of x, in this case 9/16): Write as a binomial squared: (the constant in the binomial is half the coefficient of x) Square root both sides: (remember to use plus-or-minus) Solve for x:                  Thus               x = ½  or  x = -2 If the Coefficient of x2 is Not 1 First divide through by the coefficient, then proceed with completing the square. Example:   Given Equation: Divide through by coefficient of x2: (in this case a 2) Move constant to other side: Add new constant term: (the square of half the coefficient of x, in this case 9/16): Write as a binomial squared: (the constant in the binomial is half the coefficient of x) Square root both sides: (remember to use plus-or-minus) Solve for x:                  Thus               x = ½  or  x = -2  || 
book3_chapter09_5	 || Deriving the Quadratic Formula The quadratic formula can be derived by using the technique of completing the square on the general quadratic formula: Given: Divide through by a: Move the constant term to the right side: Add the square of one-half the coefficient of x to both sides: Factor the left side (which is now a perfect square), and rearrange the right side: Get the right side over a common denominator: Take the square root of both sides (remembering to use plus-or-minus): Solve for x:  || 
book3_chapter09_5_1	Deriving the Quadratic Formula The quadratic formula can be derived by using the technique of completing the square on the general quadratic formula: Given: Divide through by a: Move the constant term to the right side: Add the square of one-half the coefficient of x to both sides: Factor the left side (which is now a perfect square), and rearrange the right side: Get the right side over a common denominator: Take the square root of both sides (remembering to use plus-or-minus): Solve for x: Deriving the Quadratic Formula The quadratic formula can be derived by using the technique of completing the square on the general quadratic formula: Given: Divide through by a: Move the constant term to the right side: Add the square of one-half the coefficient of x to both sides: Factor the left side (which is now a perfect square), and rearrange the right side: Get the right side over a common denominator: Take the square root of both sides (remembering to use plus-or-minus): Solve for x:  || 
book3_chapter04	 ||  || Coordinates, Graphing Points We specify the location of a point by first giving its x coordinate (the left or right displacement from the origin), and then the y coordinate (the up or down displacement from the origin). Thus, every point on the plane can be identified by a pair of numbers (x, y), called its coordinates. Examples:   || Quadrants Sometimes we just want to know what general part of the graph we are talking about. The axes naturally divide the plane up into quarters. We call these quadrants, and number them from one to four. Notice that the numbering begins in the upper right quadrant and continues around in the counter-clockwise direction. Notice also that each quadrant can be identified by the unique combination of positive and negative signs for the coordinates of a point in that quadrant.  || Consider an equation such asy = 2x – 1We say that y is a function of x because if you choose any value for x, this formula will give you a unique value of y. For example, if we choose x = 3 then the formula gives usy = 2(3) – 1ory = 5Thus we can say that the value y = 5 is generated by the choice of x = 3. Had we chosen a different value for x, we would have gotten a different value for y. In fact, we can choose a whole bunch of different values for x and get a y value for each one. This is best shown in a table:x (Input) x→ FORMULA→ y y (Output) –2 2(–2) – 1 = –5 –5 –1 2(–1) – 1 = –3 –3 0 2(0) – 1 = –1 –1 1 2(1) – 1 = 1 1 2 2(2) – 1 = 3 3 3 2(3) – 1 = 5 5This relationship between x and its corresponding y values produces a collection of pairs of points (x, y), namely(–2, –5)(–1, –3)(0, –1)(1, 1)(2, 3)(3, 5)Since each of these pairs of numbers can be the coordinates of a point on the plane, it is natural to ask what this collection of ordered pairs would look like if we graphed them. The result is something like this:The points seem to fall in a straight line. Now, our choices for x were quite arbitrary. We could just as well have picked other values, including non-integer values. Suppose we picked many more values for x, like 2.7, 3.14, etc. and added them to our graph. Eventually the points would be so crowded together that they would form a solid line:The arrows on the ends of the line indicate that it goes on forever, because there is no limit to what numbers we could choose for x. We say that this line is the graph of the function y = 2x – 1.If you pick any point on this line and read off its x and y coordinates, they will satisfy the equation y = 2x – 1. For example, the point (1.5, 2) is on the line:and the coordinates x = 1.5, y = 2 satisfy the equation y = 2x – 1:2 = 2(1.5) – 1·        Note: This graph turned out to be a straight line only because of the particular function that we used as an example. There are many other functions whose graphs turn out to be various curves. ||  || Describing Lines Just as there are an infinite number of equations that satisfy the above conditions, there are also an infinite number of straight lines that we can draw on a graph. To describe a particular line we need to specify two distinct pieces of information concerning that line. A specific straight line can be determined by specifying two distinct points that the line passes through, or it can be determined by giving one point that it passes through and somehow describing how “tilted” the line is.  || Slope The slope of a line is a measure of how “tilted” the line is. A highway sign might say something like “6% grade ahead.” What does this mean, other than that you hope your brakes work? What it means is that the ratio of your drop in altitude to your horizontal distance is 6%, or 6/100. In other words, if you move 100 feet forward, you will drop 6 feet; if you move 200 feet forward, you will drop 12 feet, and so on. We measure the slope of lines in much the same way, although we do not convert the result to a percent. Suppose we have a graph of an unknown straight line. Pick any two different points on the line and label them point 1 and point 2: In moving from point 1 to point 2, we cover 4 steps horizontally (the x direction) and 2 steps vertically (the y direction): Therefore, the ratio of the change in altitude to the change in horizontal distance is 2 to 4. Expressing it as a fraction and reducing, we say that the slope of this line is To formalize this procedure a bit, we need to think about the two points in terms of their x and y coordinates. Now you should be able to see that the horizontal displacement is the difference between the x coordinates of the two points, or 4 = 5 – 1, and the vertical displacement is the difference between the y coordinates, or 2 = 4 – 2. In general, if we say that the coordinates of point 1 are (x1, y1) and the coordinates of point 2 are (x2, y2), then we can define the slope m as follows: where (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) are any two distinct points on the line. It is customary (in the US) to use the letter m to represent slope. No one knows why. It makes no difference which two points are used for point 1 and point 2. If they were switched, both the numerator and the denominator of the fraction would be changed to the opposite sign, giving exactly the same result. Many people find it useful to remember this formula as “slope is rise over run.” Another common notation is , where the Greek letter delta (D) means “the change in.” The slope is a ratio of how much y changes per change in x:  || Horizontal Lines A horizontal line has zero slope, because there is no change in y as x increases. Thus, any two points will have the same y coordinates, and since y1 = y2,   .  || Vertical Lines A vertical line presents a different problem. If you look at the formula , you see that there is a problem with the denominator. It is not possible to get two different values for xl and x2, because if x changes then you are not on the vertical line anymore. Any two points on a vertical line will have the same x coordinates, and so x2 – x1 = 0. Since the denominator of a fraction cannot be zero, we have to say that a vertical line has undefined slope. Do not confuse this with the case of the horizontal line, which has a well-defined slope that just happens to equal zero.  || Positive and Negative Slope The x coordinate increases to the right, so moving from left to right is motion in the positive x direction. Suppose that you are going uphill as you move in the positive x direction. Then both your x and y coordinates are increasing, so the ratio of rise over run will be positive—you will have a positive increase in y for a positive increase in x. On the other hand, if you are going downhill as you move from left to right, then the ratio of rise over run will be negative because you lose height for a given positive increase in x. The thing to remember is: As you go from left to right, Uphill = Positive Slope Downhill = Negative Slope And of course, no change in height means that the line has zero slope.   Some Slopes  || Intercepts Two lines can have the same slope and be in different places on the graph. This means that in addition to describing the slope of a line we need some way to specify exactly where the line is on the graph. This can be accomplished by specifying one particular point that the line passes through. Although any point will do, it is conventional to specify the point where the line crosses the y-axis. This point is called the y-intercept, and is usually denoted by the letter b. Note that every line except vertical lines will cross the y-axis at some point, and we have to handle vertical lines as a special case anyway because we cannot define a slope for them. Same Slopes, Different y-Intercepts  || Equations The equation of a line gives the mathematical relationship between the x and y coordinates of any point on the line. Let’s return to the example we used in graphing functions. The equation y = 2x – 1 produces the following graph: This line evidently has a slope of 2 and a y intercept equal to –1. The numbers 2 and –1 also appear in the equation—the coefficient of x is 2, and the additive constant is –1. This is not a coincidence, but is due to the standard form in which the equation was written. Standard Form (Slope-Intercept Form) If a linear equation in two unknowns is written in the form y = mx + b   where m and b are any two real numbers, then the graph will be a straight line with a slope of m and a y intercept equal to b. Point-Slope Form As mentioned earlier, a line is fully described by giving its slope and one distinct point that the line passes through. While this point is customarily the y intercept, it does not need to be. If you want to describe a line with a given slope m that passes through a given point (x1, y1), the formula is   To help remember this formula, think of solving it for m:   Since the point (x, y) is an arbitrary point on the line and the point (x1, y1) is another point on the line, this is nothing more than the definition of slope for that line. Two-Point Form Another way to completely specify a line is to give two different points that the line passes through. If you are given that the line passes through the points (x1, y1) and (x2, y2), the formula is   This formula is also easy to remember if you notice that it is just the same as the point-slope form with the slope m replaced by the definition of slope,    || 
book3_chapter04_1	 || Coordinates, Graphing Points We specify the location of a point by first giving its x coordinate (the left or right displacement from the origin), and then the y coordinate (the up or down displacement from the origin). Thus, every point on the plane can be identified by a pair of numbers (x, y), called its coordinates. Examples:   || Quadrants Sometimes we just want to know what general part of the graph we are talking about. The axes naturally divide the plane up into quarters. We call these quadrants, and number them from one to four. Notice that the numbering begins in the upper right quadrant and continues around in the counter-clockwise direction. Notice also that each quadrant can be identified by the unique combination of positive and negative signs for the coordinates of a point in that quadrant.  || 
book3_chapter04_1_1	Coordinates, Graphing Points We specify the location of a point by first giving its x coordinate (the left or right displacement from the origin), and then the y coordinate (the up or down displacement from the origin). Thus, every point on the plane can be identified by a pair of numbers (x, y), called its coordinates. Examples:  Coordinates, Graphing Points We specify the location of a point by first giving its x coordinate (the left or right displacement from the origin), and then the y coordinate (the up or down displacement from the origin). Thus, every point on the plane can be identified by a pair of numbers (x, y), called its coordinates. Examples:   || 
book3_chapter04_1_2	Quadrants Sometimes we just want to know what general part of the graph we are talking about. The axes naturally divide the plane up into quarters. We call these quadrants, and number them from one to four. Notice that the numbering begins in the upper right quadrant and continues around in the counter-clockwise direction. Notice also that each quadrant can be identified by the unique combination of positive and negative signs for the coordinates of a point in that quadrant. Quadrants Sometimes we just want to know what general part of the graph we are talking about. The axes naturally divide the plane up into quarters. We call these quadrants, and number them from one to four. Notice that the numbering begins in the upper right quadrant and continues around in the counter-clockwise direction. Notice also that each quadrant can be identified by the unique combination of positive and negative signs for the coordinates of a point in that quadrant.  || 
book3_chapter04_2	Consider an equation such asy = 2x – 1We say that y is a function of x because if you choose any value for x, this formula will give you a unique value of y. For example, if we choose x = 3 then the formula gives usy = 2(3) – 1ory = 5Thus we can say that the value y = 5 is generated by the choice of x = 3. Had we chosen a different value for x, we would have gotten a different value for y. In fact, we can choose a whole bunch of different values for x and get a y value for each one. This is best shown in a table:x (Input) x→ FORMULA→ y y (Output) –2 2(–2) – 1 = –5 –5 –1 2(–1) – 1 = –3 –3 0 2(0) – 1 = –1 –1 1 2(1) – 1 = 1 1 2 2(2) – 1 = 3 3 3 2(3) – 1 = 5 5This relationship between x and its corresponding y values produces a collection of pairs of points (x, y), namely(–2, –5)(–1, –3)(0, –1)(1, 1)(2, 3)(3, 5)Since each of these pairs of numbers can be the coordinates of a point on the plane, it is natural to ask what this collection of ordered pairs would look like if we graphed them. The result is something like this:The points seem to fall in a straight line. Now, our choices for x were quite arbitrary. We could just as well have picked other values, including non-integer values. Suppose we picked many more values for x, like 2.7, 3.14, etc. and added them to our graph. Eventually the points would be so crowded together that they would form a solid line:The arrows on the ends of the line indicate that it goes on forever, because there is no limit to what numbers we could choose for x. We say that this line is the graph of the function y = 2x – 1.If you pick any point on this line and read off its x and y coordinates, they will satisfy the equation y = 2x – 1. For example, the point (1.5, 2) is on the line:and the coordinates x = 1.5, y = 2 satisfy the equation y = 2x – 1:2 = 2(1.5) – 1·        Note: This graph turned out to be a straight line only because of the particular function that we used as an example. There are many other functions whose graphs turn out to be various curves.Consider an equation such asy = 2x – 1We say that y is a function of x because if you choose any value for x, this formula will give you a unique value of y. For example, if we choose x = 3 then the formula gives usy = 2(3) – 1ory = 5Thus we can say that the value y = 5 is generated by the choice of x = 3. Had we chosen a different value for x, we would have gotten a different value for y. In fact, we can choose a whole bunch of different values for x and get a y value for each one. This is best shown in a table:x (Input) x→ FORMULA→ y y (Output) –2 2(–2) – 1 = –5 –5 –1 2(–1) – 1 = –3 –3 0 2(0) – 1 = –1 –1 1 2(1) – 1 = 1 1 2 2(2) – 1 = 3 3 3 2(3) – 1 = 5 5This relationship between x and its corresponding y values produces a collection of pairs of points (x, y), namely(–2, –5)(–1, –3)(0, –1)(1, 1)(2, 3)(3, 5)Since each of these pairs of numbers can be the coordinates of a point on the plane, it is natural to ask what this collection of ordered pairs would look like if we graphed them. The result is something like this:The points seem to fall in a straight line. Now, our choices for x were quite arbitrary. We could just as well have picked other values, including non-integer values. Suppose we picked many more values for x, like 2.7, 3.14, etc. and added them to our graph. Eventually the points would be so crowded together that they would form a solid line:The arrows on the ends of the line indicate that it goes on forever, because there is no limit to what numbers we could choose for x. We say that this line is the graph of the function y = 2x – 1.If you pick any point on this line and read off its x and y coordinates, they will satisfy the equation y = 2x – 1. For example, the point (1.5, 2) is on the line:and the coordinates x = 1.5, y = 2 satisfy the equation y = 2x – 1:2 = 2(1.5) – 1·        Note: This graph turned out to be a straight line only because of the particular function that we used as an example. There are many other functions whose graphs turn out to be various curves. || 
book3_chapter04_3	 || Describing Lines Just as there are an infinite number of equations that satisfy the above conditions, there are also an infinite number of straight lines that we can draw on a graph. To describe a particular line we need to specify two distinct pieces of information concerning that line. A specific straight line can be determined by specifying two distinct points that the line passes through, or it can be determined by giving one point that it passes through and somehow describing how “tilted” the line is.  || Slope The slope of a line is a measure of how “tilted” the line is. A highway sign might say something like “6% grade ahead.” What does this mean, other than that you hope your brakes work? What it means is that the ratio of your drop in altitude to your horizontal distance is 6%, or 6/100. In other words, if you move 100 feet forward, you will drop 6 feet; if you move 200 feet forward, you will drop 12 feet, and so on. We measure the slope of lines in much the same way, although we do not convert the result to a percent. Suppose we have a graph of an unknown straight line. Pick any two different points on the line and label them point 1 and point 2: In moving from point 1 to point 2, we cover 4 steps horizontally (the x direction) and 2 steps vertically (the y direction): Therefore, the ratio of the change in altitude to the change in horizontal distance is 2 to 4. Expressing it as a fraction and reducing, we say that the slope of this line is To formalize this procedure a bit, we need to think about the two points in terms of their x and y coordinates. Now you should be able to see that the horizontal displacement is the difference between the x coordinates of the two points, or 4 = 5 – 1, and the vertical displacement is the difference between the y coordinates, or 2 = 4 – 2. In general, if we say that the coordinates of point 1 are (x1, y1) and the coordinates of point 2 are (x2, y2), then we can define the slope m as follows: where (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) are any two distinct points on the line. It is customary (in the US) to use the letter m to represent slope. No one knows why. It makes no difference which two points are used for point 1 and point 2. If they were switched, both the numerator and the denominator of the fraction would be changed to the opposite sign, giving exactly the same result. Many people find it useful to remember this formula as “slope is rise over run.” Another common notation is , where the Greek letter delta (D) means “the change in.” The slope is a ratio of how much y changes per change in x:  || Horizontal Lines A horizontal line has zero slope, because there is no change in y as x increases. Thus, any two points will have the same y coordinates, and since y1 = y2,   .  || Vertical Lines A vertical line presents a different problem. If you look at the formula , you see that there is a problem with the denominator. It is not possible to get two different values for xl and x2, because if x changes then you are not on the vertical line anymore. Any two points on a vertical line will have the same x coordinates, and so x2 – x1 = 0. Since the denominator of a fraction cannot be zero, we have to say that a vertical line has undefined slope. Do not confuse this with the case of the horizontal line, which has a well-defined slope that just happens to equal zero.  || Positive and Negative Slope The x coordinate increases to the right, so moving from left to right is motion in the positive x direction. Suppose that you are going uphill as you move in the positive x direction. Then both your x and y coordinates are increasing, so the ratio of rise over run will be positive—you will have a positive increase in y for a positive increase in x. On the other hand, if you are going downhill as you move from left to right, then the ratio of rise over run will be negative because you lose height for a given positive increase in x. The thing to remember is: As you go from left to right, Uphill = Positive Slope Downhill = Negative Slope And of course, no change in height means that the line has zero slope.   Some Slopes  || Intercepts Two lines can have the same slope and be in different places on the graph. This means that in addition to describing the slope of a line we need some way to specify exactly where the line is on the graph. This can be accomplished by specifying one particular point that the line passes through. Although any point will do, it is conventional to specify the point where the line crosses the y-axis. This point is called the y-intercept, and is usually denoted by the letter b. Note that every line except vertical lines will cross the y-axis at some point, and we have to handle vertical lines as a special case anyway because we cannot define a slope for them. Same Slopes, Different y-Intercepts  || Equations The equation of a line gives the mathematical relationship between the x and y coordinates of any point on the line. Let’s return to the example we used in graphing functions. The equation y = 2x – 1 produces the following graph: This line evidently has a slope of 2 and a y intercept equal to –1. The numbers 2 and –1 also appear in the equation—the coefficient of x is 2, and the additive constant is –1. This is not a coincidence, but is due to the standard form in which the equation was written. Standard Form (Slope-Intercept Form) If a linear equation in two unknowns is written in the form y = mx + b   where m and b are any two real numbers, then the graph will be a straight line with a slope of m and a y intercept equal to b. Point-Slope Form As mentioned earlier, a line is fully described by giving its slope and one distinct point that the line passes through. While this point is customarily the y intercept, it does not need to be. If you want to describe a line with a given slope m that passes through a given point (x1, y1), the formula is   To help remember this formula, think of solving it for m:   Since the point (x, y) is an arbitrary point on the line and the point (x1, y1) is another point on the line, this is nothing more than the definition of slope for that line. Two-Point Form Another way to completely specify a line is to give two different points that the line passes through. If you are given that the line passes through the points (x1, y1) and (x2, y2), the formula is   This formula is also easy to remember if you notice that it is just the same as the point-slope form with the slope m replaced by the definition of slope,    || 
book3_chapter04_3_1	Describing Lines Just as there are an infinite number of equations that satisfy the above conditions, there are also an infinite number of straight lines that we can draw on a graph. To describe a particular line we need to specify two distinct pieces of information concerning that line. A specific straight line can be determined by specifying two distinct points that the line passes through, or it can be determined by giving one point that it passes through and somehow describing how “tilted” the line is. Describing Lines Just as there are an infinite number of equations that satisfy the above conditions, there are also an infinite number of straight lines that we can draw on a graph. To describe a particular line we need to specify two distinct pieces of information concerning that line. A specific straight line can be determined by specifying two distinct points that the line passes through, or it can be determined by giving one point that it passes through and somehow describing how “tilted” the line is.  || 
book3_chapter04_3_2	Slope The slope of a line is a measure of how “tilted” the line is. A highway sign might say something like “6% grade ahead.” What does this mean, other than that you hope your brakes work? What it means is that the ratio of your drop in altitude to your horizontal distance is 6%, or 6/100. In other words, if you move 100 feet forward, you will drop 6 feet; if you move 200 feet forward, you will drop 12 feet, and so on. We measure the slope of lines in much the same way, although we do not convert the result to a percent. Suppose we have a graph of an unknown straight line. Pick any two different points on the line and label them point 1 and point 2: In moving from point 1 to point 2, we cover 4 steps horizontally (the x direction) and 2 steps vertically (the y direction): Therefore, the ratio of the change in altitude to the change in horizontal distance is 2 to 4. Expressing it as a fraction and reducing, we say that the slope of this line is To formalize this procedure a bit, we need to think about the two points in terms of their x and y coordinates. Now you should be able to see that the horizontal displacement is the difference between the x coordinates of the two points, or 4 = 5 – 1, and the vertical displacement is the difference between the y coordinates, or 2 = 4 – 2. In general, if we say that the coordinates of point 1 are (x1, y1) and the coordinates of point 2 are (x2, y2), then we can define the slope m as follows: where (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) are any two distinct points on the line. It is customary (in the US) to use the letter m to represent slope. No one knows why. It makes no difference which two points are used for point 1 and point 2. If they were switched, both the numerator and the denominator of the fraction would be changed to the opposite sign, giving exactly the same result. Many people find it useful to remember this formula as “slope is rise over run.” Another common notation is , where the Greek letter delta (D) means “the change in.” The slope is a ratio of how much y changes per change in x: Slope The slope of a line is a measure of how “tilted” the line is. A highway sign might say something like “6% grade ahead.” What does this mean, other than that you hope your brakes work? What it means is that the ratio of your drop in altitude to your horizontal distance is 6%, or 6/100. In other words, if you move 100 feet forward, you will drop 6 feet; if you move 200 feet forward, you will drop 12 feet, and so on. We measure the slope of lines in much the same way, although we do not convert the result to a percent. Suppose we have a graph of an unknown straight line. Pick any two different points on the line and label them point 1 and point 2: In moving from point 1 to point 2, we cover 4 steps horizontally (the x direction) and 2 steps vertically (the y direction): Therefore, the ratio of the change in altitude to the change in horizontal distance is 2 to 4. Expressing it as a fraction and reducing, we say that the slope of this line is To formalize this procedure a bit, we need to think about the two points in terms of their x and y coordinates. Now you should be able to see that the horizontal displacement is the difference between the x coordinates of the two points, or 4 = 5 – 1, and the vertical displacement is the difference between the y coordinates, or 2 = 4 – 2. In general, if we say that the coordinates of point 1 are (x1, y1) and the coordinates of point 2 are (x2, y2), then we can define the slope m as follows: where (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) are any two distinct points on the line. It is customary (in the US) to use the letter m to represent slope. No one knows why. It makes no difference which two points are used for point 1 and point 2. If they were switched, both the numerator and the denominator of the fraction would be changed to the opposite sign, giving exactly the same result. Many people find it useful to remember this formula as “slope is rise over run.” Another common notation is , where the Greek letter delta (D) means “the change in.” The slope is a ratio of how much y changes per change in x:  || 
book3_chapter04_3_3	Horizontal Lines A horizontal line has zero slope, because there is no change in y as x increases. Thus, any two points will have the same y coordinates, and since y1 = y2,   . Horizontal Lines A horizontal line has zero slope, because there is no change in y as x increases. Thus, any two points will have the same y coordinates, and since y1 = y2,   .  || 
book3_chapter04_3_4	Vertical Lines A vertical line presents a different problem. If you look at the formula , you see that there is a problem with the denominator. It is not possible to get two different values for xl and x2, because if x changes then you are not on the vertical line anymore. Any two points on a vertical line will have the same x coordinates, and so x2 – x1 = 0. Since the denominator of a fraction cannot be zero, we have to say that a vertical line has undefined slope. Do not confuse this with the case of the horizontal line, which has a well-defined slope that just happens to equal zero. Vertical Lines A vertical line presents a different problem. If you look at the formula , you see that there is a problem with the denominator. It is not possible to get two different values for xl and x2, because if x changes then you are not on the vertical line anymore. Any two points on a vertical line will have the same x coordinates, and so x2 – x1 = 0. Since the denominator of a fraction cannot be zero, we have to say that a vertical line has undefined slope. Do not confuse this with the case of the horizontal line, which has a well-defined slope that just happens to equal zero.  || 
book3_chapter04_3_5	Positive and Negative Slope The x coordinate increases to the right, so moving from left to right is motion in the positive x direction. Suppose that you are going uphill as you move in the positive x direction. Then both your x and y coordinates are increasing, so the ratio of rise over run will be positive—you will have a positive increase in y for a positive increase in x. On the other hand, if you are going downhill as you move from left to right, then the ratio of rise over run will be negative because you lose height for a given positive increase in x. The thing to remember is: As you go from left to right, Uphill = Positive Slope Downhill = Negative Slope And of course, no change in height means that the line has zero slope.   Some Slopes Positive and Negative Slope The x coordinate increases to the right, so moving from left to right is motion in the positive x direction. Suppose that you are going uphill as you move in the positive x direction. Then both your x and y coordinates are increasing, so the ratio of rise over run will be positive—you will have a positive increase in y for a positive increase in x. On the other hand, if you are going downhill as you move from left to right, then the ratio of rise over run will be negative because you lose height for a given positive increase in x. The thing to remember is: As you go from left to right, Uphill = Positive Slope Downhill = Negative Slope And of course, no change in height means that the line has zero slope.   Some Slopes  || 
book3_chapter04_3_6	Intercepts Two lines can have the same slope and be in different places on the graph. This means that in addition to describing the slope of a line we need some way to specify exactly where the line is on the graph. This can be accomplished by specifying one particular point that the line passes through. Although any point will do, it is conventional to specify the point where the line crosses the y-axis. This point is called the y-intercept, and is usually denoted by the letter b. Note that every line except vertical lines will cross the y-axis at some point, and we have to handle vertical lines as a special case anyway because we cannot define a slope for them. Same Slopes, Different y-Intercepts Intercepts Two lines can have the same slope and be in different places on the graph. This means that in addition to describing the slope of a line we need some way to specify exactly where the line is on the graph. This can be accomplished by specifying one particular point that the line passes through. Although any point will do, it is conventional to specify the point where the line crosses the y-axis. This point is called the y-intercept, and is usually denoted by the letter b. Note that every line except vertical lines will cross the y-axis at some point, and we have to handle vertical lines as a special case anyway because we cannot define a slope for them. Same Slopes, Different y-Intercepts  || 
book3_chapter04_3_7	Equations The equation of a line gives the mathematical relationship between the x and y coordinates of any point on the line. Let’s return to the example we used in graphing functions. The equation y = 2x – 1 produces the following graph: This line evidently has a slope of 2 and a y intercept equal to –1. The numbers 2 and –1 also appear in the equation—the coefficient of x is 2, and the additive constant is –1. This is not a coincidence, but is due to the standard form in which the equation was written. Standard Form (Slope-Intercept Form) If a linear equation in two unknowns is written in the form y = mx + b   where m and b are any two real numbers, then the graph will be a straight line with a slope of m and a y intercept equal to b. Point-Slope Form As mentioned earlier, a line is fully described by giving its slope and one distinct point that the line passes through. While this point is customarily the y intercept, it does not need to be. If you want to describe a line with a given slope m that passes through a given point (x1, y1), the formula is   To help remember this formula, think of solving it for m:   Since the point (x, y) is an arbitrary point on the line and the point (x1, y1) is another point on the line, this is nothing more than the definition of slope for that line. Two-Point Form Another way to completely specify a line is to give two different points that the line passes through. If you are given that the line passes through the points (x1, y1) and (x2, y2), the formula is   This formula is also easy to remember if you notice that it is just the same as the point-slope form with the slope m replaced by the definition of slope,   Equations The equation of a line gives the mathematical relationship between the x and y coordinates of any point on the line. Let’s return to the example we used in graphing functions. The equation y = 2x – 1 produces the following graph: This line evidently has a slope of 2 and a y intercept equal to –1. The numbers 2 and –1 also appear in the equation—the coefficient of x is 2, and the additive constant is –1. This is not a coincidence, but is due to the standard form in which the equation was written. Standard Form (Slope-Intercept Form) If a linear equation in two unknowns is written in the form y = mx + b   where m and b are any two real numbers, then the graph will be a straight line with a slope of m and a y intercept equal to b. Point-Slope Form As mentioned earlier, a line is fully described by giving its slope and one distinct point that the line passes through. While this point is customarily the y intercept, it does not need to be. If you want to describe a line with a given slope m that passes through a given point (x1, y1), the formula is   To help remember this formula, think of solving it for m:   Since the point (x, y) is an arbitrary point on the line and the point (x1, y1) is another point on the line, this is nothing more than the definition of slope for that line. Two-Point Form Another way to completely specify a line is to give two different points that the line passes through. If you are given that the line passes through the points (x1, y1) and (x2, y2), the formula is   This formula is also easy to remember if you notice that it is just the same as the point-slope form with the slope m replaced by the definition of slope,    || 
book4_ch11	 ||  || Algebraic Expressions Numerical Expression In arithmetic, a numerical expression results when numbers are connected by arithmetic operation signs (+, -, ⋅ , ÷). For example, , , , and are numerical expressions. Algebraic Expression In algebra, letters are used to represent numbers, and an algebraic expression results when an arithmetic operation sign associates a letter with a number or a letter with a letter. For example, , , , , and are algebraic expressions. Expressions Numerical expressions and algebraic expressions are often referred to simply as expressions.  || Terms and Factors In algebra, it is extremely important to be able to distinguish between terms and factors. Distinction Between Terms and Factors Terms are parts of sums and are therefore connected by + signs. Factors are parts of products and are therefore separated by ⋅ signs. Note While making the distinction between sums and products, we must re­member that subtraction and division are functions of these operations. In some expressions it will appear that terms are separated by minus signs. We must keep in mind that subtraction is addition of the opposite, that is, In some expressions it will appear that factors are separated by division signs. We must keep in mind that Sample Set A State the number of terms in each expression and name them. Example 11.1.  . In this expression, x and 4 are connected by a "+" sign. Therefore, they are terms. This expression consists of two terms. Example 11.2.  . The expression can be expressed as . We can now see that this expres­sion consists of the two terms and . Rather than rewriting the expression when a subtraction occurs, we can identify terms more quickly by associating the + or - sign with the individual quantity. Example 11.3.  . Associating the sign with the individual quantities, we see that this expression consists of the four terms , 7, , . Example 11.4.  . This expression consists of the two terms, and . Notice that the term is composed of the two factors 5 and . The term is composed of the two factors and . Example 11.5.  . This expression consists of one term. Notice that can be expressed as or (indicating the connecting signs of arithmetic). Note that no operation sign is necessary for multiplication. Practice Set A Specify the terms in each expression. Exercise 11.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.5. (Go to Solution)  || Coefficients We know that multiplication is a description of repeated addition. For example, describes Suppose some quantity is represented by the letter . The multiplication de­scribes . It is now easy to see that specifies 5 of the quantities represented by . In the expression , 5 is called the numerical coefficient, or more simply, the coefficient of . Coefficient The coefficient of a quantity records how many of that quantity there are. Since constants alone do not record the number of some quantity, they are not usually considered as numerical coefficients. For example, in the expression , the coefficient of is 7. (There are 7 x's.) is 2. (There are 2 y 's.) is . (There are z 's.) The constant 12 is not considered a numerical coefficient.  When the numerical coefficient of a variable is 1, we write only the variable and not the coefficient. For example, we write rather than . It is clear just by looking at that there is only one.  || Numerical Evaluation We know that a variable represents an unknown quantity. Therefore, any expres­sion that contains a variable represents an unknown quantity. For example, if the value of is unknown, then the value of is unknown. The value of depends on the value of . Numerical Evaluation Numerical evaluation is the process of determining the numerical value of an algebraic expression by replacing the variables in the expression with specified numbers. Sample Set B Find the value of each expression. Example 11.6.  , if and Replace x with –4 and y with 2. Thus, when and , . Example 11.7.  , if and = . Replace a with 6 and b with –3. Thus, when a = 6 and b = –3, . Example 11.8.  , if and Replace with –5 and with –1. Thus, when and , . Example 11.9.  , if Replace x with 4. Thus, when , . Example 11.10.  , if Replace x with 3. Example 11.11.  , if . Replace x with 3. The exponent is connected to –3, not 3 as in the problem above. Practice Set B Find the value of each expression. Exercise 11.2.6. (Go to Solution) if and Exercise 11.2.7. (Go to Solution) , if , , Exercise 11.2.8. (Go to Solution) , if , and Exercise 11.2.9. (Go to Solution) , if and Exercise 11.2.10. (Go to Solution) , if and Exercise 11.2.11. (Go to Solution) , if Exercise 11.2.12. (Go to Solution) , if Exercise 11.2.13. (Go to Solution) , if  ||  || Combining Like Terms From our examination of terms in Section 11.2, we know that like terms are terms in which the variable parts are identical. Like terms is an appropriate name since terms with identical variable parts and different numerical coefficients represent different amounts of the same quantity. When we are dealing with quantities of the same type, we may combine them using addition and subtraction. Simplifying an Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression may be simplified by combining like terms. This concept is illustrated in the following examples. Eight and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. We have combined quantities of the same type. Eight and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. Thus, we have 13 of one type and 3 of another type. We have combined only quantities of the same type. Suppose we let the letter represent "record." Then, . The terms and are like terms. So, 8 and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. We have combined like terms. Suppose we let the letter represent "record" and represent "tape." Then, We have combined only the like terms. After observing the problems in these examples, we can suggest a method for simplifying an algebraic expression by combining like terms. Combining Like Terms Like terms may be combined by adding or subtracting their coefficients and affixing the result to the common variable. Sample Set A Simplify each expression by combining like terms. Example 11.12.  . All three terms are alike. Combine their coefficients and affix this result to : . Thus, . Example 11.13.  The terms and are like terms. Combine their coefficients: . Thus, . Example 11.14.  The like terms are Thus, Example 11.15.  . The like terms are Thus, . Practice Set A Simplify each expression by combining like terms. Exercise 11.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.5. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Equations Equation An equation is a statement that two algebraic expressions are equal. The following are examples of equations: Notice that , , and are not equations. They are expressions. They are not equations because there is no statement that each of these expressions is equal to another expression.  || Solutions and Equivalent Equations Conditional Equations The truth of some equations is conditional upon the value chosen for the variable. Such equations are called conditional equations. There are two additional types of equations. They are examined in courses in algebra, so we will not consider them now. Solutions and Solving an Equation The set of values that, when substituted for the variables, make the equation true, are called the solutions of the equation. An equation has been solved when all its solutions have been found. Sample Set A Example 11.16.  Verify that 3 is a solution to . When , Example 11.17.  Verify that is a solution to When , Example 11.18.  Verify that 5 is not a solution to . When , Example 11.19.  Verify that -2 is a solution to . When , Practice Set A Exercise 11.4.1. (Go to Solution) Verify that 5 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.2. (Go to Solution) Verify that is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.3. (Go to Solution) Verify that 0 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.4. (Go to Solution) Verify that 3 is not a solution to . Exercise 11.4.5. (Go to Solution) Verify that -1 is a solution to . Equivalent Equations Some equations have precisely the same collection of solutions. Such equations are called equivalent equations. For example, , , and are all equivalent equations since the only solution to each is . (Can you verify this?)  || Solving Equations We know that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. Table 11.1. This number is the same as this number ↓ ↓ ↓ = 4 = 11 = -1 Addition/Subtraction Property of Equality From this, we can suggest the addition/subtraction property of equality. Given any equation, We can obtain an equivalent equation by adding the same number to both sides of the equation. We can obtain an equivalent equation by subtracting the same number from both sides of the equation. The Idea Behind Equation Solving The idea behind equation solving is to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. Signs of operation (+, -, ⋅,÷) are used to associate two numbers. For example, in the expression , the numbers 5 and 3 are associated by addition. An association can be undone by performing the opposite operation. The addition/subtraction property of equality can be used to undo an association that is made by addition or subtraction. Subtraction is used to undo an addition. Addition is used to undo a subtraction. The procedure is illustrated in the problems of id1163760715212. Sample Set B Use the addition/subtraction property of equality to solve each equation. Example 11.20.  . 4 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 4 from both sides. Check: When , becomes The solution to is . Example 11.21.  . 8 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 8 to both sides. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.22.  . Before we use the addition/subtraction property, we should simplify as much as possible. 6 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 6 from both sides. This is equivalent to . Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.23.  . Begin by simplifying the left side of the equation. 1 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 1 from both sides. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.24.  . In this equation, the variable appears on both sides. We need to isolate it on one side. Although we can choose either side, it will be more convenient to choose the side with the larger coefficient. Since 8 is greater than 6, we’ll isolate on the left side. Since represents , subtract from each side. 4 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 4 to both sides. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.25.  . -8 is associated with by addition. Undo the by subtracting -8 from both sides. Subtracting -8 we get . We actually add 8 to both sides. Check: When becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Practice Set B Exercise 11.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.11. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Multiplication/ Division Property of Equality Recall that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. From this, we can suggest the multiplication/division property of equality. Multiplication/Division Property of Equality Given any equation, We can obtain an equivalent equation by multiplying both sides of the equa­tion by the same nonzero number, that is, if , then is equivalent to We can obtain an equivalent equation by dividing both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if , then is equivalent to The multiplication/division property of equality can be used to undo an association with a number that multiplies or divides the variable. Sample Set A Use the multiplication / division property of equality to solve each equation. Example 11.26.  6 is associated with y by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6 Check: When becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.27.  . -2 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by -2. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is Example 11.28.  . We will examine two methods for solving equations such as this one. Method 1: Use of dividing out common factors. 7 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by 7. Divide out the 7’s. 3 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dviding both sides by 3. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Method 2: Use of reciprocals Recall that if the product of two numbers is 1, the numbers are reciprocals. Thus and are reciprocals. Multiply both sides of the equation by , the reciprocal of . Notice that we get the same solution using either method. Example 11.29.  -8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by -8. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. Example 11.30.  Since is actually and , we can isolate by multiplying both sides of the equation by . Check: When , becomes The solution to is . Practice Set A Use the multiplication/division property of equality to solve each equation. Be sure to check each solution. Exercise 11.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.6. (Go to Solution)  || Combining Techniques in Equation Solving Having examined solving equations using the addition/subtraction and the multi­plication/division principles of equality, we can combine these techniques to solve more complicated equations. When beginning to solve an equation such as , it is helpful to know which property of equality to use first, addition/subtraction or multiplication/di­vision. Recalling that in equation solving we are trying to isolate the variable (disas­sociate numbers from it), it is helpful to note the following. To associate numbers and letters, we use the order of operations. Multiply/divide Add/subtract To undo an association between numbers and letters, we use the order of opera­tions in reverse. Add/subtract Multiply/divide Sample Set B Solve each equation. (In these example problems, we will not show the checks.) Example 11.31.  -4 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 4 to both sides. 6 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6 Example 11.32.  3 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 3 from both sides. -8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by -8. Example 11.33.  Begin by solving this equation by combining like terms. Choose a side on which to isolate m. Since 7 is greater than 1, we'll isolate m on the right side. Subtract m from both sides. 8 is associated with m by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 8 to both sides. 6 is associated with m by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6. Reduce. Notice that if we had chosen to isolate m on the left side of the equation rather than the right side, we would have proceeded as follows: Subtract from both sides. Add 6 to both sides, Divide both sides by -6. This is the same result as with the previous approach. Example 11.34.  7 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by 7. 8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 8. Practice Set B Solve each equation. Be sure to check each solution. Exercise 11.5.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.12. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Translating Words to Symbols Practical problems seldom, if ever, come in equation form. The job of the problem solver is to translate the problem from phrases and statements into mathematical expressions and equations, and then to solve the equations. As problem solvers, our job is made simpler if we are able to translate verbal phrases to mathematical expressions and if we follow the five-step method of solving applied problems. To help us translate from words to symbols, we can use the following Mathematics Dictionary. Table 11.2. MATHEMATICS DICTIONARY Word or Phrase Mathematical Operation Sum, sum of, added to, increased by, more than, and, plus + Difference, minus, subtracted from, decreased by, less, less than - Product, the product of, of, multiplied by, times, per ⋅ Quotient, divided by, ratio, per ÷ Equals, is equal to, is, the result is, becomes = A number, an unknown quantity, an unknown, a quantity (or any symbol) Sample Set A Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Example 11.35.  Translation: . Example 11.36.  Translation: . Example 11.37.  Translation: . Example 11.38.  Translation: . Example 11.39.  Translation: , or . Example 11.40.  Translation: . Practice Set A Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Exercise 11.6.1. (Go to Solution) Twelve more than a number. Exercise 11.6.2. (Go to Solution) Eight minus a number. Exercise 11.6.3. (Go to Solution) An unknown quantity less fourteen. Exercise 11.6.4. (Go to Solution) Six times a number is fifty-four. Exercise 11.6.5. (Go to Solution) Two ninths of a number is eleven. Exercise 11.6.6. (Go to Solution) Three more than seven times a number is nine more than five times the number. Exercise 11.6.7. (Go to Solution) Twice a number less eight is equal to one more than three times the number. Sample Set B Example 11.41.  Sometimes the structure of the sentence indicates the use of grouping symbols. We’ll be alert for commas. They set off terms. Translation: . Example 11.42.  Some phrases and sentences do not translate directly. We must be careful to read them properly. The word from often appears in such phrases and sentences. The word from means “a point of departure for motion.” The following translation will illustrate this use. Translation: . The word from indicated the motion (subtraction) is to begin at the point of “some number.” Example 11.43.  Ten less than some number. Notice that less than can be replaced by from. Ten from some number. Translation: . Practice Set B Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Exercise 11.6.8. (Go to Solution) A number divided by eight, plus seven, is fifty. Exercise 11.6.9. (Go to Solution) A number divided by three, minus the same number multiplied by six, is one more than the number. Exercise 11.6.10. (Go to Solution) Nine from some number is four. Exercise 11.6.11. (Go to Solution) Five less than some quantity is eight.  ||  || The Five Step Method We are now in a position to solve some applied problems using algebraic methods. The problems we shall solve are intended as logic developers. Although they may not seem to reflect real situations, they do serve as a basis for solving more complex, real situation, applied problems. To solve problems algebraically, we will use the five-step method. Strategy for Reading Word Problems When solving mathematical word problems, you may wish to apply the following "reading strategy." Read the problem quickly to get a feel for the situation. Do not pay close attention to details. At the first reading, too much attention to details may be overwhelming and lead to confusion and discouragement. After the first, brief reading, read the problem carefully in phrases. Reading phrases introduces information more slowly and allows us to absorb and put together important information. We can look for the unknown quantity by reading one phrase at a time. Five-Step Method for Solving Word Problems Let (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Draw a picture if possible. Solve the equation. Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement, not equation, of the problem. Write a conclusion. If it has been your experience that word problems are difficult, then follow the five-step method carefully. Most people have trouble with word problems for two reasons: They are not able to translate the words to mathematical symbols. (See Section 11.5.) They neglect step 1. After working through the problem phrase by phrase, to become familiar with the situation, INTRODUCE A VARIABLE  || Number Problems Sample Set A Example 11.44.  What number decreased by six is five? Let represent the unknown number. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Read phrases. Solve this equation. Add 6 to both sides. Check the result. When 11 is decreased by 6, the result is , which is equal to 5. The solution checks. The number is 11. Example 11.45.  When three times a number is increased by four, the result is eight more than five times the number. Let the unknown number. Translate the phrases to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Check this result. Three times is . Increasing by 4 results in . Now, five times is . Increasing by results in . The results agree, and the solution checks. The number is Example 11.46.  Consecutive integers have the property that if Consecutive odd or even integers have the property that if The sum of three consecutive odd integers is equal to one less than twice the first odd integer. Find the three integers. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Read phrases. Check this result. The sum of the three integers is One less than twice the first integer is . Since these two results are equal, the solution checks. The three odd integers are -7, -5, -3. Practice Set A Exercise 11.7.1. (Go to Solution) When three times a number is decreased by 5, the result is -23. Find the number. Let Check: The number is __________. Exercise 11.7.2. (Go to Solution) When five times a number is increased by 7, the result is five less than seven times the number. Find the number. Let Check: The number is __________. Exercise 11.7.3. (Go to Solution) Two consecutive numbers add to 35. Find the numbers. Check: The numbers are __________ and __________. Exercise 11.7.4. (Go to Solution) The sum of three consecutive even integers is six more than four times the middle integer. Find the integers. Let smallest integer. __________= next integer. __________= largest integer. Check: The integers are __________, __________, and __________.  || Geometry Problems Sample Set B Example 11.47.  The perimeter (length around) of a rectangle is 20 meters. If the length is 4 meters longer than the width, find the length and width of the rectangle. Let the width of the rectangle. Then, the length of the rectangle. We can draw a picture. The length around the rectangle is Check: The length of the rectangle is 7 meters. The width of the rectangle is 3 meters. Practice Set B Exercise 11.7.5. (Go to Solution) The perimeter of a triangle is 16 inches. The second leg is 2 inches longer than the first leg, and the third leg is 5 inches longer than the first leg. Find the length of each leg. Let length of the first leg. __________= length of the second leg. __________= length of the third leg. We can draw a picture. Check: The lengths of the legs are__________,__________, and__________.  || 
book4_ch11_2	 || Algebraic Expressions Numerical Expression In arithmetic, a numerical expression results when numbers are connected by arithmetic operation signs (+, -, ⋅ , ÷). For example, , , , and are numerical expressions. Algebraic Expression In algebra, letters are used to represent numbers, and an algebraic expression results when an arithmetic operation sign associates a letter with a number or a letter with a letter. For example, , , , , and are algebraic expressions. Expressions Numerical expressions and algebraic expressions are often referred to simply as expressions.  || Terms and Factors In algebra, it is extremely important to be able to distinguish between terms and factors. Distinction Between Terms and Factors Terms are parts of sums and are therefore connected by + signs. Factors are parts of products and are therefore separated by ⋅ signs. Note While making the distinction between sums and products, we must re­member that subtraction and division are functions of these operations. In some expressions it will appear that terms are separated by minus signs. We must keep in mind that subtraction is addition of the opposite, that is, In some expressions it will appear that factors are separated by division signs. We must keep in mind that Sample Set A State the number of terms in each expression and name them. Example 11.1.  . In this expression, x and 4 are connected by a "+" sign. Therefore, they are terms. This expression consists of two terms. Example 11.2.  . The expression can be expressed as . We can now see that this expres­sion consists of the two terms and . Rather than rewriting the expression when a subtraction occurs, we can identify terms more quickly by associating the + or - sign with the individual quantity. Example 11.3.  . Associating the sign with the individual quantities, we see that this expression consists of the four terms , 7, , . Example 11.4.  . This expression consists of the two terms, and . Notice that the term is composed of the two factors 5 and . The term is composed of the two factors and . Example 11.5.  . This expression consists of one term. Notice that can be expressed as or (indicating the connecting signs of arithmetic). Note that no operation sign is necessary for multiplication. Practice Set A Specify the terms in each expression. Exercise 11.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.5. (Go to Solution)  || Coefficients We know that multiplication is a description of repeated addition. For example, describes Suppose some quantity is represented by the letter . The multiplication de­scribes . It is now easy to see that specifies 5 of the quantities represented by . In the expression , 5 is called the numerical coefficient, or more simply, the coefficient of . Coefficient The coefficient of a quantity records how many of that quantity there are. Since constants alone do not record the number of some quantity, they are not usually considered as numerical coefficients. For example, in the expression , the coefficient of is 7. (There are 7 x's.) is 2. (There are 2 y 's.) is . (There are z 's.) The constant 12 is not considered a numerical coefficient.  When the numerical coefficient of a variable is 1, we write only the variable and not the coefficient. For example, we write rather than . It is clear just by looking at that there is only one.  || Numerical Evaluation We know that a variable represents an unknown quantity. Therefore, any expres­sion that contains a variable represents an unknown quantity. For example, if the value of is unknown, then the value of is unknown. The value of depends on the value of . Numerical Evaluation Numerical evaluation is the process of determining the numerical value of an algebraic expression by replacing the variables in the expression with specified numbers. Sample Set B Find the value of each expression. Example 11.6.  , if and Replace x with –4 and y with 2. Thus, when and , . Example 11.7.  , if and = . Replace a with 6 and b with –3. Thus, when a = 6 and b = –3, . Example 11.8.  , if and Replace with –5 and with –1. Thus, when and , . Example 11.9.  , if Replace x with 4. Thus, when , . Example 11.10.  , if Replace x with 3. Example 11.11.  , if . Replace x with 3. The exponent is connected to –3, not 3 as in the problem above. Practice Set B Find the value of each expression. Exercise 11.2.6. (Go to Solution) if and Exercise 11.2.7. (Go to Solution) , if , , Exercise 11.2.8. (Go to Solution) , if , and Exercise 11.2.9. (Go to Solution) , if and Exercise 11.2.10. (Go to Solution) , if and Exercise 11.2.11. (Go to Solution) , if Exercise 11.2.12. (Go to Solution) , if Exercise 11.2.13. (Go to Solution) , if  || 
book4_ch11_2_2	Algebraic Expressions Numerical Expression In arithmetic, a numerical expression results when numbers are connected by arithmetic operation signs (+, -, ⋅ , ÷). For example, , , , and are numerical expressions. Algebraic Expression In algebra, letters are used to represent numbers, and an algebraic expression results when an arithmetic operation sign associates a letter with a number or a letter with a letter. For example, , , , , and are algebraic expressions. Expressions Numerical expressions and algebraic expressions are often referred to simply as expressions. Algebraic Expressions Numerical Expression In arithmetic, a numerical expression results when numbers are connected by arithmetic operation signs (+, -, ⋅ , ÷). For example, , , , and are numerical expressions. Algebraic Expression In algebra, letters are used to represent numbers, and an algebraic expression results when an arithmetic operation sign associates a letter with a number or a letter with a letter. For example, , , , , and are algebraic expressions. Expressions Numerical expressions and algebraic expressions are often referred to simply as expressions.  || 
book4_ch11_2_3	Terms and Factors In algebra, it is extremely important to be able to distinguish between terms and factors. Distinction Between Terms and Factors Terms are parts of sums and are therefore connected by + signs. Factors are parts of products and are therefore separated by ⋅ signs. Note While making the distinction between sums and products, we must re­member that subtraction and division are functions of these operations. In some expressions it will appear that terms are separated by minus signs. We must keep in mind that subtraction is addition of the opposite, that is, In some expressions it will appear that factors are separated by division signs. We must keep in mind that Sample Set A State the number of terms in each expression and name them. Example 11.1.  . In this expression, x and 4 are connected by a "+" sign. Therefore, they are terms. This expression consists of two terms. Example 11.2.  . The expression can be expressed as . We can now see that this expres­sion consists of the two terms and . Rather than rewriting the expression when a subtraction occurs, we can identify terms more quickly by associating the + or - sign with the individual quantity. Example 11.3.  . Associating the sign with the individual quantities, we see that this expression consists of the four terms , 7, , . Example 11.4.  . This expression consists of the two terms, and . Notice that the term is composed of the two factors 5 and . The term is composed of the two factors and . Example 11.5.  . This expression consists of one term. Notice that can be expressed as or (indicating the connecting signs of arithmetic). Note that no operation sign is necessary for multiplication. Practice Set A Specify the terms in each expression. Exercise 11.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.5. (Go to Solution) Terms and Factors In algebra, it is extremely important to be able to distinguish between terms and factors. Distinction Between Terms and Factors Terms are parts of sums and are therefore connected by + signs. Factors are parts of products and are therefore separated by ⋅ signs. Note While making the distinction between sums and products, we must re­member that subtraction and division are functions of these operations. In some expressions it will appear that terms are separated by minus signs. We must keep in mind that subtraction is addition of the opposite, that is, In some expressions it will appear that factors are separated by division signs. We must keep in mind that Sample Set A State the number of terms in each expression and name them. Example 11.1.  . In this expression, x and 4 are connected by a "+" sign. Therefore, they are terms. This expression consists of two terms. Example 11.2.  . The expression can be expressed as . We can now see that this expres­sion consists of the two terms and . Rather than rewriting the expression when a subtraction occurs, we can identify terms more quickly by associating the + or - sign with the individual quantity. Example 11.3.  . Associating the sign with the individual quantities, we see that this expression consists of the four terms , 7, , . Example 11.4.  . This expression consists of the two terms, and . Notice that the term is composed of the two factors 5 and . The term is composed of the two factors and . Example 11.5.  . This expression consists of one term. Notice that can be expressed as or (indicating the connecting signs of arithmetic). Note that no operation sign is necessary for multiplication. Practice Set A Specify the terms in each expression. Exercise 11.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.2.5. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch11_2_6	Coefficients We know that multiplication is a description of repeated addition. For example, describes Suppose some quantity is represented by the letter . The multiplication de­scribes . It is now easy to see that specifies 5 of the quantities represented by . In the expression , 5 is called the numerical coefficient, or more simply, the coefficient of . Coefficient The coefficient of a quantity records how many of that quantity there are. Since constants alone do not record the number of some quantity, they are not usually considered as numerical coefficients. For example, in the expression , the coefficient of is 7. (There are 7 x's.) is 2. (There are 2 y 's.) is . (There are z 's.) The constant 12 is not considered a numerical coefficient.  When the numerical coefficient of a variable is 1, we write only the variable and not the coefficient. For example, we write rather than . It is clear just by looking at that there is only one. Coefficients We know that multiplication is a description of repeated addition. For example, describes Suppose some quantity is represented by the letter . The multiplication de­scribes . It is now easy to see that specifies 5 of the quantities represented by . In the expression , 5 is called the numerical coefficient, or more simply, the coefficient of . Coefficient The coefficient of a quantity records how many of that quantity there are. Since constants alone do not record the number of some quantity, they are not usually considered as numerical coefficients. For example, in the expression , the coefficient of is 7. (There are 7 x's.) is 2. (There are 2 y 's.) is . (There are z 's.) The constant 12 is not considered a numerical coefficient.  When the numerical coefficient of a variable is 1, we write only the variable and not the coefficient. For example, we write rather than . It is clear just by looking at that there is only one.  || 
book4_ch11_2_7	Numerical Evaluation We know that a variable represents an unknown quantity. Therefore, any expres­sion that contains a variable represents an unknown quantity. For example, if the value of is unknown, then the value of is unknown. The value of depends on the value of . Numerical Evaluation Numerical evaluation is the process of determining the numerical value of an algebraic expression by replacing the variables in the expression with specified numbers. Sample Set B Find the value of each expression. Example 11.6.  , if and Replace x with –4 and y with 2. Thus, when and , . Example 11.7.  , if and = . Replace a with 6 and b with –3. Thus, when a = 6 and b = –3, . Example 11.8.  , if and Replace with –5 and with –1. Thus, when and , . Example 11.9.  , if Replace x with 4. Thus, when , . Example 11.10.  , if Replace x with 3. Example 11.11.  , if . Replace x with 3. The exponent is connected to –3, not 3 as in the problem above. Practice Set B Find the value of each expression. Exercise 11.2.6. (Go to Solution) if and Exercise 11.2.7. (Go to Solution) , if , , Exercise 11.2.8. (Go to Solution) , if , and Exercise 11.2.9. (Go to Solution) , if and Exercise 11.2.10. (Go to Solution) , if and Exercise 11.2.11. (Go to Solution) , if Exercise 11.2.12. (Go to Solution) , if Exercise 11.2.13. (Go to Solution) , if Numerical Evaluation We know that a variable represents an unknown quantity. Therefore, any expres­sion that contains a variable represents an unknown quantity. For example, if the value of is unknown, then the value of is unknown. The value of depends on the value of . Numerical Evaluation Numerical evaluation is the process of determining the numerical value of an algebraic expression by replacing the variables in the expression with specified numbers. Sample Set B Find the value of each expression. Example 11.6.  , if and Replace x with –4 and y with 2. Thus, when and , . Example 11.7.  , if and = . Replace a with 6 and b with –3. Thus, when a = 6 and b = –3, . Example 11.8.  , if and Replace with –5 and with –1. Thus, when and , . Example 11.9.  , if Replace x with 4. Thus, when , . Example 11.10.  , if Replace x with 3. Example 11.11.  , if . Replace x with 3. The exponent is connected to –3, not 3 as in the problem above. Practice Set B Find the value of each expression. Exercise 11.2.6. (Go to Solution) if and Exercise 11.2.7. (Go to Solution) , if , , Exercise 11.2.8. (Go to Solution) , if , and Exercise 11.2.9. (Go to Solution) , if and Exercise 11.2.10. (Go to Solution) , if and Exercise 11.2.11. (Go to Solution) , if Exercise 11.2.12. (Go to Solution) , if Exercise 11.2.13. (Go to Solution) , if  || 
book4_ch11_3	 || Combining Like Terms From our examination of terms in Section 11.2, we know that like terms are terms in which the variable parts are identical. Like terms is an appropriate name since terms with identical variable parts and different numerical coefficients represent different amounts of the same quantity. When we are dealing with quantities of the same type, we may combine them using addition and subtraction. Simplifying an Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression may be simplified by combining like terms. This concept is illustrated in the following examples. Eight and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. We have combined quantities of the same type. Eight and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. Thus, we have 13 of one type and 3 of another type. We have combined only quantities of the same type. Suppose we let the letter represent "record." Then, . The terms and are like terms. So, 8 and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. We have combined like terms. Suppose we let the letter represent "record" and represent "tape." Then, We have combined only the like terms. After observing the problems in these examples, we can suggest a method for simplifying an algebraic expression by combining like terms. Combining Like Terms Like terms may be combined by adding or subtracting their coefficients and affixing the result to the common variable. Sample Set A Simplify each expression by combining like terms. Example 11.12.  . All three terms are alike. Combine their coefficients and affix this result to : . Thus, . Example 11.13.  The terms and are like terms. Combine their coefficients: . Thus, . Example 11.14.  The like terms are Thus, Example 11.15.  . The like terms are Thus, . Practice Set A Simplify each expression by combining like terms. Exercise 11.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.5. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch11_3_2	Combining Like Terms From our examination of terms in Section 11.2, we know that like terms are terms in which the variable parts are identical. Like terms is an appropriate name since terms with identical variable parts and different numerical coefficients represent different amounts of the same quantity. When we are dealing with quantities of the same type, we may combine them using addition and subtraction. Simplifying an Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression may be simplified by combining like terms. This concept is illustrated in the following examples. Eight and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. We have combined quantities of the same type. Eight and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. Thus, we have 13 of one type and 3 of another type. We have combined only quantities of the same type. Suppose we let the letter represent "record." Then, . The terms and are like terms. So, 8 and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. We have combined like terms. Suppose we let the letter represent "record" and represent "tape." Then, We have combined only the like terms. After observing the problems in these examples, we can suggest a method for simplifying an algebraic expression by combining like terms. Combining Like Terms Like terms may be combined by adding or subtracting their coefficients and affixing the result to the common variable. Sample Set A Simplify each expression by combining like terms. Example 11.12.  . All three terms are alike. Combine their coefficients and affix this result to : . Thus, . Example 11.13.  The terms and are like terms. Combine their coefficients: . Thus, . Example 11.14.  The like terms are Thus, Example 11.15.  . The like terms are Thus, . Practice Set A Simplify each expression by combining like terms. Exercise 11.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.5. (Go to Solution) Combining Like Terms From our examination of terms in Section 11.2, we know that like terms are terms in which the variable parts are identical. Like terms is an appropriate name since terms with identical variable parts and different numerical coefficients represent different amounts of the same quantity. When we are dealing with quantities of the same type, we may combine them using addition and subtraction. Simplifying an Algebraic Expression An algebraic expression may be simplified by combining like terms. This concept is illustrated in the following examples. Eight and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. We have combined quantities of the same type. Eight and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. Thus, we have 13 of one type and 3 of another type. We have combined only quantities of the same type. Suppose we let the letter represent "record." Then, . The terms and are like terms. So, 8 and 5 of the same type give 13 of that type. We have combined like terms. Suppose we let the letter represent "record" and represent "tape." Then, We have combined only the like terms. After observing the problems in these examples, we can suggest a method for simplifying an algebraic expression by combining like terms. Combining Like Terms Like terms may be combined by adding or subtracting their coefficients and affixing the result to the common variable. Sample Set A Simplify each expression by combining like terms. Example 11.12.  . All three terms are alike. Combine their coefficients and affix this result to : . Thus, . Example 11.13.  The terms and are like terms. Combine their coefficients: . Thus, . Example 11.14.  The like terms are Thus, Example 11.15.  . The like terms are Thus, . Practice Set A Simplify each expression by combining like terms. Exercise 11.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.3.5. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch11_4	 || Equations Equation An equation is a statement that two algebraic expressions are equal. The following are examples of equations: Notice that , , and are not equations. They are expressions. They are not equations because there is no statement that each of these expressions is equal to another expression.  || Solutions and Equivalent Equations Conditional Equations The truth of some equations is conditional upon the value chosen for the variable. Such equations are called conditional equations. There are two additional types of equations. They are examined in courses in algebra, so we will not consider them now. Solutions and Solving an Equation The set of values that, when substituted for the variables, make the equation true, are called the solutions of the equation. An equation has been solved when all its solutions have been found. Sample Set A Example 11.16.  Verify that 3 is a solution to . When , Example 11.17.  Verify that is a solution to When , Example 11.18.  Verify that 5 is not a solution to . When , Example 11.19.  Verify that -2 is a solution to . When , Practice Set A Exercise 11.4.1. (Go to Solution) Verify that 5 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.2. (Go to Solution) Verify that is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.3. (Go to Solution) Verify that 0 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.4. (Go to Solution) Verify that 3 is not a solution to . Exercise 11.4.5. (Go to Solution) Verify that -1 is a solution to . Equivalent Equations Some equations have precisely the same collection of solutions. Such equations are called equivalent equations. For example, , , and are all equivalent equations since the only solution to each is . (Can you verify this?)  || Solving Equations We know that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. Table 11.1. This number is the same as this number ↓ ↓ ↓ = 4 = 11 = -1 Addition/Subtraction Property of Equality From this, we can suggest the addition/subtraction property of equality. Given any equation, We can obtain an equivalent equation by adding the same number to both sides of the equation. We can obtain an equivalent equation by subtracting the same number from both sides of the equation. The Idea Behind Equation Solving The idea behind equation solving is to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. Signs of operation (+, -, ⋅,÷) are used to associate two numbers. For example, in the expression , the numbers 5 and 3 are associated by addition. An association can be undone by performing the opposite operation. The addition/subtraction property of equality can be used to undo an association that is made by addition or subtraction. Subtraction is used to undo an addition. Addition is used to undo a subtraction. The procedure is illustrated in the problems of id1163760715212. Sample Set B Use the addition/subtraction property of equality to solve each equation. Example 11.20.  . 4 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 4 from both sides. Check: When , becomes The solution to is . Example 11.21.  . 8 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 8 to both sides. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.22.  . Before we use the addition/subtraction property, we should simplify as much as possible. 6 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 6 from both sides. This is equivalent to . Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.23.  . Begin by simplifying the left side of the equation. 1 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 1 from both sides. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.24.  . In this equation, the variable appears on both sides. We need to isolate it on one side. Although we can choose either side, it will be more convenient to choose the side with the larger coefficient. Since 8 is greater than 6, we’ll isolate on the left side. Since represents , subtract from each side. 4 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 4 to both sides. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.25.  . -8 is associated with by addition. Undo the by subtracting -8 from both sides. Subtracting -8 we get . We actually add 8 to both sides. Check: When becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Practice Set B Exercise 11.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.11. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch11_4_2	Equations Equation An equation is a statement that two algebraic expressions are equal. The following are examples of equations: Notice that , , and are not equations. They are expressions. They are not equations because there is no statement that each of these expressions is equal to another expression. Equations Equation An equation is a statement that two algebraic expressions are equal. The following are examples of equations: Notice that , , and are not equations. They are expressions. They are not equations because there is no statement that each of these expressions is equal to another expression.  || 
book4_ch11_4_3	Solutions and Equivalent Equations Conditional Equations The truth of some equations is conditional upon the value chosen for the variable. Such equations are called conditional equations. There are two additional types of equations. They are examined in courses in algebra, so we will not consider them now. Solutions and Solving an Equation The set of values that, when substituted for the variables, make the equation true, are called the solutions of the equation. An equation has been solved when all its solutions have been found. Sample Set A Example 11.16.  Verify that 3 is a solution to . When , Example 11.17.  Verify that is a solution to When , Example 11.18.  Verify that 5 is not a solution to . When , Example 11.19.  Verify that -2 is a solution to . When , Practice Set A Exercise 11.4.1. (Go to Solution) Verify that 5 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.2. (Go to Solution) Verify that is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.3. (Go to Solution) Verify that 0 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.4. (Go to Solution) Verify that 3 is not a solution to . Exercise 11.4.5. (Go to Solution) Verify that -1 is a solution to . Equivalent Equations Some equations have precisely the same collection of solutions. Such equations are called equivalent equations. For example, , , and are all equivalent equations since the only solution to each is . (Can you verify this?) Solutions and Equivalent Equations Conditional Equations The truth of some equations is conditional upon the value chosen for the variable. Such equations are called conditional equations. There are two additional types of equations. They are examined in courses in algebra, so we will not consider them now. Solutions and Solving an Equation The set of values that, when substituted for the variables, make the equation true, are called the solutions of the equation. An equation has been solved when all its solutions have been found. Sample Set A Example 11.16.  Verify that 3 is a solution to . When , Example 11.17.  Verify that is a solution to When , Example 11.18.  Verify that 5 is not a solution to . When , Example 11.19.  Verify that -2 is a solution to . When , Practice Set A Exercise 11.4.1. (Go to Solution) Verify that 5 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.2. (Go to Solution) Verify that is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.3. (Go to Solution) Verify that 0 is a solution to . Exercise 11.4.4. (Go to Solution) Verify that 3 is not a solution to . Exercise 11.4.5. (Go to Solution) Verify that -1 is a solution to . Equivalent Equations Some equations have precisely the same collection of solutions. Such equations are called equivalent equations. For example, , , and are all equivalent equations since the only solution to each is . (Can you verify this?)  || 
book4_ch11_4_6	Solving Equations We know that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. Table 11.1. This number is the same as this number ↓ ↓ ↓ = 4 = 11 = -1 Addition/Subtraction Property of Equality From this, we can suggest the addition/subtraction property of equality. Given any equation, We can obtain an equivalent equation by adding the same number to both sides of the equation. We can obtain an equivalent equation by subtracting the same number from both sides of the equation. The Idea Behind Equation Solving The idea behind equation solving is to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. Signs of operation (+, -, ⋅,÷) are used to associate two numbers. For example, in the expression , the numbers 5 and 3 are associated by addition. An association can be undone by performing the opposite operation. The addition/subtraction property of equality can be used to undo an association that is made by addition or subtraction. Subtraction is used to undo an addition. Addition is used to undo a subtraction. The procedure is illustrated in the problems of id1163760715212. Sample Set B Use the addition/subtraction property of equality to solve each equation. Example 11.20.  . 4 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 4 from both sides. Check: When , becomes The solution to is . Example 11.21.  . 8 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 8 to both sides. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.22.  . Before we use the addition/subtraction property, we should simplify as much as possible. 6 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 6 from both sides. This is equivalent to . Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.23.  . Begin by simplifying the left side of the equation. 1 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 1 from both sides. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.24.  . In this equation, the variable appears on both sides. We need to isolate it on one side. Although we can choose either side, it will be more convenient to choose the side with the larger coefficient. Since 8 is greater than 6, we’ll isolate on the left side. Since represents , subtract from each side. 4 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 4 to both sides. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.25.  . -8 is associated with by addition. Undo the by subtracting -8 from both sides. Subtracting -8 we get . We actually add 8 to both sides. Check: When becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Practice Set B Exercise 11.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.11. (Go to Solution) Solving Equations We know that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. Table 11.1. This number is the same as this number ↓ ↓ ↓ = 4 = 11 = -1 Addition/Subtraction Property of Equality From this, we can suggest the addition/subtraction property of equality. Given any equation, We can obtain an equivalent equation by adding the same number to both sides of the equation. We can obtain an equivalent equation by subtracting the same number from both sides of the equation. The Idea Behind Equation Solving The idea behind equation solving is to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. Signs of operation (+, -, ⋅,÷) are used to associate two numbers. For example, in the expression , the numbers 5 and 3 are associated by addition. An association can be undone by performing the opposite operation. The addition/subtraction property of equality can be used to undo an association that is made by addition or subtraction. Subtraction is used to undo an addition. Addition is used to undo a subtraction. The procedure is illustrated in the problems of id1163760715212. Sample Set B Use the addition/subtraction property of equality to solve each equation. Example 11.20.  . 4 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 4 from both sides. Check: When , becomes The solution to is . Example 11.21.  . 8 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 8 to both sides. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.22.  . Before we use the addition/subtraction property, we should simplify as much as possible. 6 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 6 from both sides. This is equivalent to . Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.23.  . Begin by simplifying the left side of the equation. 1 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 1 from both sides. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.24.  . In this equation, the variable appears on both sides. We need to isolate it on one side. Although we can choose either side, it will be more convenient to choose the side with the larger coefficient. Since 8 is greater than 6, we’ll isolate on the left side. Since represents , subtract from each side. 4 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 4 to both sides. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.25.  . -8 is associated with by addition. Undo the by subtracting -8 from both sides. Subtracting -8 we get . We actually add 8 to both sides. Check: When becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Practice Set B Exercise 11.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.4.11. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch11_5	 || Multiplication/ Division Property of Equality Recall that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. From this, we can suggest the multiplication/division property of equality. Multiplication/Division Property of Equality Given any equation, We can obtain an equivalent equation by multiplying both sides of the equa­tion by the same nonzero number, that is, if , then is equivalent to We can obtain an equivalent equation by dividing both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if , then is equivalent to The multiplication/division property of equality can be used to undo an association with a number that multiplies or divides the variable. Sample Set A Use the multiplication / division property of equality to solve each equation. Example 11.26.  6 is associated with y by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6 Check: When becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.27.  . -2 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by -2. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is Example 11.28.  . We will examine two methods for solving equations such as this one. Method 1: Use of dividing out common factors. 7 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by 7. Divide out the 7’s. 3 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dviding both sides by 3. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Method 2: Use of reciprocals Recall that if the product of two numbers is 1, the numbers are reciprocals. Thus and are reciprocals. Multiply both sides of the equation by , the reciprocal of . Notice that we get the same solution using either method. Example 11.29.  -8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by -8. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. Example 11.30.  Since is actually and , we can isolate by multiplying both sides of the equation by . Check: When , becomes The solution to is . Practice Set A Use the multiplication/division property of equality to solve each equation. Be sure to check each solution. Exercise 11.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.6. (Go to Solution)  || Combining Techniques in Equation Solving Having examined solving equations using the addition/subtraction and the multi­plication/division principles of equality, we can combine these techniques to solve more complicated equations. When beginning to solve an equation such as , it is helpful to know which property of equality to use first, addition/subtraction or multiplication/di­vision. Recalling that in equation solving we are trying to isolate the variable (disas­sociate numbers from it), it is helpful to note the following. To associate numbers and letters, we use the order of operations. Multiply/divide Add/subtract To undo an association between numbers and letters, we use the order of opera­tions in reverse. Add/subtract Multiply/divide Sample Set B Solve each equation. (In these example problems, we will not show the checks.) Example 11.31.  -4 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 4 to both sides. 6 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6 Example 11.32.  3 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 3 from both sides. -8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by -8. Example 11.33.  Begin by solving this equation by combining like terms. Choose a side on which to isolate m. Since 7 is greater than 1, we'll isolate m on the right side. Subtract m from both sides. 8 is associated with m by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 8 to both sides. 6 is associated with m by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6. Reduce. Notice that if we had chosen to isolate m on the left side of the equation rather than the right side, we would have proceeded as follows: Subtract from both sides. Add 6 to both sides, Divide both sides by -6. This is the same result as with the previous approach. Example 11.34.  7 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by 7. 8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 8. Practice Set B Solve each equation. Be sure to check each solution. Exercise 11.5.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.12. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch11_5_2	Multiplication/ Division Property of Equality Recall that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. From this, we can suggest the multiplication/division property of equality. Multiplication/Division Property of Equality Given any equation, We can obtain an equivalent equation by multiplying both sides of the equa­tion by the same nonzero number, that is, if , then is equivalent to We can obtain an equivalent equation by dividing both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if , then is equivalent to The multiplication/division property of equality can be used to undo an association with a number that multiplies or divides the variable. Sample Set A Use the multiplication / division property of equality to solve each equation. Example 11.26.  6 is associated with y by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6 Check: When becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.27.  . -2 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by -2. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is Example 11.28.  . We will examine two methods for solving equations such as this one. Method 1: Use of dividing out common factors. 7 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by 7. Divide out the 7’s. 3 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dviding both sides by 3. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Method 2: Use of reciprocals Recall that if the product of two numbers is 1, the numbers are reciprocals. Thus and are reciprocals. Multiply both sides of the equation by , the reciprocal of . Notice that we get the same solution using either method. Example 11.29.  -8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by -8. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. Example 11.30.  Since is actually and , we can isolate by multiplying both sides of the equation by . Check: When , becomes The solution to is . Practice Set A Use the multiplication/division property of equality to solve each equation. Be sure to check each solution. Exercise 11.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.6. (Go to Solution) Multiplication/ Division Property of Equality Recall that the equal sign of an equation indicates that the number represented by the expression on the left side is the same as the number represented by the expression on the right side. From this, we can suggest the multiplication/division property of equality. Multiplication/Division Property of Equality Given any equation, We can obtain an equivalent equation by multiplying both sides of the equa­tion by the same nonzero number, that is, if , then is equivalent to We can obtain an equivalent equation by dividing both sides of the equation by the same nonzero number, that is, if , then is equivalent to The multiplication/division property of equality can be used to undo an association with a number that multiplies or divides the variable. Sample Set A Use the multiplication / division property of equality to solve each equation. Example 11.26.  6 is associated with y by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6 Check: When becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Example 11.27.  . -2 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by -2. Check: When , becomes a true statement. The solution to is Example 11.28.  . We will examine two methods for solving equations such as this one. Method 1: Use of dividing out common factors. 7 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by 7. Divide out the 7’s. 3 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dviding both sides by 3. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. The solution to is . Method 2: Use of reciprocals Recall that if the product of two numbers is 1, the numbers are reciprocals. Thus and are reciprocals. Multiply both sides of the equation by , the reciprocal of . Notice that we get the same solution using either method. Example 11.29.  -8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by -8. Check: When , becomes , a true statement. Example 11.30.  Since is actually and , we can isolate by multiplying both sides of the equation by . Check: When , becomes The solution to is . Practice Set A Use the multiplication/division property of equality to solve each equation. Be sure to check each solution. Exercise 11.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.6. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch11_5_5	Combining Techniques in Equation Solving Having examined solving equations using the addition/subtraction and the multi­plication/division principles of equality, we can combine these techniques to solve more complicated equations. When beginning to solve an equation such as , it is helpful to know which property of equality to use first, addition/subtraction or multiplication/di­vision. Recalling that in equation solving we are trying to isolate the variable (disas­sociate numbers from it), it is helpful to note the following. To associate numbers and letters, we use the order of operations. Multiply/divide Add/subtract To undo an association between numbers and letters, we use the order of opera­tions in reverse. Add/subtract Multiply/divide Sample Set B Solve each equation. (In these example problems, we will not show the checks.) Example 11.31.  -4 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 4 to both sides. 6 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6 Example 11.32.  3 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 3 from both sides. -8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by -8. Example 11.33.  Begin by solving this equation by combining like terms. Choose a side on which to isolate m. Since 7 is greater than 1, we'll isolate m on the right side. Subtract m from both sides. 8 is associated with m by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 8 to both sides. 6 is associated with m by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6. Reduce. Notice that if we had chosen to isolate m on the left side of the equation rather than the right side, we would have proceeded as follows: Subtract from both sides. Add 6 to both sides, Divide both sides by -6. This is the same result as with the previous approach. Example 11.34.  7 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by 7. 8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 8. Practice Set B Solve each equation. Be sure to check each solution. Exercise 11.5.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.12. (Go to Solution) Combining Techniques in Equation Solving Having examined solving equations using the addition/subtraction and the multi­plication/division principles of equality, we can combine these techniques to solve more complicated equations. When beginning to solve an equation such as , it is helpful to know which property of equality to use first, addition/subtraction or multiplication/di­vision. Recalling that in equation solving we are trying to isolate the variable (disas­sociate numbers from it), it is helpful to note the following. To associate numbers and letters, we use the order of operations. Multiply/divide Add/subtract To undo an association between numbers and letters, we use the order of opera­tions in reverse. Add/subtract Multiply/divide Sample Set B Solve each equation. (In these example problems, we will not show the checks.) Example 11.31.  -4 is associated with by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 4 to both sides. 6 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6 Example 11.32.  3 is associated with by addition. Undo the association by subtracting 3 from both sides. -8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by -8. Example 11.33.  Begin by solving this equation by combining like terms. Choose a side on which to isolate m. Since 7 is greater than 1, we'll isolate m on the right side. Subtract m from both sides. 8 is associated with m by subtraction. Undo the association by adding 8 to both sides. 6 is associated with m by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 6. Reduce. Notice that if we had chosen to isolate m on the left side of the equation rather than the right side, we would have proceeded as follows: Subtract from both sides. Add 6 to both sides, Divide both sides by -6. This is the same result as with the previous approach. Example 11.34.  7 is associated with by division. Undo the association by multiplying both sides by 7. 8 is associated with by multiplication. Undo the association by dividing both sides by 8. Practice Set B Solve each equation. Be sure to check each solution. Exercise 11.5.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 11.5.12. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch11_6	 || Translating Words to Symbols Practical problems seldom, if ever, come in equation form. The job of the problem solver is to translate the problem from phrases and statements into mathematical expressions and equations, and then to solve the equations. As problem solvers, our job is made simpler if we are able to translate verbal phrases to mathematical expressions and if we follow the five-step method of solving applied problems. To help us translate from words to symbols, we can use the following Mathematics Dictionary. Table 11.2. MATHEMATICS DICTIONARY Word or Phrase Mathematical Operation Sum, sum of, added to, increased by, more than, and, plus + Difference, minus, subtracted from, decreased by, less, less than - Product, the product of, of, multiplied by, times, per ⋅ Quotient, divided by, ratio, per ÷ Equals, is equal to, is, the result is, becomes = A number, an unknown quantity, an unknown, a quantity (or any symbol) Sample Set A Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Example 11.35.  Translation: . Example 11.36.  Translation: . Example 11.37.  Translation: . Example 11.38.  Translation: . Example 11.39.  Translation: , or . Example 11.40.  Translation: . Practice Set A Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Exercise 11.6.1. (Go to Solution) Twelve more than a number. Exercise 11.6.2. (Go to Solution) Eight minus a number. Exercise 11.6.3. (Go to Solution) An unknown quantity less fourteen. Exercise 11.6.4. (Go to Solution) Six times a number is fifty-four. Exercise 11.6.5. (Go to Solution) Two ninths of a number is eleven. Exercise 11.6.6. (Go to Solution) Three more than seven times a number is nine more than five times the number. Exercise 11.6.7. (Go to Solution) Twice a number less eight is equal to one more than three times the number. Sample Set B Example 11.41.  Sometimes the structure of the sentence indicates the use of grouping symbols. We’ll be alert for commas. They set off terms. Translation: . Example 11.42.  Some phrases and sentences do not translate directly. We must be careful to read them properly. The word from often appears in such phrases and sentences. The word from means “a point of departure for motion.” The following translation will illustrate this use. Translation: . The word from indicated the motion (subtraction) is to begin at the point of “some number.” Example 11.43.  Ten less than some number. Notice that less than can be replaced by from. Ten from some number. Translation: . Practice Set B Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Exercise 11.6.8. (Go to Solution) A number divided by eight, plus seven, is fifty. Exercise 11.6.9. (Go to Solution) A number divided by three, minus the same number multiplied by six, is one more than the number. Exercise 11.6.10. (Go to Solution) Nine from some number is four. Exercise 11.6.11. (Go to Solution) Five less than some quantity is eight.  || 
book4_ch11_6_2	Translating Words to Symbols Practical problems seldom, if ever, come in equation form. The job of the problem solver is to translate the problem from phrases and statements into mathematical expressions and equations, and then to solve the equations. As problem solvers, our job is made simpler if we are able to translate verbal phrases to mathematical expressions and if we follow the five-step method of solving applied problems. To help us translate from words to symbols, we can use the following Mathematics Dictionary. Table 11.2. MATHEMATICS DICTIONARY Word or Phrase Mathematical Operation Sum, sum of, added to, increased by, more than, and, plus + Difference, minus, subtracted from, decreased by, less, less than - Product, the product of, of, multiplied by, times, per ⋅ Quotient, divided by, ratio, per ÷ Equals, is equal to, is, the result is, becomes = A number, an unknown quantity, an unknown, a quantity (or any symbol) Sample Set A Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Example 11.35.  Translation: . Example 11.36.  Translation: . Example 11.37.  Translation: . Example 11.38.  Translation: . Example 11.39.  Translation: , or . Example 11.40.  Translation: . Practice Set A Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Exercise 11.6.1. (Go to Solution) Twelve more than a number. Exercise 11.6.2. (Go to Solution) Eight minus a number. Exercise 11.6.3. (Go to Solution) An unknown quantity less fourteen. Exercise 11.6.4. (Go to Solution) Six times a number is fifty-four. Exercise 11.6.5. (Go to Solution) Two ninths of a number is eleven. Exercise 11.6.6. (Go to Solution) Three more than seven times a number is nine more than five times the number. Exercise 11.6.7. (Go to Solution) Twice a number less eight is equal to one more than three times the number. Sample Set B Example 11.41.  Sometimes the structure of the sentence indicates the use of grouping symbols. We’ll be alert for commas. They set off terms. Translation: . Example 11.42.  Some phrases and sentences do not translate directly. We must be careful to read them properly. The word from often appears in such phrases and sentences. The word from means “a point of departure for motion.” The following translation will illustrate this use. Translation: . The word from indicated the motion (subtraction) is to begin at the point of “some number.” Example 11.43.  Ten less than some number. Notice that less than can be replaced by from. Ten from some number. Translation: . Practice Set B Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Exercise 11.6.8. (Go to Solution) A number divided by eight, plus seven, is fifty. Exercise 11.6.9. (Go to Solution) A number divided by three, minus the same number multiplied by six, is one more than the number. Exercise 11.6.10. (Go to Solution) Nine from some number is four. Exercise 11.6.11. (Go to Solution) Five less than some quantity is eight. Translating Words to Symbols Practical problems seldom, if ever, come in equation form. The job of the problem solver is to translate the problem from phrases and statements into mathematical expressions and equations, and then to solve the equations. As problem solvers, our job is made simpler if we are able to translate verbal phrases to mathematical expressions and if we follow the five-step method of solving applied problems. To help us translate from words to symbols, we can use the following Mathematics Dictionary. Table 11.2. MATHEMATICS DICTIONARY Word or Phrase Mathematical Operation Sum, sum of, added to, increased by, more than, and, plus + Difference, minus, subtracted from, decreased by, less, less than - Product, the product of, of, multiplied by, times, per ⋅ Quotient, divided by, ratio, per ÷ Equals, is equal to, is, the result is, becomes = A number, an unknown quantity, an unknown, a quantity (or any symbol) Sample Set A Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Example 11.35.  Translation: . Example 11.36.  Translation: . Example 11.37.  Translation: . Example 11.38.  Translation: . Example 11.39.  Translation: , or . Example 11.40.  Translation: . Practice Set A Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Exercise 11.6.1. (Go to Solution) Twelve more than a number. Exercise 11.6.2. (Go to Solution) Eight minus a number. Exercise 11.6.3. (Go to Solution) An unknown quantity less fourteen. Exercise 11.6.4. (Go to Solution) Six times a number is fifty-four. Exercise 11.6.5. (Go to Solution) Two ninths of a number is eleven. Exercise 11.6.6. (Go to Solution) Three more than seven times a number is nine more than five times the number. Exercise 11.6.7. (Go to Solution) Twice a number less eight is equal to one more than three times the number. Sample Set B Example 11.41.  Sometimes the structure of the sentence indicates the use of grouping symbols. We’ll be alert for commas. They set off terms. Translation: . Example 11.42.  Some phrases and sentences do not translate directly. We must be careful to read them properly. The word from often appears in such phrases and sentences. The word from means “a point of departure for motion.” The following translation will illustrate this use. Translation: . The word from indicated the motion (subtraction) is to begin at the point of “some number.” Example 11.43.  Ten less than some number. Notice that less than can be replaced by from. Ten from some number. Translation: . Practice Set B Translate each phrase or sentence into a mathematical expression or equation. Exercise 11.6.8. (Go to Solution) A number divided by eight, plus seven, is fifty. Exercise 11.6.9. (Go to Solution) A number divided by three, minus the same number multiplied by six, is one more than the number. Exercise 11.6.10. (Go to Solution) Nine from some number is four. Exercise 11.6.11. (Go to Solution) Five less than some quantity is eight.  || 
book4_ch11_7	 || The Five Step Method We are now in a position to solve some applied problems using algebraic methods. The problems we shall solve are intended as logic developers. Although they may not seem to reflect real situations, they do serve as a basis for solving more complex, real situation, applied problems. To solve problems algebraically, we will use the five-step method. Strategy for Reading Word Problems When solving mathematical word problems, you may wish to apply the following "reading strategy." Read the problem quickly to get a feel for the situation. Do not pay close attention to details. At the first reading, too much attention to details may be overwhelming and lead to confusion and discouragement. After the first, brief reading, read the problem carefully in phrases. Reading phrases introduces information more slowly and allows us to absorb and put together important information. We can look for the unknown quantity by reading one phrase at a time. Five-Step Method for Solving Word Problems Let (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Draw a picture if possible. Solve the equation. Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement, not equation, of the problem. Write a conclusion. If it has been your experience that word problems are difficult, then follow the five-step method carefully. Most people have trouble with word problems for two reasons: They are not able to translate the words to mathematical symbols. (See Section 11.5.) They neglect step 1. After working through the problem phrase by phrase, to become familiar with the situation, INTRODUCE A VARIABLE  || Number Problems Sample Set A Example 11.44.  What number decreased by six is five? Let represent the unknown number. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Read phrases. Solve this equation. Add 6 to both sides. Check the result. When 11 is decreased by 6, the result is , which is equal to 5. The solution checks. The number is 11. Example 11.45.  When three times a number is increased by four, the result is eight more than five times the number. Let the unknown number. Translate the phrases to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Check this result. Three times is . Increasing by 4 results in . Now, five times is . Increasing by results in . The results agree, and the solution checks. The number is Example 11.46.  Consecutive integers have the property that if Consecutive odd or even integers have the property that if The sum of three consecutive odd integers is equal to one less than twice the first odd integer. Find the three integers. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Read phrases. Check this result. The sum of the three integers is One less than twice the first integer is . Since these two results are equal, the solution checks. The three odd integers are -7, -5, -3. Practice Set A Exercise 11.7.1. (Go to Solution) When three times a number is decreased by 5, the result is -23. Find the number. Let Check: The number is __________. Exercise 11.7.2. (Go to Solution) When five times a number is increased by 7, the result is five less than seven times the number. Find the number. Let Check: The number is __________. Exercise 11.7.3. (Go to Solution) Two consecutive numbers add to 35. Find the numbers. Check: The numbers are __________ and __________. Exercise 11.7.4. (Go to Solution) The sum of three consecutive even integers is six more than four times the middle integer. Find the integers. Let smallest integer. __________= next integer. __________= largest integer. Check: The integers are __________, __________, and __________.  || Geometry Problems Sample Set B Example 11.47.  The perimeter (length around) of a rectangle is 20 meters. If the length is 4 meters longer than the width, find the length and width of the rectangle. Let the width of the rectangle. Then, the length of the rectangle. We can draw a picture. The length around the rectangle is Check: The length of the rectangle is 7 meters. The width of the rectangle is 3 meters. Practice Set B Exercise 11.7.5. (Go to Solution) The perimeter of a triangle is 16 inches. The second leg is 2 inches longer than the first leg, and the third leg is 5 inches longer than the first leg. Find the length of each leg. Let length of the first leg. __________= length of the second leg. __________= length of the third leg. We can draw a picture. Check: The lengths of the legs are__________,__________, and__________.  || 
book4_ch11_7_2	The Five Step Method We are now in a position to solve some applied problems using algebraic methods. The problems we shall solve are intended as logic developers. Although they may not seem to reflect real situations, they do serve as a basis for solving more complex, real situation, applied problems. To solve problems algebraically, we will use the five-step method. Strategy for Reading Word Problems When solving mathematical word problems, you may wish to apply the following "reading strategy." Read the problem quickly to get a feel for the situation. Do not pay close attention to details. At the first reading, too much attention to details may be overwhelming and lead to confusion and discouragement. After the first, brief reading, read the problem carefully in phrases. Reading phrases introduces information more slowly and allows us to absorb and put together important information. We can look for the unknown quantity by reading one phrase at a time. Five-Step Method for Solving Word Problems Let (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Draw a picture if possible. Solve the equation. Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement, not equation, of the problem. Write a conclusion. If it has been your experience that word problems are difficult, then follow the five-step method carefully. Most people have trouble with word problems for two reasons: They are not able to translate the words to mathematical symbols. (See Section 11.5.) They neglect step 1. After working through the problem phrase by phrase, to become familiar with the situation, INTRODUCE A VARIABLE The Five Step Method We are now in a position to solve some applied problems using algebraic methods. The problems we shall solve are intended as logic developers. Although they may not seem to reflect real situations, they do serve as a basis for solving more complex, real situation, applied problems. To solve problems algebraically, we will use the five-step method. Strategy for Reading Word Problems When solving mathematical word problems, you may wish to apply the following "reading strategy." Read the problem quickly to get a feel for the situation. Do not pay close attention to details. At the first reading, too much attention to details may be overwhelming and lead to confusion and discouragement. After the first, brief reading, read the problem carefully in phrases. Reading phrases introduces information more slowly and allows us to absorb and put together important information. We can look for the unknown quantity by reading one phrase at a time. Five-Step Method for Solving Word Problems Let (or some other letter) represent the unknown quantity. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and form an equation. Draw a picture if possible. Solve the equation. Check the solution by substituting the result into the original statement, not equation, of the problem. Write a conclusion. If it has been your experience that word problems are difficult, then follow the five-step method carefully. Most people have trouble with word problems for two reasons: They are not able to translate the words to mathematical symbols. (See Section 11.5.) They neglect step 1. After working through the problem phrase by phrase, to become familiar with the situation, INTRODUCE A VARIABLE  || 
book4_ch11_7_3	Number Problems Sample Set A Example 11.44.  What number decreased by six is five? Let represent the unknown number. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Read phrases. Solve this equation. Add 6 to both sides. Check the result. When 11 is decreased by 6, the result is , which is equal to 5. The solution checks. The number is 11. Example 11.45.  When three times a number is increased by four, the result is eight more than five times the number. Let the unknown number. Translate the phrases to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Check this result. Three times is . Increasing by 4 results in . Now, five times is . Increasing by results in . The results agree, and the solution checks. The number is Example 11.46.  Consecutive integers have the property that if Consecutive odd or even integers have the property that if The sum of three consecutive odd integers is equal to one less than twice the first odd integer. Find the three integers. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Read phrases. Check this result. The sum of the three integers is One less than twice the first integer is . Since these two results are equal, the solution checks. The three odd integers are -7, -5, -3. Practice Set A Exercise 11.7.1. (Go to Solution) When three times a number is decreased by 5, the result is -23. Find the number. Let Check: The number is __________. Exercise 11.7.2. (Go to Solution) When five times a number is increased by 7, the result is five less than seven times the number. Find the number. Let Check: The number is __________. Exercise 11.7.3. (Go to Solution) Two consecutive numbers add to 35. Find the numbers. Check: The numbers are __________ and __________. Exercise 11.7.4. (Go to Solution) The sum of three consecutive even integers is six more than four times the middle integer. Find the integers. Let smallest integer. __________= next integer. __________= largest integer. Check: The integers are __________, __________, and __________. Number Problems Sample Set A Example 11.44.  What number decreased by six is five? Let represent the unknown number. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Read phrases. Solve this equation. Add 6 to both sides. Check the result. When 11 is decreased by 6, the result is , which is equal to 5. The solution checks. The number is 11. Example 11.45.  When three times a number is increased by four, the result is eight more than five times the number. Let the unknown number. Translate the phrases to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Check this result. Three times is . Increasing by 4 results in . Now, five times is . Increasing by results in . The results agree, and the solution checks. The number is Example 11.46.  Consecutive integers have the property that if Consecutive odd or even integers have the property that if The sum of three consecutive odd integers is equal to one less than twice the first odd integer. Find the three integers. Translate the words to mathematical symbols and construct an equation. Read phrases. Check this result. The sum of the three integers is One less than twice the first integer is . Since these two results are equal, the solution checks. The three odd integers are -7, -5, -3. Practice Set A Exercise 11.7.1. (Go to Solution) When three times a number is decreased by 5, the result is -23. Find the number. Let Check: The number is __________. Exercise 11.7.2. (Go to Solution) When five times a number is increased by 7, the result is five less than seven times the number. Find the number. Let Check: The number is __________. Exercise 11.7.3. (Go to Solution) Two consecutive numbers add to 35. Find the numbers. Check: The numbers are __________ and __________. Exercise 11.7.4. (Go to Solution) The sum of three consecutive even integers is six more than four times the middle integer. Find the integers. Let smallest integer. __________= next integer. __________= largest integer. Check: The integers are __________, __________, and __________.  || 
book4_ch11_7_6	Geometry Problems Sample Set B Example 11.47.  The perimeter (length around) of a rectangle is 20 meters. If the length is 4 meters longer than the width, find the length and width of the rectangle. Let the width of the rectangle. Then, the length of the rectangle. We can draw a picture. The length around the rectangle is Check: The length of the rectangle is 7 meters. The width of the rectangle is 3 meters. Practice Set B Exercise 11.7.5. (Go to Solution) The perimeter of a triangle is 16 inches. The second leg is 2 inches longer than the first leg, and the third leg is 5 inches longer than the first leg. Find the length of each leg. Let length of the first leg. __________= length of the second leg. __________= length of the third leg. We can draw a picture. Check: The lengths of the legs are__________,__________, and__________. Geometry Problems Sample Set B Example 11.47.  The perimeter (length around) of a rectangle is 20 meters. If the length is 4 meters longer than the width, find the length and width of the rectangle. Let the width of the rectangle. Then, the length of the rectangle. We can draw a picture. The length around the rectangle is Check: The length of the rectangle is 7 meters. The width of the rectangle is 3 meters. Practice Set B Exercise 11.7.5. (Go to Solution) The perimeter of a triangle is 16 inches. The second leg is 2 inches longer than the first leg, and the third leg is 5 inches longer than the first leg. Find the length of each leg. Let length of the first leg. __________= length of the second leg. __________= length of the third leg. We can draw a picture. Check: The lengths of the legs are__________,__________, and__________.  || 
book4_ch08	 ||  || Estimation by Rounding The rounding technique estimates the result of a computation by rounding the numbers involved in the computation to one or two nonzero digits. Sample Set A Example 8.1.  Estimate the sum: 2,357 + 6,106. Notice that 2,357 is near and that 6,106 is near The sum can be estimated by 2,400 + 6,100 = 8,500. (It is quick and easy to add 24 and 61.) Thus, 2,357 + 6,106 is about 8,400. In fact, 2,357 + 6,106 = 8,463. Practice Set A Exercise 8.2.1. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 4,216 + 3,942. Exercise 8.2.2. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 812 + 514. Exercise 8.2.3. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 43,892 + 92,106. Sample Set B Example 8.2.  Estimate the difference: 5,203 – 3,015. Notice that 5,203 is near and that 3,015 is near The difference can be estimated by 5,200 – 3,000 = 2,200. Thus, 5,203 – 3,015 is about 2,200. In fact, 5,203 – 3,015 = 2,188. We could make a less accurate estimation by observing that 5,203 is near 5,000. The number 5,000 has only one nonzero digit rather than two (as does 5,200). This fact makes the estimation quicker (but a little less accurate). We then estimate the difference by 5,000 – 3,000 = 2,000, and conclude that 5,203 – 3,015 is about 2,000. This is why we say "answers may vary." Practice Set B Exercise 8.2.4. (Go to Solution) Estimate the difference: 628 – 413. Exercise 8.2.5. (Go to Solution) Estimate the difference: 7,842 – 5,209. Exercise 8.2.6. (Go to Solution) Estimate the difference: 73,812 – 28,492. Sample Set C Example 8.3.  Estimate the product: 73 ⋅ 46. Notice that 73 is near and that 46 is near The product can be estimated by 70 ⋅ 50 = 3,500. (Recall that to multiply numbers ending in zeros, we multiply the nonzero digits and affix to this product the total number of ending zeros in the factors. See Section 2.2 for a review of this technique.) Thus, 73 ⋅ 46 is about 3,500. In fact, 73 ⋅ 46 = 3,358. Example 8.4.  Estimate the product: 87 ⋅ 4,316. Notice that 87 is close to and that 4,316 is close to The product can be estimated by 90 ⋅ 4,000 = 360,000. Thus, 87 ⋅ 4,316 is about 360,000. In fact, 87 ⋅ 4,316 = 375,492. Practice Set C Exercise 8.2.7. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: 31 ⋅ 87. Exercise 8.2.8. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: 18 ⋅ 42. Exercise 8.2.9. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: 16 ⋅ 94. Sample Set D Example 8.5.  Estimate the quotient: 153 ÷ 17. Notice that 153 is close to and that 17 is close to The quotient can be estimated by 150 ÷ 15 = 10. Thus, 153 ÷ 17 is about 10. In fact, 153 ÷ 17 = 9. Example 8.6.  Estimate the quotient: 742,000 ÷ 2,400. Notice that 742,000 is close to , and that 2,400 is close to The quotient can be estimated by 700,000 ÷ 2,000 = 350. Thus, 742,000 ÷ 2,400 is about 350. In fact, . Practice Set D Exercise 8.2.10. (Go to Solution) Estimate the quotient: 221 ÷ 18. Exercise 8.2.11. (Go to Solution) Estimate the quotient: 4,079 ÷ 381. Exercise 8.2.12. (Go to Solution) Estimate the quotient: 609,000 ÷ 16,000. Sample Set E Example 8.7.  Estimate the sum: 53.82 + 41.6. Notice that 53.82 is close to and that 41.6 is close to The sum can be estimated by 54 + 42 = 96. Thus, 53.82 + 41.6 is about 96. In fact, 53.82 + 41.6 = 95.42. Practice Set E Exercise 8.2.13. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 61.02 + 26.8. Exercise 8.2.14. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 109.12 + 137.88. Sample Set F Example 8.8.  Estimate the product: (31.28)(14.2). Notice that 31.28 is close to and that 14.2 is close to The product can be estimated by 30 ⋅ 15 = 450. ( 3 ⋅ 15 = 45, then affix one zero.) Thus, (31.28)(14.2) is about 450. In fact, (31.28)(14.2) = 444.176. Example 8.9.  Estimate 21% of 5.42. Notice that 21% = .21 as a decimal, and that .21 is close to Notice also that 5.42 is close to Then, 21% of 5.42 can be estimated by (.2)(5) = 1. Thus, 21% of 5.42 is about 1. In fact, 21% of 5.42 is 1.1382. Practice Set F Exercise 8.2.15. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: (47.8)(21.1). Exercise 8.2.16. (Go to Solution) Estimate 32% of 14.88.  ||  ||  || The Distributive Property Distributive Property The distributive property is a characteristic of numbers that involves both addition and multiplication. It is used often in algebra, and we can use it now to obtain exact results for a multiplication. Suppose we wish to compute 3(2 + 5). We can proceed in either of two ways, one way which is known to us already (the order of operations), and a new way (the distributive property). Compute 3(2 + 5) using the order of operations. 3 ( 2 + 5 ) Operate inside the parentheses first: 2 + 5 = 7. 3 ( 2 + 5 ) = 3 ⋅ 7 Now multiply 3 and 7. 3 ( 2 + 5 ) = 3 ⋅ 7 = 21 Thus, 3(2 + 5) = 21. Compute 3(2 + 5) using the distributive property. We know that multiplication describes repeated addition. Thus, Thus, 3(2 + 5) = 21. Let's look again at this use of the distributive property. The 3 has been distributed to the 2 and 5. This is the distributive property. We distribute the factor to each addend in the parentheses. The distributive property works for both sums and differences. Sample Set A Example 8.15.  Using the order of operations, we get Example 8.16.  Using the order of operations, we get Example 8.17.  Example 8.18.  Practice Set A Use the distributive property to compute each value. Exercise 8.4.1. (Go to Solution) 6(8 + 4) Exercise 8.4.2. (Go to Solution) 4(4 + 7) Exercise 8.4.3. (Go to Solution) 8(2 + 9) Exercise 8.4.4. (Go to Solution) 12(10 + 3) Exercise 8.4.5. (Go to Solution) 6(11 – 3) Exercise 8.4.6. (Go to Solution) 8(9 – 7) Exercise 8.4.7. (Go to Solution) 15(30 – 8)  || Estimation Using the Distributive Property We can use the distributive property to obtain exact results for products such as 25 ⋅ 23. The distributive property works best for products when one of the factors ends in 0 or 5. We shall restrict our attention to only such products. Sample Set B Use the distributive property to compute each value. Example 8.19.  25 ⋅ 23 Notice that 23 = 20 + 3. We now write Thus, 25 ⋅ 23 = 575 We could have proceeded by writing 23 as 30 – 7. Example 8.20.  15 ⋅ 37 Notice that 37 = 30 + 7. We now write Thus, 15 ⋅ 37 = 555 We could have proceeded by writing 37 as 40 – 3. Example 8.21.  15 ⋅ 86 Notice that 86 = 80 + 6. We now write We could have proceeded by writing 86 as 90 – 4. Practice Set B Use the distributive property to compute each value. Exercise 8.4.8. (Go to Solution) 25 ⋅ 12 Exercise 8.4.9. (Go to Solution) 35 ⋅ 14 Exercise 8.4.10. (Go to Solution) 80 ⋅ 58 Exercise 8.4.11. (Go to Solution) 65 ⋅ 62  ||  || 
book4_ch08_2	 || Estimation by Rounding The rounding technique estimates the result of a computation by rounding the numbers involved in the computation to one or two nonzero digits. Sample Set A Example 8.1.  Estimate the sum: 2,357 + 6,106. Notice that 2,357 is near and that 6,106 is near The sum can be estimated by 2,400 + 6,100 = 8,500. (It is quick and easy to add 24 and 61.) Thus, 2,357 + 6,106 is about 8,400. In fact, 2,357 + 6,106 = 8,463. Practice Set A Exercise 8.2.1. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 4,216 + 3,942. Exercise 8.2.2. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 812 + 514. Exercise 8.2.3. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 43,892 + 92,106. Sample Set B Example 8.2.  Estimate the difference: 5,203 – 3,015. Notice that 5,203 is near and that 3,015 is near The difference can be estimated by 5,200 – 3,000 = 2,200. Thus, 5,203 – 3,015 is about 2,200. In fact, 5,203 – 3,015 = 2,188. We could make a less accurate estimation by observing that 5,203 is near 5,000. The number 5,000 has only one nonzero digit rather than two (as does 5,200). This fact makes the estimation quicker (but a little less accurate). We then estimate the difference by 5,000 – 3,000 = 2,000, and conclude that 5,203 – 3,015 is about 2,000. This is why we say "answers may vary." Practice Set B Exercise 8.2.4. (Go to Solution) Estimate the difference: 628 – 413. Exercise 8.2.5. (Go to Solution) Estimate the difference: 7,842 – 5,209. Exercise 8.2.6. (Go to Solution) Estimate the difference: 73,812 – 28,492. Sample Set C Example 8.3.  Estimate the product: 73 ⋅ 46. Notice that 73 is near and that 46 is near The product can be estimated by 70 ⋅ 50 = 3,500. (Recall that to multiply numbers ending in zeros, we multiply the nonzero digits and affix to this product the total number of ending zeros in the factors. See Section 2.2 for a review of this technique.) Thus, 73 ⋅ 46 is about 3,500. In fact, 73 ⋅ 46 = 3,358. Example 8.4.  Estimate the product: 87 ⋅ 4,316. Notice that 87 is close to and that 4,316 is close to The product can be estimated by 90 ⋅ 4,000 = 360,000. Thus, 87 ⋅ 4,316 is about 360,000. In fact, 87 ⋅ 4,316 = 375,492. Practice Set C Exercise 8.2.7. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: 31 ⋅ 87. Exercise 8.2.8. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: 18 ⋅ 42. Exercise 8.2.9. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: 16 ⋅ 94. Sample Set D Example 8.5.  Estimate the quotient: 153 ÷ 17. Notice that 153 is close to and that 17 is close to The quotient can be estimated by 150 ÷ 15 = 10. Thus, 153 ÷ 17 is about 10. In fact, 153 ÷ 17 = 9. Example 8.6.  Estimate the quotient: 742,000 ÷ 2,400. Notice that 742,000 is close to , and that 2,400 is close to The quotient can be estimated by 700,000 ÷ 2,000 = 350. Thus, 742,000 ÷ 2,400 is about 350. In fact, . Practice Set D Exercise 8.2.10. (Go to Solution) Estimate the quotient: 221 ÷ 18. Exercise 8.2.11. (Go to Solution) Estimate the quotient: 4,079 ÷ 381. Exercise 8.2.12. (Go to Solution) Estimate the quotient: 609,000 ÷ 16,000. Sample Set E Example 8.7.  Estimate the sum: 53.82 + 41.6. Notice that 53.82 is close to and that 41.6 is close to The sum can be estimated by 54 + 42 = 96. Thus, 53.82 + 41.6 is about 96. In fact, 53.82 + 41.6 = 95.42. Practice Set E Exercise 8.2.13. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 61.02 + 26.8. Exercise 8.2.14. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 109.12 + 137.88. Sample Set F Example 8.8.  Estimate the product: (31.28)(14.2). Notice that 31.28 is close to and that 14.2 is close to The product can be estimated by 30 ⋅ 15 = 450. ( 3 ⋅ 15 = 45, then affix one zero.) Thus, (31.28)(14.2) is about 450. In fact, (31.28)(14.2) = 444.176. Example 8.9.  Estimate 21% of 5.42. Notice that 21% = .21 as a decimal, and that .21 is close to Notice also that 5.42 is close to Then, 21% of 5.42 can be estimated by (.2)(5) = 1. Thus, 21% of 5.42 is about 1. In fact, 21% of 5.42 is 1.1382. Practice Set F Exercise 8.2.15. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: (47.8)(21.1). Exercise 8.2.16. (Go to Solution) Estimate 32% of 14.88.  || 
book4_ch08_2_2	Estimation by Rounding The rounding technique estimates the result of a computation by rounding the numbers involved in the computation to one or two nonzero digits. Sample Set A Example 8.1.  Estimate the sum: 2,357 + 6,106. Notice that 2,357 is near and that 6,106 is near The sum can be estimated by 2,400 + 6,100 = 8,500. (It is quick and easy to add 24 and 61.) Thus, 2,357 + 6,106 is about 8,400. In fact, 2,357 + 6,106 = 8,463. Practice Set A Exercise 8.2.1. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 4,216 + 3,942. Exercise 8.2.2. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 812 + 514. Exercise 8.2.3. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 43,892 + 92,106. Sample Set B Example 8.2.  Estimate the difference: 5,203 – 3,015. Notice that 5,203 is near and that 3,015 is near The difference can be estimated by 5,200 – 3,000 = 2,200. Thus, 5,203 – 3,015 is about 2,200. In fact, 5,203 – 3,015 = 2,188. We could make a less accurate estimation by observing that 5,203 is near 5,000. The number 5,000 has only one nonzero digit rather than two (as does 5,200). This fact makes the estimation quicker (but a little less accurate). We then estimate the difference by 5,000 – 3,000 = 2,000, and conclude that 5,203 – 3,015 is about 2,000. This is why we say "answers may vary." Practice Set B Exercise 8.2.4. (Go to Solution) Estimate the difference: 628 – 413. Exercise 8.2.5. (Go to Solution) Estimate the difference: 7,842 – 5,209. Exercise 8.2.6. (Go to Solution) Estimate the difference: 73,812 – 28,492. Sample Set C Example 8.3.  Estimate the product: 73 ⋅ 46. Notice that 73 is near and that 46 is near The product can be estimated by 70 ⋅ 50 = 3,500. (Recall that to multiply numbers ending in zeros, we multiply the nonzero digits and affix to this product the total number of ending zeros in the factors. See Section 2.2 for a review of this technique.) Thus, 73 ⋅ 46 is about 3,500. In fact, 73 ⋅ 46 = 3,358. Example 8.4.  Estimate the product: 87 ⋅ 4,316. Notice that 87 is close to and that 4,316 is close to The product can be estimated by 90 ⋅ 4,000 = 360,000. Thus, 87 ⋅ 4,316 is about 360,000. In fact, 87 ⋅ 4,316 = 375,492. Practice Set C Exercise 8.2.7. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: 31 ⋅ 87. Exercise 8.2.8. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: 18 ⋅ 42. Exercise 8.2.9. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: 16 ⋅ 94. Sample Set D Example 8.5.  Estimate the quotient: 153 ÷ 17. Notice that 153 is close to and that 17 is close to The quotient can be estimated by 150 ÷ 15 = 10. Thus, 153 ÷ 17 is about 10. In fact, 153 ÷ 17 = 9. Example 8.6.  Estimate the quotient: 742,000 ÷ 2,400. Notice that 742,000 is close to , and that 2,400 is close to The quotient can be estimated by 700,000 ÷ 2,000 = 350. Thus, 742,000 ÷ 2,400 is about 350. In fact, . Practice Set D Exercise 8.2.10. (Go to Solution) Estimate the quotient: 221 ÷ 18. Exercise 8.2.11. (Go to Solution) Estimate the quotient: 4,079 ÷ 381. Exercise 8.2.12. (Go to Solution) Estimate the quotient: 609,000 ÷ 16,000. Sample Set E Example 8.7.  Estimate the sum: 53.82 + 41.6. Notice that 53.82 is close to and that 41.6 is close to The sum can be estimated by 54 + 42 = 96. Thus, 53.82 + 41.6 is about 96. In fact, 53.82 + 41.6 = 95.42. Practice Set E Exercise 8.2.13. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 61.02 + 26.8. Exercise 8.2.14. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 109.12 + 137.88. Sample Set F Example 8.8.  Estimate the product: (31.28)(14.2). Notice that 31.28 is close to and that 14.2 is close to The product can be estimated by 30 ⋅ 15 = 450. ( 3 ⋅ 15 = 45, then affix one zero.) Thus, (31.28)(14.2) is about 450. In fact, (31.28)(14.2) = 444.176. Example 8.9.  Estimate 21% of 5.42. Notice that 21% = .21 as a decimal, and that .21 is close to Notice also that 5.42 is close to Then, 21% of 5.42 can be estimated by (.2)(5) = 1. Thus, 21% of 5.42 is about 1. In fact, 21% of 5.42 is 1.1382. Practice Set F Exercise 8.2.15. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: (47.8)(21.1). Exercise 8.2.16. (Go to Solution) Estimate 32% of 14.88. Estimation by Rounding The rounding technique estimates the result of a computation by rounding the numbers involved in the computation to one or two nonzero digits. Sample Set A Example 8.1.  Estimate the sum: 2,357 + 6,106. Notice that 2,357 is near and that 6,106 is near The sum can be estimated by 2,400 + 6,100 = 8,500. (It is quick and easy to add 24 and 61.) Thus, 2,357 + 6,106 is about 8,400. In fact, 2,357 + 6,106 = 8,463. Practice Set A Exercise 8.2.1. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 4,216 + 3,942. Exercise 8.2.2. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 812 + 514. Exercise 8.2.3. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 43,892 + 92,106. Sample Set B Example 8.2.  Estimate the difference: 5,203 – 3,015. Notice that 5,203 is near and that 3,015 is near The difference can be estimated by 5,200 – 3,000 = 2,200. Thus, 5,203 – 3,015 is about 2,200. In fact, 5,203 – 3,015 = 2,188. We could make a less accurate estimation by observing that 5,203 is near 5,000. The number 5,000 has only one nonzero digit rather than two (as does 5,200). This fact makes the estimation quicker (but a little less accurate). We then estimate the difference by 5,000 – 3,000 = 2,000, and conclude that 5,203 – 3,015 is about 2,000. This is why we say "answers may vary." Practice Set B Exercise 8.2.4. (Go to Solution) Estimate the difference: 628 – 413. Exercise 8.2.5. (Go to Solution) Estimate the difference: 7,842 – 5,209. Exercise 8.2.6. (Go to Solution) Estimate the difference: 73,812 – 28,492. Sample Set C Example 8.3.  Estimate the product: 73 ⋅ 46. Notice that 73 is near and that 46 is near The product can be estimated by 70 ⋅ 50 = 3,500. (Recall that to multiply numbers ending in zeros, we multiply the nonzero digits and affix to this product the total number of ending zeros in the factors. See Section 2.2 for a review of this technique.) Thus, 73 ⋅ 46 is about 3,500. In fact, 73 ⋅ 46 = 3,358. Example 8.4.  Estimate the product: 87 ⋅ 4,316. Notice that 87 is close to and that 4,316 is close to The product can be estimated by 90 ⋅ 4,000 = 360,000. Thus, 87 ⋅ 4,316 is about 360,000. In fact, 87 ⋅ 4,316 = 375,492. Practice Set C Exercise 8.2.7. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: 31 ⋅ 87. Exercise 8.2.8. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: 18 ⋅ 42. Exercise 8.2.9. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: 16 ⋅ 94. Sample Set D Example 8.5.  Estimate the quotient: 153 ÷ 17. Notice that 153 is close to and that 17 is close to The quotient can be estimated by 150 ÷ 15 = 10. Thus, 153 ÷ 17 is about 10. In fact, 153 ÷ 17 = 9. Example 8.6.  Estimate the quotient: 742,000 ÷ 2,400. Notice that 742,000 is close to , and that 2,400 is close to The quotient can be estimated by 700,000 ÷ 2,000 = 350. Thus, 742,000 ÷ 2,400 is about 350. In fact, . Practice Set D Exercise 8.2.10. (Go to Solution) Estimate the quotient: 221 ÷ 18. Exercise 8.2.11. (Go to Solution) Estimate the quotient: 4,079 ÷ 381. Exercise 8.2.12. (Go to Solution) Estimate the quotient: 609,000 ÷ 16,000. Sample Set E Example 8.7.  Estimate the sum: 53.82 + 41.6. Notice that 53.82 is close to and that 41.6 is close to The sum can be estimated by 54 + 42 = 96. Thus, 53.82 + 41.6 is about 96. In fact, 53.82 + 41.6 = 95.42. Practice Set E Exercise 8.2.13. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 61.02 + 26.8. Exercise 8.2.14. (Go to Solution) Estimate the sum: 109.12 + 137.88. Sample Set F Example 8.8.  Estimate the product: (31.28)(14.2). Notice that 31.28 is close to and that 14.2 is close to The product can be estimated by 30 ⋅ 15 = 450. ( 3 ⋅ 15 = 45, then affix one zero.) Thus, (31.28)(14.2) is about 450. In fact, (31.28)(14.2) = 444.176. Example 8.9.  Estimate 21% of 5.42. Notice that 21% = .21 as a decimal, and that .21 is close to Notice also that 5.42 is close to Then, 21% of 5.42 can be estimated by (.2)(5) = 1. Thus, 21% of 5.42 is about 1. In fact, 21% of 5.42 is 1.1382. Practice Set F Exercise 8.2.15. (Go to Solution) Estimate the product: (47.8)(21.1). Exercise 8.2.16. (Go to Solution) Estimate 32% of 14.88.  || 
book4_ch08_3	 || 
book4_ch08_4	 || The Distributive Property Distributive Property The distributive property is a characteristic of numbers that involves both addition and multiplication. It is used often in algebra, and we can use it now to obtain exact results for a multiplication. Suppose we wish to compute 3(2 + 5). We can proceed in either of two ways, one way which is known to us already (the order of operations), and a new way (the distributive property). Compute 3(2 + 5) using the order of operations. 3 ( 2 + 5 ) Operate inside the parentheses first: 2 + 5 = 7. 3 ( 2 + 5 ) = 3 ⋅ 7 Now multiply 3 and 7. 3 ( 2 + 5 ) = 3 ⋅ 7 = 21 Thus, 3(2 + 5) = 21. Compute 3(2 + 5) using the distributive property. We know that multiplication describes repeated addition. Thus, Thus, 3(2 + 5) = 21. Let's look again at this use of the distributive property. The 3 has been distributed to the 2 and 5. This is the distributive property. We distribute the factor to each addend in the parentheses. The distributive property works for both sums and differences. Sample Set A Example 8.15.  Using the order of operations, we get Example 8.16.  Using the order of operations, we get Example 8.17.  Example 8.18.  Practice Set A Use the distributive property to compute each value. Exercise 8.4.1. (Go to Solution) 6(8 + 4) Exercise 8.4.2. (Go to Solution) 4(4 + 7) Exercise 8.4.3. (Go to Solution) 8(2 + 9) Exercise 8.4.4. (Go to Solution) 12(10 + 3) Exercise 8.4.5. (Go to Solution) 6(11 – 3) Exercise 8.4.6. (Go to Solution) 8(9 – 7) Exercise 8.4.7. (Go to Solution) 15(30 – 8)  || Estimation Using the Distributive Property We can use the distributive property to obtain exact results for products such as 25 ⋅ 23. The distributive property works best for products when one of the factors ends in 0 or 5. We shall restrict our attention to only such products. Sample Set B Use the distributive property to compute each value. Example 8.19.  25 ⋅ 23 Notice that 23 = 20 + 3. We now write Thus, 25 ⋅ 23 = 575 We could have proceeded by writing 23 as 30 – 7. Example 8.20.  15 ⋅ 37 Notice that 37 = 30 + 7. We now write Thus, 15 ⋅ 37 = 555 We could have proceeded by writing 37 as 40 – 3. Example 8.21.  15 ⋅ 86 Notice that 86 = 80 + 6. We now write We could have proceeded by writing 86 as 90 – 4. Practice Set B Use the distributive property to compute each value. Exercise 8.4.8. (Go to Solution) 25 ⋅ 12 Exercise 8.4.9. (Go to Solution) 35 ⋅ 14 Exercise 8.4.10. (Go to Solution) 80 ⋅ 58 Exercise 8.4.11. (Go to Solution) 65 ⋅ 62  || 
book4_ch08_4_2	The Distributive Property Distributive Property The distributive property is a characteristic of numbers that involves both addition and multiplication. It is used often in algebra, and we can use it now to obtain exact results for a multiplication. Suppose we wish to compute 3(2 + 5). We can proceed in either of two ways, one way which is known to us already (the order of operations), and a new way (the distributive property). Compute 3(2 + 5) using the order of operations. 3 ( 2 + 5 ) Operate inside the parentheses first: 2 + 5 = 7. 3 ( 2 + 5 ) = 3 ⋅ 7 Now multiply 3 and 7. 3 ( 2 + 5 ) = 3 ⋅ 7 = 21 Thus, 3(2 + 5) = 21. Compute 3(2 + 5) using the distributive property. We know that multiplication describes repeated addition. Thus, Thus, 3(2 + 5) = 21. Let's look again at this use of the distributive property. The 3 has been distributed to the 2 and 5. This is the distributive property. We distribute the factor to each addend in the parentheses. The distributive property works for both sums and differences. Sample Set A Example 8.15.  Using the order of operations, we get Example 8.16.  Using the order of operations, we get Example 8.17.  Example 8.18.  Practice Set A Use the distributive property to compute each value. Exercise 8.4.1. (Go to Solution) 6(8 + 4) Exercise 8.4.2. (Go to Solution) 4(4 + 7) Exercise 8.4.3. (Go to Solution) 8(2 + 9) Exercise 8.4.4. (Go to Solution) 12(10 + 3) Exercise 8.4.5. (Go to Solution) 6(11 – 3) Exercise 8.4.6. (Go to Solution) 8(9 – 7) Exercise 8.4.7. (Go to Solution) 15(30 – 8) The Distributive Property Distributive Property The distributive property is a characteristic of numbers that involves both addition and multiplication. It is used often in algebra, and we can use it now to obtain exact results for a multiplication. Suppose we wish to compute 3(2 + 5). We can proceed in either of two ways, one way which is known to us already (the order of operations), and a new way (the distributive property). Compute 3(2 + 5) using the order of operations. 3 ( 2 + 5 ) Operate inside the parentheses first: 2 + 5 = 7. 3 ( 2 + 5 ) = 3 ⋅ 7 Now multiply 3 and 7. 3 ( 2 + 5 ) = 3 ⋅ 7 = 21 Thus, 3(2 + 5) = 21. Compute 3(2 + 5) using the distributive property. We know that multiplication describes repeated addition. Thus, Thus, 3(2 + 5) = 21. Let's look again at this use of the distributive property. The 3 has been distributed to the 2 and 5. This is the distributive property. We distribute the factor to each addend in the parentheses. The distributive property works for both sums and differences. Sample Set A Example 8.15.  Using the order of operations, we get Example 8.16.  Using the order of operations, we get Example 8.17.  Example 8.18.  Practice Set A Use the distributive property to compute each value. Exercise 8.4.1. (Go to Solution) 6(8 + 4) Exercise 8.4.2. (Go to Solution) 4(4 + 7) Exercise 8.4.3. (Go to Solution) 8(2 + 9) Exercise 8.4.4. (Go to Solution) 12(10 + 3) Exercise 8.4.5. (Go to Solution) 6(11 – 3) Exercise 8.4.6. (Go to Solution) 8(9 – 7) Exercise 8.4.7. (Go to Solution) 15(30 – 8)  || 
book4_ch08_4_5	Estimation Using the Distributive Property We can use the distributive property to obtain exact results for products such as 25 ⋅ 23. The distributive property works best for products when one of the factors ends in 0 or 5. We shall restrict our attention to only such products. Sample Set B Use the distributive property to compute each value. Example 8.19.  25 ⋅ 23 Notice that 23 = 20 + 3. We now write Thus, 25 ⋅ 23 = 575 We could have proceeded by writing 23 as 30 – 7. Example 8.20.  15 ⋅ 37 Notice that 37 = 30 + 7. We now write Thus, 15 ⋅ 37 = 555 We could have proceeded by writing 37 as 40 – 3. Example 8.21.  15 ⋅ 86 Notice that 86 = 80 + 6. We now write We could have proceeded by writing 86 as 90 – 4. Practice Set B Use the distributive property to compute each value. Exercise 8.4.8. (Go to Solution) 25 ⋅ 12 Exercise 8.4.9. (Go to Solution) 35 ⋅ 14 Exercise 8.4.10. (Go to Solution) 80 ⋅ 58 Exercise 8.4.11. (Go to Solution) 65 ⋅ 62 Estimation Using the Distributive Property We can use the distributive property to obtain exact results for products such as 25 ⋅ 23. The distributive property works best for products when one of the factors ends in 0 or 5. We shall restrict our attention to only such products. Sample Set B Use the distributive property to compute each value. Example 8.19.  25 ⋅ 23 Notice that 23 = 20 + 3. We now write Thus, 25 ⋅ 23 = 575 We could have proceeded by writing 23 as 30 – 7. Example 8.20.  15 ⋅ 37 Notice that 37 = 30 + 7. We now write Thus, 15 ⋅ 37 = 555 We could have proceeded by writing 37 as 40 – 3. Example 8.21.  15 ⋅ 86 Notice that 86 = 80 + 6. We now write We could have proceeded by writing 86 as 90 – 4. Practice Set B Use the distributive property to compute each value. Exercise 8.4.8. (Go to Solution) 25 ⋅ 12 Exercise 8.4.9. (Go to Solution) 35 ⋅ 14 Exercise 8.4.10. (Go to Solution) 80 ⋅ 58 Exercise 8.4.11. (Go to Solution) 65 ⋅ 62  || 
book4_ch08_5	 || 
book4_ch10	 ||  || Variables and Constants A basic distinction between algebra and arithmetic is the use of symbols (usually letters) in algebra to represent numbers. So, algebra is a generalization of arithme­tic. Let us look at two examples of situations in which letters are substituted for numbers: Suppose that a student is taking four college classes, and each class can have at most 1 exam per week. In any 1-week period, the student may have 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 exams. In algebra, we can let the letter x represent the number of exams this student may have in a 1-week period. The letter x may assume any of the various values 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. Suppose that in writing a term paper for a biology class a student needs to specify the average lifetime, in days, of a male housefly. If she does not know this number off the top of her head, she might represent it (at least temporarily) on her paper with the letter t (which reminds her of time). Later, she could look up the average time in a reference book and find it to be 17 days. The letter t can assume only the one value, 17, and no other values. The value t is constant. Variable, Constant A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. A letter or symbol that represents one specific number, known or unknown, is called a constant. In example 1, the letter x is a variable since it can represent any of the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. The letter t example 2 is a constant since it can only have the value 17.  || Real Numbers Real Number Line The study of mathematics requires the use of several collections of numbers. The real number line allows us to visually display (graph) the numbers in which we are interested. A line is composed of infinitely many points. To each point we can associate a unique number, and with each number, we can associate a particular point. Coordinate The number associated with a point on the number line is called the coordinate of the point. Graph The point on a number line that is associated with a particular number is called the graph of that number. Constructing a Real Number Line We construct a real number line as follows: Draw a horizontal line. Origin Choose any point on the line and label it 0. This point is called the origin. Choose a convenient length. Starting at 0, mark this length off in both direc­tions, being careful to have the lengths look like they are about the same. We now define a real number. Real Number A real number is any number that is the coordinate of a point on the real number line. Positive Numbers, Negative Numbers Real numbers whose graphs are to the right of 0 are called positive real numbers, or more simply, positive numbers. Real numbers whose graphs appear to the left of 0 are called negative real numbers, or more simply, negative numbers. The number 0 is neither positive nor negative.  || Subsets of Real Numbers The set of real numbers has many subsets. Some of the subsets that are of interest in the study of algebra are listed below along with their notations and graphs. Natural Numbers, Counting Numbers The natural or counting numbers ( N ): 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . Read “and so on.” Whole Numbers The whole numbers ( W ): 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . Notice that every natural number is a whole number. Integers The integers ( Z ): . . . -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . Notice that every whole number is an integer. Rational Numbers (Fractions) The rational numbers ( Q ): Rational numbers are sometimes called fractions. They are numbers that can be written as the quotient of two integers. They have decimal representations that either terminate or do not terminate but contain a repeating block of digits. Some examples are       Some rational numbers are graphed below. Notice that every integer is a rational number. Notice that there are still a great many points on the number line that have not yet been assigned a type of number. We will not examine these other types of numbers in this text. They are examined in detail in algebra. An example of these numbers is the number π , whose decimal representation does not terminate nor contain a repeating block of digits. An approximation for π is 3.14. Sample Set A Example 10.1.  Is every whole number a natural number? No. The number 0 is a whole number but it is not a natural number. Example 10.2.  Is there an integer that is not a natural number? Yes. Some examples are 0, -1, -2, -3, and -4. Example 10.3.  Is there an integer that is a whole number? Yes. In fact, every whole number is an integer. Practice Set A Exercise 10.2.1. (Go to Solution) Is every natural number a whole number? Exercise 10.2.2. (Go to Solution) Is every whole number an integer? Exercise 10.2.3. (Go to Solution) Is every integer a real number? Exercise 10.2.4. (Go to Solution) Is there an integer that is a whole number? Exercise 10.2.5. (Go to Solution) Is there an integer that is not a natural number?  || Ordering Real Numbers Ordering Real Numbers A real number b is said to be greater than a real number a , denoted b > a , if b is to the right of a on the number line. Thus, as we would expect, 5 > 2 since 5 is to the right of 2 on the number line. Also, – 2 > – 5 since -2 is to the right of -5 on the number line. If we let a and b represent two numbers, then a and b are related in exactly one of three ways: Either Equality Symbol Inequality Symbols Sample Set B Example 10.4.  What integers can replace x so that the following statement is true? – 3 ≤ x < 2 The integers are -3, -2, -1, 0, 1. Example 10.5.  Draw a number line that extends from -3 to 5. Place points at all whole numbers between and including -1 and 3. -1 is not a whole number Practice Set B Exercise 10.2.6. (Go to Solution) What integers can replace x so that the following statement is true? – 5 ≤ x < 2 Exercise 10.2.7. (Go to Solution) Draw a number line that extends from -4 to 3. Place points at all natural numbers between, but not including, -2 to 2.  ||  || Positive and Negative Numbers Positive and Negative Numbers Each real number other than zero has a sign associated with it. A real number is said to be a positive number if it is to the right of 0 on the number line and negative if it is to the left of 0 on the number line. THE NOTATION OF SIGNED NUMBERS + and – Notation A number is denoted as positive if it is directly preceded by a plus sign or no sign at all. A number is denoted as negative if it is directly preceded by a minus sign.  || Reading Signed Numbers The plus and minus signs now have two meanings: The plus sign can denote the operation of addition or a positive number. The minus sign can denote the operation of subtraction or a negative number. To avoid any confusion between "sign" and "operation," it is preferable to read the sign of a number as "positive" or "negative." When "+" is used as an operation sign, it is read as "plus." When " – " is used as an operation sign, it is read as "minus." Sample Set A Read each expression so as to avoid confusion between "operation" and "sign." Example 10.6.  – 8 should be read as "negative eight" rather than "minus eight." Example 10.7.  4 + ( – 2) should be read as "four plus negative two" rather than "four plus minus two." Example 10.8.  – 6 + ( – 3)should be read as "negative six plus negative three" rather than "minus six plus minus three." Example 10.9.  – 15 – ( – 6)should be read as "negative fifteen minus negative six" rather than "minus fifteen minus minus six." Example 10.10.  – 5 + 7 should be read as "negative five plus seven" rather than "minus five plus seven." Example 10.11.  0 – 2 should be read as "zero minus two." Practice Set A Write each expression in words. Exercise 10.3.1. (Go to Solution) 6 + 1 Exercise 10.3.2. (Go to Solution) 2 + ( – 8) Exercise 10.3.3. (Go to Solution) – 7 + 5 Exercise 10.3.4. (Go to Solution) – 10 – ( + 3) Exercise 10.3.5. (Go to Solution) – 1 – ( – 8) Exercise 10.3.6. (Go to Solution) 0 + ( – 11)  || Opposites Opposites On the number line, each real number, other than zero, has an image on the opposite side of 0. For this reason, we say that each real number has an opposite. Opposites are the same distance from zero but have opposite signs. The opposite of a real number is denoted by placing a negative sign directly in front of the number. Thus, if a is any real number, then − a is its opposite. Note The letter " a " is a variable. Thus, " a " need not be positive, and " – a " need not be negative. If a is any real number, − a is opposite a on the number line.  || The Double-Negative Property The number a is opposite − a on the number line. Therefore, − ( − a) is opposite − a on the number line. This means that − ( − a ) = a From this property of opposites, we can suggest the double-negative property for real numbers. Double-Negative Property: − ( − a) = a If a is a real number, then − ( − a ) = a Sample Set B Find the opposite of each number. Example 10.12.  If a = 2, then – a = – 2. Also, − ( − a) = − ( − 2) = 2. Example 10.13.  If a = – 4, then – a = – ( – 4) = 4. Also, – ( – a) = a = – 4. Practice Set B Find the opposite of each number. Exercise 10.3.7. (Go to Solution) 8 Exercise 10.3.8. (Go to Solution) 17 Exercise 10.3.9. (Go to Solution) -6 Exercise 10.3.10. (Go to Solution) -15 Exercise 10.3.11. (Go to Solution) -(-1) Exercise 10.3.12. (Go to Solution) – [ – ( – 7 ) ] Exercise 10.3.13. (Go to Solution) Suppose a is a positive number. Is − a positive or negative? Exercise 10.3.14. (Go to Solution) Suppose a is a negative number. Is − a positive or negative? Exercise 10.3.15. (Go to Solution) Suppose we do not know the sign of the number k . Is − k positive, negative, or do we not know?  ||  || Geometric Definition of Absolute Value Absolute Value-Geometric Approach Geometric definition of absolute value: The absolute value of a number a , denoted ∣ a ∣ , is the distance from a to 0 on the number line. Absolute value answers the question of "how far," and not "which way." The phrase "how far" implies "length" and length is always a nonnegative quantity. Thus, the absolute value of a number is a nonnegative number. Sample Set A Determine each value. Example 10.14.  ∣ 4 ∣ = 4 Example 10.15.  ∣ − 4 ∣ = 4 Example 10.16.  ∣ 0 ∣ = 0 Example 10.17.  − ∣ 5 ∣ = − 5. The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of 5." The absolute value of 5 is 5. Hence, negative the absolute value of 5 is -5. Example 10.18.  − ∣ − 3 ∣ = − 3. The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of -3." The absolute value of -3 is 3. Hence, negative the absolute value of -3 is – ( 3 ) = – 3 . Practice Set A By reasoning geometrically, determine each absolute value. Exercise 10.4.1. (Go to Solution) ∣ 7 ∣ Exercise 10.4.2. (Go to Solution) ∣ − 3 ∣ Exercise 10.4.3. (Go to Solution) ∣ 12 ∣ Exercise 10.4.4. (Go to Solution) ∣ 0 ∣ Exercise 10.4.5. (Go to Solution) − ∣ 9 ∣ Exercise 10.4.6. (Go to Solution) − ∣ − 6 ∣  || Algebraic Definition of Absolute Value From the problems in the section called “Sample Set A”, we can suggest the following algebraic defini­tion of absolute value. Note that the definition has two parts. Absolute Value—Algebraic Approach Algebraic definition of absolute value The absolute value of a number a is The algebraic definition takes into account the fact that the number a could be either positive or zero (a ≥ 0) or negative (a < 0). If the number a is positive or zero (a ≥ 0), the upper part of the definition applies. The upper part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed in the absolute value bars is a nonnegative number, the absolute value of the number is the number itself. The lower part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a negative number, the absolute value of the number is the opposite of the number. The opposite of a negative number is a positive number. Note The definition says that the vertical absolute value lines may be elimi­nated only if we know whether the number inside is positive or negative. Sample Set B Use the algebraic definition of absolute value to find the following values. Example 10.19.  ∣ 8 ∣ . The number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a nonnegative number, so the upper part of the definition applies. This part says that the absolute value of 8 is 8 itself. ∣ 8 ∣ = 8 Example 10.20.  ∣ − 3 ∣ . The number enclosed within absolute value bars is a negative number, so the lower part of the definition applies. This part says that the absolute value of -3 is the opposite of -3, which is − ( − 3). By the definition of absolute value and the double-negative property, ∣ − 3 ∣ = − ( − 3 ) = 3 Practice Set B Use the algebraic definition of absolute value to find the following values. Exercise 10.4.7. (Go to Solution) ∣ 7 ∣ Exercise 10.4.8. (Go to Solution) ∣ 9 ∣ Exercise 10.4.9. (Go to Solution) ∣ − 12 ∣ Exercise 10.4.10. (Go to Solution) ∣ − 5 ∣ Exercise 10.4.11. (Go to Solution) − ∣ 8 ∣ Exercise 10.4.12. (Go to Solution) − ∣ 1 ∣ Exercise 10.4.13. (Go to Solution) − ∣ − 52 ∣ Exercise 10.4.14. (Go to Solution) − ∣ − 31 ∣  ||  || Addition of Numbers with Like Signs The addition of the two positive numbers 2 and 3 is performed on the number line as follows. Begin at 0, the origin. Since 2 is positive, move 2 units to the right. Since 3 is positive, move 3 more units to the right. We are now located at 5. Thus, 2 + 3 = 5. Summarizing, we have ( 2 positive units ) + ( 3 positive units ) = ( 5 positive units ) The addition of the two negative numbers -2 and -3 is performed on the number line as follows. Begin at 0, the origin. Since -2 is negative, move 2 units to the left. Since -3 is negative, move 3 more units to the left. We are now located at -5. Thus, ( − 2) + ( − 3) = − 5. Summarizing, we have ( 2 negative units ) + ( 3 negative units ) = ( 5 negative units ) Observing these two examples, we can suggest these relationships: ( positive number ) + ( positive number ) = ( positive number ) ( negative number ) + ( negative number ) = ( negative number ) Adding Numbers with the Same Sign Addition of numbers with like sign: To add two real numbers that have the same sign, add the absolute values of the numbers and associate with the sum the common sign. Sample Set A Find the sums. Example 10.21.  3 + 7 Add these absolute values. 3 + 7 = 10 The common sign is “+.” Thus, 3 + 7 = + 10, or 3 + 7 = 10. Example 10.22.  ( − 4) + ( − 9) Add these absolute values. 4 + 9 = 13 The common sign is “ – .“ Thus, ( − 4) + ( − 9) = − 13. Practice Set A Find the sums. Exercise 10.5.1. (Go to Solution) 8 + 6 Exercise 10.5.2. (Go to Solution) 41 + 11 Exercise 10.5.3. (Go to Solution) ( – 4) + ( – 8) Exercise 10.5.4. (Go to Solution) ( − 36) + ( − 9) Exercise 10.5.5. (Go to Solution) − 14 + ( − 20) Exercise 10.5.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.5.7. (Go to Solution) – 2.8 + ( – 4.6) Exercise 10.5.8. (Go to Solution) 0 + ( − 16)  || Addition With Zero Addition with Zero Notice that (0) + (a positive number) = (that same positive number). (0) + (a negative number) = (that same negative number). The Additive Identity Is Zero Since adding zero to a real number leaves that number unchanged, zero is called the additive identity.  || Addition of Numbers with Unlike Signs The addition 2 + ( – 6), two numbers with unlike signs, can also be illustrated using the number line. Begin at 0, the origin. Since 2 is positive, move 2 units to the right. Since -6 is negative, move, from 2, 6 units to the left. We are now located at -4. We can suggest a rule for adding two numbers that have unlike signs by noting that if the signs are disregarded, 4 can be obtained by subtracting 2 from 6. But 2 and 6 are precisely the absolute values of 2 and -6. Also, notice that the sign of the number with the larger absolute value is negative and that the sign of the resulting sum is negative. Adding Numbers with Unlike Signs Addition of numbers with unlike signs: To add two real numbers that have unlike signs, subtract the smaller absolute value from the larger absolute value and associate with this difference the sign of the number with the larger absolute value. Sample Set B Find the following sums. Example 10.23.  7 + ( – 2)       Subtract absolute values: 7 – 2 = 5. Attach the proper sign: "+." Thus, 7 + ( – 2) = + 5 or 7 + ( – 2) = 5. Example 10.24.  3 + ( – 11 )       Subtract absolute values: 11 – 3 = 8. Attach the proper sign: " – ." Thus, 3 + ( – 11) = – 8. Example 10.25.  The morning temperature on a winter's day in Lake Tahoe was -12 degrees. The afternoon temperature was 25 degrees warmer. What was the afternoon temperature? We need to find – 12 + 25.       Subtract absolute values: 25 – 12 = 16. Attach the proper sign: "+." Thus, – 12 + 25 = 13. Practice Set B Find the sums. Exercise 10.5.9. (Go to Solution) 4 + ( – 3) Exercise 10.5.10. (Go to Solution) − 3 + 5 Exercise 10.5.11. (Go to Solution) 15 + ( − 18) Exercise 10.5.12. (Go to Solution) 0 + ( − 6) Exercise 10.5.13. (Go to Solution) − 26 + 12 Exercise 10.5.14. (Go to Solution) 35 + ( − 78) Exercise 10.5.15. (Go to Solution) 15 + ( – 10) Exercise 10.5.16. (Go to Solution) 1.5 + ( − 2) Exercise 10.5.17. (Go to Solution) − 8 + 0 Exercise 10.5.18. (Go to Solution) 0 + (0.57) Exercise 10.5.19. (Go to Solution) − 879 + 454  || Calculators Calculators having the key can be used for finding sums of signed numbers. Sample Set C Use a calculator to find the sum of -147 and 84. Table 10.1.     Display Reads   Type 147 147   Press -147 This key changes the sign of a number. It is different than – . Press + -147   Type 84 84   Press = -63   Practice Set C Use a calculator to find each sum. Exercise 10.5.20. (Go to Solution) 673 + ( – 721) Exercise 10.5.21. (Go to Solution) – 8,261 + 2,206 Exercise 10.5.22. (Go to Solution) – 1,345.6 + ( – 6,648.1)  ||  || Definition of Subtraction We know from experience with arithmetic that the subtraction 5 – 2 produces 3, that is 5 – 2 = 3. We can suggest a rule for subtracting signed numbers by illus­trating this process on the number line. Begin at 0, the origin. Since 5 is positive, move 5 units to the right. Then, move 2 units to the left to get to 6. (This reminds us of addition with a negative number.) From this illustration we can see that 5 – 2 is the same as 5 + ( – 2). This leads us directly to the definition of subtraction. Definition of Subtraction If a and b are real numbers, a – b is the same as a + ( – b), where – b is the opposite of b .  || The Process of Subtraction From this definition, we suggest the following rule for subtracting signed numbers. Subtraction of Signed Numbers To perform the subtraction a – b , add the opposite of b to a , that is, change the sign of b and add. Sample Set A Perform the indicated subtractions. Example 10.26.  5 − 3 = 5 + ( − 3) = 2 Example 10.27.  4 – 9 = 4 + ( – 9) = – 5 Example 10.28.  − 4 − 6 = − 4 + ( − 6) = − 10 Example 10.29.  − 3 − ( − 12) = − 3 + 12 = 9 Example 10.30.  0 – ( – 15) = 0 + 15 = 15 Example 10.31.  The high temperature today in Lake Tahoe was 26°F. The low temperature tonight is expected to be -7°F. How many degrees is the temperature expected to drop? We need to find the difference between 26 and -7. 26 – ( – 7 ) = 26 + 7 = 33 Thus, the expected temperature drop is 33°F. Example 10.32.  Practice Set A Perform the indicated subtractions. Exercise 10.6.1. (Go to Solution) 9 − 6 Exercise 10.6.2. (Go to Solution) 6 − 9 Exercise 10.6.3. (Go to Solution) 0 − 7 Exercise 10.6.4. (Go to Solution) 1 − 14 Exercise 10.6.5. (Go to Solution) − 8 − 12 Exercise 10.6.6. (Go to Solution) − 21 − 6 Exercise 10.6.7. (Go to Solution) − 6 − ( − 4) Exercise 10.6.8. (Go to Solution) 8 − ( − 10) Exercise 10.6.9. (Go to Solution) 1 − ( − 12) Exercise 10.6.10. (Go to Solution) 86 − ( − 32) Exercise 10.6.11. (Go to Solution) 0 − 16 Exercise 10.6.12. (Go to Solution) 0 − ( − 16) Exercise 10.6.13. (Go to Solution) 0 − (8) Exercise 10.6.14. (Go to Solution) 5 − ( − 5) Exercise 10.6.15. (Go to Solution) 24 − [ − ( − 24)]  || Calculators Calculators can be used for subtraction of signed numbers. The most efficient calculators are those with a key. Sample Set B Use a calculator to find each difference. Example 10.33.  3,187 − 8,719 Table 10.2. Display Reads Type 3187 3187 Press - 3187 Type 8719 8719 Press = -5532 Thus, 3,187 − 8,719 = − 5,532. Example 10.34.  − 156 − ( − 211) Method A: Table 10.3. Display Reads Type 156 156 Press -156 Type - -156 Press 211 211 Type -211 Press = 55 Thus, − 156 − ( − 211) = 55. Method B: We manually change the subtraction to an addition and change the sign of the number to be subtracted. − 156 − ( − 211) becomes − 156 + 211 Table 10.4. Display Reads Type 156 156 Press -156 Press + -156 Type 211 211 Press = 55 Practice Set B Use a calculator to find each difference. Exercise 10.6.16. (Go to Solution) 44 − 315 Exercise 10.6.17. (Go to Solution) 12.756 − 15.003 Exercise 10.6.18. (Go to Solution) − 31.89 − 44.17 Exercise 10.6.19. (Go to Solution) − 0.797 − ( − 0.615)  ||  || Multiplication of Signed Numbers Let us consider first, the product of two positive numbers. Multiply: 3 ⋅ 5. 3 ⋅ 5 means 5 + 5 + 5 = 15 This suggests[1] that ( positive number ) ⋅ ( positive number ) = ( positive number ) More briefly, ( + ) ( + ) = ( + ) Now consider the product of a positive number and a negative number. Multiply: (3)( − 5). (3)( − 5) means ( − 5) + ( − 5) + ( − 5) = − 15 This suggests that ( positive number ) ⋅ ( negative number ) = ( negative number ) More briefly, ( + ) ( – ) = ( – ) By the commutative property of multiplication, we get ( negative number ) ⋅ ( positive number ) = ( negative number ) More briefly, ( − ) ( + ) = ( − ) The sign of the product of two negative numbers can be suggested after observing the following illustration. Multiply -2 by, respectively, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0, -1, -2, -3, -4. We have the following rules for multiplying signed numbers. Rules for Multiplying Signed Numbers Multiplying signed numbers: To multiply two real numbers that have the same sign, multiply their absolute values. The product is positive. ( + ) ( + ) = ( + ) ( − ) ( − ) = ( + ) To multiply two real numbers that have opposite signs, multiply their abso­lute values. The product is negative. ( + ) ( − ) = ( − ) ( − ) ( + ) = ( − ) Sample Set A Find the following products. Example 10.35.  8 ⋅ 6 Multiply these absolute values. 8 ⋅ 6 = 48 Since the numbers have the same sign, the product is positive. Thus, 8⋅6=+48, or 8⋅6 = 48. Example 10.36.  ( − 8)( − 6) Multiply these absolute values. 8 ⋅ 6 = 48 Since the numbers have the same sign, the product is positive. Thus, ( − 8)( − 6)=+48, or ( − 8)( − 6) = 48. Example 10.37.  ( − 4)(7) Multiply these absolute values. 4 ⋅ 7 = 28 Since the numbers have opposite signs, the product is negative. Thus, ( − 4)(7) = − 28. Example 10.38.  6( − 3) Multiply these absolute values. 6 ⋅ 3 = 18 Since the numbers have opposite signs, the product is negative. Thus, 6( − 3) = − 18. Practice Set A Find the following products. Exercise 10.7.1. (Go to Solution) 3( − 8) Exercise 10.7.2. (Go to Solution) 4(16) Exercise 10.7.3. (Go to Solution) ( − 6)( − 5) Exercise 10.7.4. (Go to Solution) ( − 7)( − 2) Exercise 10.7.5. (Go to Solution) ( − 1)(4) Exercise 10.7.6. (Go to Solution) ( − 7)7  || Division of Signed Numbers To determine the signs in a division problem, recall that since 12 = 3⋅4 This suggests that   since ( + ) = ( + )( + ) What is ? − 12 = ( − 3)( − 4) suggests that . That is,   ( + ) = ( − )( − ) suggests that What is ? − 12 = (3)( − 4) suggests that . That is,   ( − ) = ( + )( − ) suggests that What is ? − 12 = ( − 3)(4) suggests that . That is,   ( − ) = ( − )( + ) suggests that We have the following rules for dividing signed numbers. Rules for Dividing Signed Numbers Dividing signed numbers: To divide two real numbers that have the same sign, divide their absolute values. The quotient is positive. To divide two real numbers that have opposite signs, divide their absolute values. The quotient is negative. Sample Set B Find the following quotients. Example 10.39.  Divide these absolute values. Since the numbers have opposite signs, the quotient is negative. Thus . Example 10.40.  Divide these absolute values. Since the numbers have the same signs, the quotient is positive. Thus, . Example 10.41.  Divide these absolute values. Since the numbers have opposite signs, the quotient is negative. Thus, . Practice Set B Find the following quotients. Exercise 10.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.7.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.7.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.7.10. (Go to Solution) Sample Set C Example 10.42.  Find the value of . Using the order of operations and what we know about signed numbers, we get, Practice Set C Exercise 10.7.11. (Go to Solution) Find the value of .  || Calculators Calculators with the key can be used for multiplying and dividing signed numbers. Sample Set D Use a calculator to find each quotient or product. Example 10.43.  ( − 186)⋅( − 43) Since this product involves a (negative)⋅(negative), we know the result should be a positive number. We'll illustrate this on the calculator. Table 10.5.     Display Reads Type 186 186 Press -186 Press × -186 Type 43 43 Press -43 Press = 7998 Thus, ( − 186)⋅( − 43) = 7,998. Example 10.44.  . Round to one decimal place. Table 10.6.     Display Reads Type 158.64 158.64 Press ÷ 158.64 Type 54.3 54.3 Press -54.3 Press = -2.921546961 Rounding to one decimal place we get -2.9. Practice Set D Use a calculator to find each value. Exercise 10.7.12. (Go to Solution) ( – 51.3)⋅( – 21.6) Exercise 10.7.13. (Go to Solution) – 2.5746÷ – 2.1 Exercise 10.7.14. (Go to Solution) (0.006)⋅( – 0.241). Round to three decimal places.  || 
book4_ch10_2	 || Variables and Constants A basic distinction between algebra and arithmetic is the use of symbols (usually letters) in algebra to represent numbers. So, algebra is a generalization of arithme­tic. Let us look at two examples of situations in which letters are substituted for numbers: Suppose that a student is taking four college classes, and each class can have at most 1 exam per week. In any 1-week period, the student may have 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 exams. In algebra, we can let the letter x represent the number of exams this student may have in a 1-week period. The letter x may assume any of the various values 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. Suppose that in writing a term paper for a biology class a student needs to specify the average lifetime, in days, of a male housefly. If she does not know this number off the top of her head, she might represent it (at least temporarily) on her paper with the letter t (which reminds her of time). Later, she could look up the average time in a reference book and find it to be 17 days. The letter t can assume only the one value, 17, and no other values. The value t is constant. Variable, Constant A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. A letter or symbol that represents one specific number, known or unknown, is called a constant. In example 1, the letter x is a variable since it can represent any of the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. The letter t example 2 is a constant since it can only have the value 17.  || Real Numbers Real Number Line The study of mathematics requires the use of several collections of numbers. The real number line allows us to visually display (graph) the numbers in which we are interested. A line is composed of infinitely many points. To each point we can associate a unique number, and with each number, we can associate a particular point. Coordinate The number associated with a point on the number line is called the coordinate of the point. Graph The point on a number line that is associated with a particular number is called the graph of that number. Constructing a Real Number Line We construct a real number line as follows: Draw a horizontal line. Origin Choose any point on the line and label it 0. This point is called the origin. Choose a convenient length. Starting at 0, mark this length off in both direc­tions, being careful to have the lengths look like they are about the same. We now define a real number. Real Number A real number is any number that is the coordinate of a point on the real number line. Positive Numbers, Negative Numbers Real numbers whose graphs are to the right of 0 are called positive real numbers, or more simply, positive numbers. Real numbers whose graphs appear to the left of 0 are called negative real numbers, or more simply, negative numbers. The number 0 is neither positive nor negative.  || Subsets of Real Numbers The set of real numbers has many subsets. Some of the subsets that are of interest in the study of algebra are listed below along with their notations and graphs. Natural Numbers, Counting Numbers The natural or counting numbers ( N ): 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . Read “and so on.” Whole Numbers The whole numbers ( W ): 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . Notice that every natural number is a whole number. Integers The integers ( Z ): . . . -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . Notice that every whole number is an integer. Rational Numbers (Fractions) The rational numbers ( Q ): Rational numbers are sometimes called fractions. They are numbers that can be written as the quotient of two integers. They have decimal representations that either terminate or do not terminate but contain a repeating block of digits. Some examples are       Some rational numbers are graphed below. Notice that every integer is a rational number. Notice that there are still a great many points on the number line that have not yet been assigned a type of number. We will not examine these other types of numbers in this text. They are examined in detail in algebra. An example of these numbers is the number π , whose decimal representation does not terminate nor contain a repeating block of digits. An approximation for π is 3.14. Sample Set A Example 10.1.  Is every whole number a natural number? No. The number 0 is a whole number but it is not a natural number. Example 10.2.  Is there an integer that is not a natural number? Yes. Some examples are 0, -1, -2, -3, and -4. Example 10.3.  Is there an integer that is a whole number? Yes. In fact, every whole number is an integer. Practice Set A Exercise 10.2.1. (Go to Solution) Is every natural number a whole number? Exercise 10.2.2. (Go to Solution) Is every whole number an integer? Exercise 10.2.3. (Go to Solution) Is every integer a real number? Exercise 10.2.4. (Go to Solution) Is there an integer that is a whole number? Exercise 10.2.5. (Go to Solution) Is there an integer that is not a natural number?  || Ordering Real Numbers Ordering Real Numbers A real number b is said to be greater than a real number a , denoted b > a , if b is to the right of a on the number line. Thus, as we would expect, 5 > 2 since 5 is to the right of 2 on the number line. Also, – 2 > – 5 since -2 is to the right of -5 on the number line. If we let a and b represent two numbers, then a and b are related in exactly one of three ways: Either Equality Symbol Inequality Symbols Sample Set B Example 10.4.  What integers can replace x so that the following statement is true? – 3 ≤ x < 2 The integers are -3, -2, -1, 0, 1. Example 10.5.  Draw a number line that extends from -3 to 5. Place points at all whole numbers between and including -1 and 3. -1 is not a whole number Practice Set B Exercise 10.2.6. (Go to Solution) What integers can replace x so that the following statement is true? – 5 ≤ x < 2 Exercise 10.2.7. (Go to Solution) Draw a number line that extends from -4 to 3. Place points at all natural numbers between, but not including, -2 to 2.  || 
book4_ch10_2_2	Variables and Constants A basic distinction between algebra and arithmetic is the use of symbols (usually letters) in algebra to represent numbers. So, algebra is a generalization of arithme­tic. Let us look at two examples of situations in which letters are substituted for numbers: Suppose that a student is taking four college classes, and each class can have at most 1 exam per week. In any 1-week period, the student may have 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 exams. In algebra, we can let the letter x represent the number of exams this student may have in a 1-week period. The letter x may assume any of the various values 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. Suppose that in writing a term paper for a biology class a student needs to specify the average lifetime, in days, of a male housefly. If she does not know this number off the top of her head, she might represent it (at least temporarily) on her paper with the letter t (which reminds her of time). Later, she could look up the average time in a reference book and find it to be 17 days. The letter t can assume only the one value, 17, and no other values. The value t is constant. Variable, Constant A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. A letter or symbol that represents one specific number, known or unknown, is called a constant. In example 1, the letter x is a variable since it can represent any of the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. The letter t example 2 is a constant since it can only have the value 17. Variables and Constants A basic distinction between algebra and arithmetic is the use of symbols (usually letters) in algebra to represent numbers. So, algebra is a generalization of arithme­tic. Let us look at two examples of situations in which letters are substituted for numbers: Suppose that a student is taking four college classes, and each class can have at most 1 exam per week. In any 1-week period, the student may have 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 exams. In algebra, we can let the letter x represent the number of exams this student may have in a 1-week period. The letter x may assume any of the various values 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. Suppose that in writing a term paper for a biology class a student needs to specify the average lifetime, in days, of a male housefly. If she does not know this number off the top of her head, she might represent it (at least temporarily) on her paper with the letter t (which reminds her of time). Later, she could look up the average time in a reference book and find it to be 17 days. The letter t can assume only the one value, 17, and no other values. The value t is constant. Variable, Constant A letter or symbol that represents any member of a collection of two or more numbers is called a variable. A letter or symbol that represents one specific number, known or unknown, is called a constant. In example 1, the letter x is a variable since it can represent any of the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. The letter t example 2 is a constant since it can only have the value 17.  || 
book4_ch10_2_3	Real Numbers Real Number Line The study of mathematics requires the use of several collections of numbers. The real number line allows us to visually display (graph) the numbers in which we are interested. A line is composed of infinitely many points. To each point we can associate a unique number, and with each number, we can associate a particular point. Coordinate The number associated with a point on the number line is called the coordinate of the point. Graph The point on a number line that is associated with a particular number is called the graph of that number. Constructing a Real Number Line We construct a real number line as follows: Draw a horizontal line. Origin Choose any point on the line and label it 0. This point is called the origin. Choose a convenient length. Starting at 0, mark this length off in both direc­tions, being careful to have the lengths look like they are about the same. We now define a real number. Real Number A real number is any number that is the coordinate of a point on the real number line. Positive Numbers, Negative Numbers Real numbers whose graphs are to the right of 0 are called positive real numbers, or more simply, positive numbers. Real numbers whose graphs appear to the left of 0 are called negative real numbers, or more simply, negative numbers. The number 0 is neither positive nor negative. Real Numbers Real Number Line The study of mathematics requires the use of several collections of numbers. The real number line allows us to visually display (graph) the numbers in which we are interested. A line is composed of infinitely many points. To each point we can associate a unique number, and with each number, we can associate a particular point. Coordinate The number associated with a point on the number line is called the coordinate of the point. Graph The point on a number line that is associated with a particular number is called the graph of that number. Constructing a Real Number Line We construct a real number line as follows: Draw a horizontal line. Origin Choose any point on the line and label it 0. This point is called the origin. Choose a convenient length. Starting at 0, mark this length off in both direc­tions, being careful to have the lengths look like they are about the same. We now define a real number. Real Number A real number is any number that is the coordinate of a point on the real number line. Positive Numbers, Negative Numbers Real numbers whose graphs are to the right of 0 are called positive real numbers, or more simply, positive numbers. Real numbers whose graphs appear to the left of 0 are called negative real numbers, or more simply, negative numbers. The number 0 is neither positive nor negative.  || 
book4_ch10_2_4	Subsets of Real Numbers The set of real numbers has many subsets. Some of the subsets that are of interest in the study of algebra are listed below along with their notations and graphs. Natural Numbers, Counting Numbers The natural or counting numbers ( N ): 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . Read “and so on.” Whole Numbers The whole numbers ( W ): 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . Notice that every natural number is a whole number. Integers The integers ( Z ): . . . -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . Notice that every whole number is an integer. Rational Numbers (Fractions) The rational numbers ( Q ): Rational numbers are sometimes called fractions. They are numbers that can be written as the quotient of two integers. They have decimal representations that either terminate or do not terminate but contain a repeating block of digits. Some examples are       Some rational numbers are graphed below. Notice that every integer is a rational number. Notice that there are still a great many points on the number line that have not yet been assigned a type of number. We will not examine these other types of numbers in this text. They are examined in detail in algebra. An example of these numbers is the number π , whose decimal representation does not terminate nor contain a repeating block of digits. An approximation for π is 3.14. Sample Set A Example 10.1.  Is every whole number a natural number? No. The number 0 is a whole number but it is not a natural number. Example 10.2.  Is there an integer that is not a natural number? Yes. Some examples are 0, -1, -2, -3, and -4. Example 10.3.  Is there an integer that is a whole number? Yes. In fact, every whole number is an integer. Practice Set A Exercise 10.2.1. (Go to Solution) Is every natural number a whole number? Exercise 10.2.2. (Go to Solution) Is every whole number an integer? Exercise 10.2.3. (Go to Solution) Is every integer a real number? Exercise 10.2.4. (Go to Solution) Is there an integer that is a whole number? Exercise 10.2.5. (Go to Solution) Is there an integer that is not a natural number? Subsets of Real Numbers The set of real numbers has many subsets. Some of the subsets that are of interest in the study of algebra are listed below along with their notations and graphs. Natural Numbers, Counting Numbers The natural or counting numbers ( N ): 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . Read “and so on.” Whole Numbers The whole numbers ( W ): 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . Notice that every natural number is a whole number. Integers The integers ( Z ): . . . -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . Notice that every whole number is an integer. Rational Numbers (Fractions) The rational numbers ( Q ): Rational numbers are sometimes called fractions. They are numbers that can be written as the quotient of two integers. They have decimal representations that either terminate or do not terminate but contain a repeating block of digits. Some examples are       Some rational numbers are graphed below. Notice that every integer is a rational number. Notice that there are still a great many points on the number line that have not yet been assigned a type of number. We will not examine these other types of numbers in this text. They are examined in detail in algebra. An example of these numbers is the number π , whose decimal representation does not terminate nor contain a repeating block of digits. An approximation for π is 3.14. Sample Set A Example 10.1.  Is every whole number a natural number? No. The number 0 is a whole number but it is not a natural number. Example 10.2.  Is there an integer that is not a natural number? Yes. Some examples are 0, -1, -2, -3, and -4. Example 10.3.  Is there an integer that is a whole number? Yes. In fact, every whole number is an integer. Practice Set A Exercise 10.2.1. (Go to Solution) Is every natural number a whole number? Exercise 10.2.2. (Go to Solution) Is every whole number an integer? Exercise 10.2.3. (Go to Solution) Is every integer a real number? Exercise 10.2.4. (Go to Solution) Is there an integer that is a whole number? Exercise 10.2.5. (Go to Solution) Is there an integer that is not a natural number?  || 
book4_ch10_2_7	Ordering Real Numbers Ordering Real Numbers A real number b is said to be greater than a real number a , denoted b > a , if b is to the right of a on the number line. Thus, as we would expect, 5 > 2 since 5 is to the right of 2 on the number line. Also, – 2 > – 5 since -2 is to the right of -5 on the number line. If we let a and b represent two numbers, then a and b are related in exactly one of three ways: Either Equality Symbol Inequality Symbols Sample Set B Example 10.4.  What integers can replace x so that the following statement is true? – 3 ≤ x < 2 The integers are -3, -2, -1, 0, 1. Example 10.5.  Draw a number line that extends from -3 to 5. Place points at all whole numbers between and including -1 and 3. -1 is not a whole number Practice Set B Exercise 10.2.6. (Go to Solution) What integers can replace x so that the following statement is true? – 5 ≤ x < 2 Exercise 10.2.7. (Go to Solution) Draw a number line that extends from -4 to 3. Place points at all natural numbers between, but not including, -2 to 2. Ordering Real Numbers Ordering Real Numbers A real number b is said to be greater than a real number a , denoted b > a , if b is to the right of a on the number line. Thus, as we would expect, 5 > 2 since 5 is to the right of 2 on the number line. Also, – 2 > – 5 since -2 is to the right of -5 on the number line. If we let a and b represent two numbers, then a and b are related in exactly one of three ways: Either Equality Symbol Inequality Symbols Sample Set B Example 10.4.  What integers can replace x so that the following statement is true? – 3 ≤ x < 2 The integers are -3, -2, -1, 0, 1. Example 10.5.  Draw a number line that extends from -3 to 5. Place points at all whole numbers between and including -1 and 3. -1 is not a whole number Practice Set B Exercise 10.2.6. (Go to Solution) What integers can replace x so that the following statement is true? – 5 ≤ x < 2 Exercise 10.2.7. (Go to Solution) Draw a number line that extends from -4 to 3. Place points at all natural numbers between, but not including, -2 to 2.  || 
book4_ch10_3	 || Positive and Negative Numbers Positive and Negative Numbers Each real number other than zero has a sign associated with it. A real number is said to be a positive number if it is to the right of 0 on the number line and negative if it is to the left of 0 on the number line. THE NOTATION OF SIGNED NUMBERS + and – Notation A number is denoted as positive if it is directly preceded by a plus sign or no sign at all. A number is denoted as negative if it is directly preceded by a minus sign.  || Reading Signed Numbers The plus and minus signs now have two meanings: The plus sign can denote the operation of addition or a positive number. The minus sign can denote the operation of subtraction or a negative number. To avoid any confusion between "sign" and "operation," it is preferable to read the sign of a number as "positive" or "negative." When "+" is used as an operation sign, it is read as "plus." When " – " is used as an operation sign, it is read as "minus." Sample Set A Read each expression so as to avoid confusion between "operation" and "sign." Example 10.6.  – 8 should be read as "negative eight" rather than "minus eight." Example 10.7.  4 + ( – 2) should be read as "four plus negative two" rather than "four plus minus two." Example 10.8.  – 6 + ( – 3)should be read as "negative six plus negative three" rather than "minus six plus minus three." Example 10.9.  – 15 – ( – 6)should be read as "negative fifteen minus negative six" rather than "minus fifteen minus minus six." Example 10.10.  – 5 + 7 should be read as "negative five plus seven" rather than "minus five plus seven." Example 10.11.  0 – 2 should be read as "zero minus two." Practice Set A Write each expression in words. Exercise 10.3.1. (Go to Solution) 6 + 1 Exercise 10.3.2. (Go to Solution) 2 + ( – 8) Exercise 10.3.3. (Go to Solution) – 7 + 5 Exercise 10.3.4. (Go to Solution) – 10 – ( + 3) Exercise 10.3.5. (Go to Solution) – 1 – ( – 8) Exercise 10.3.6. (Go to Solution) 0 + ( – 11)  || Opposites Opposites On the number line, each real number, other than zero, has an image on the opposite side of 0. For this reason, we say that each real number has an opposite. Opposites are the same distance from zero but have opposite signs. The opposite of a real number is denoted by placing a negative sign directly in front of the number. Thus, if a is any real number, then − a is its opposite. Note The letter " a " is a variable. Thus, " a " need not be positive, and " – a " need not be negative. If a is any real number, − a is opposite a on the number line.  || The Double-Negative Property The number a is opposite − a on the number line. Therefore, − ( − a) is opposite − a on the number line. This means that − ( − a ) = a From this property of opposites, we can suggest the double-negative property for real numbers. Double-Negative Property: − ( − a) = a If a is a real number, then − ( − a ) = a Sample Set B Find the opposite of each number. Example 10.12.  If a = 2, then – a = – 2. Also, − ( − a) = − ( − 2) = 2. Example 10.13.  If a = – 4, then – a = – ( – 4) = 4. Also, – ( – a) = a = – 4. Practice Set B Find the opposite of each number. Exercise 10.3.7. (Go to Solution) 8 Exercise 10.3.8. (Go to Solution) 17 Exercise 10.3.9. (Go to Solution) -6 Exercise 10.3.10. (Go to Solution) -15 Exercise 10.3.11. (Go to Solution) -(-1) Exercise 10.3.12. (Go to Solution) – [ – ( – 7 ) ] Exercise 10.3.13. (Go to Solution) Suppose a is a positive number. Is − a positive or negative? Exercise 10.3.14. (Go to Solution) Suppose a is a negative number. Is − a positive or negative? Exercise 10.3.15. (Go to Solution) Suppose we do not know the sign of the number k . Is − k positive, negative, or do we not know?  || 
book4_ch10_3_2	Positive and Negative Numbers Positive and Negative Numbers Each real number other than zero has a sign associated with it. A real number is said to be a positive number if it is to the right of 0 on the number line and negative if it is to the left of 0 on the number line. THE NOTATION OF SIGNED NUMBERS + and – Notation A number is denoted as positive if it is directly preceded by a plus sign or no sign at all. A number is denoted as negative if it is directly preceded by a minus sign. Positive and Negative Numbers Positive and Negative Numbers Each real number other than zero has a sign associated with it. A real number is said to be a positive number if it is to the right of 0 on the number line and negative if it is to the left of 0 on the number line. THE NOTATION OF SIGNED NUMBERS + and – Notation A number is denoted as positive if it is directly preceded by a plus sign or no sign at all. A number is denoted as negative if it is directly preceded by a minus sign.  || 
book4_ch10_3_3	Reading Signed Numbers The plus and minus signs now have two meanings: The plus sign can denote the operation of addition or a positive number. The minus sign can denote the operation of subtraction or a negative number. To avoid any confusion between "sign" and "operation," it is preferable to read the sign of a number as "positive" or "negative." When "+" is used as an operation sign, it is read as "plus." When " – " is used as an operation sign, it is read as "minus." Sample Set A Read each expression so as to avoid confusion between "operation" and "sign." Example 10.6.  – 8 should be read as "negative eight" rather than "minus eight." Example 10.7.  4 + ( – 2) should be read as "four plus negative two" rather than "four plus minus two." Example 10.8.  – 6 + ( – 3)should be read as "negative six plus negative three" rather than "minus six plus minus three." Example 10.9.  – 15 – ( – 6)should be read as "negative fifteen minus negative six" rather than "minus fifteen minus minus six." Example 10.10.  – 5 + 7 should be read as "negative five plus seven" rather than "minus five plus seven." Example 10.11.  0 – 2 should be read as "zero minus two." Practice Set A Write each expression in words. Exercise 10.3.1. (Go to Solution) 6 + 1 Exercise 10.3.2. (Go to Solution) 2 + ( – 8) Exercise 10.3.3. (Go to Solution) – 7 + 5 Exercise 10.3.4. (Go to Solution) – 10 – ( + 3) Exercise 10.3.5. (Go to Solution) – 1 – ( – 8) Exercise 10.3.6. (Go to Solution) 0 + ( – 11) Reading Signed Numbers The plus and minus signs now have two meanings: The plus sign can denote the operation of addition or a positive number. The minus sign can denote the operation of subtraction or a negative number. To avoid any confusion between "sign" and "operation," it is preferable to read the sign of a number as "positive" or "negative." When "+" is used as an operation sign, it is read as "plus." When " – " is used as an operation sign, it is read as "minus." Sample Set A Read each expression so as to avoid confusion between "operation" and "sign." Example 10.6.  – 8 should be read as "negative eight" rather than "minus eight." Example 10.7.  4 + ( – 2) should be read as "four plus negative two" rather than "four plus minus two." Example 10.8.  – 6 + ( – 3)should be read as "negative six plus negative three" rather than "minus six plus minus three." Example 10.9.  – 15 – ( – 6)should be read as "negative fifteen minus negative six" rather than "minus fifteen minus minus six." Example 10.10.  – 5 + 7 should be read as "negative five plus seven" rather than "minus five plus seven." Example 10.11.  0 – 2 should be read as "zero minus two." Practice Set A Write each expression in words. Exercise 10.3.1. (Go to Solution) 6 + 1 Exercise 10.3.2. (Go to Solution) 2 + ( – 8) Exercise 10.3.3. (Go to Solution) – 7 + 5 Exercise 10.3.4. (Go to Solution) – 10 – ( + 3) Exercise 10.3.5. (Go to Solution) – 1 – ( – 8) Exercise 10.3.6. (Go to Solution) 0 + ( – 11)  || 
book4_ch10_3_6	Opposites Opposites On the number line, each real number, other than zero, has an image on the opposite side of 0. For this reason, we say that each real number has an opposite. Opposites are the same distance from zero but have opposite signs. The opposite of a real number is denoted by placing a negative sign directly in front of the number. Thus, if a is any real number, then − a is its opposite. Note The letter " a " is a variable. Thus, " a " need not be positive, and " – a " need not be negative. If a is any real number, − a is opposite a on the number line. Opposites Opposites On the number line, each real number, other than zero, has an image on the opposite side of 0. For this reason, we say that each real number has an opposite. Opposites are the same distance from zero but have opposite signs. The opposite of a real number is denoted by placing a negative sign directly in front of the number. Thus, if a is any real number, then − a is its opposite. Note The letter " a " is a variable. Thus, " a " need not be positive, and " – a " need not be negative. If a is any real number, − a is opposite a on the number line.  || 
book4_ch10_3_7	The Double-Negative Property The number a is opposite − a on the number line. Therefore, − ( − a) is opposite − a on the number line. This means that − ( − a ) = a From this property of opposites, we can suggest the double-negative property for real numbers. Double-Negative Property: − ( − a) = a If a is a real number, then − ( − a ) = a Sample Set B Find the opposite of each number. Example 10.12.  If a = 2, then – a = – 2. Also, − ( − a) = − ( − 2) = 2. Example 10.13.  If a = – 4, then – a = – ( – 4) = 4. Also, – ( – a) = a = – 4. Practice Set B Find the opposite of each number. Exercise 10.3.7. (Go to Solution) 8 Exercise 10.3.8. (Go to Solution) 17 Exercise 10.3.9. (Go to Solution) -6 Exercise 10.3.10. (Go to Solution) -15 Exercise 10.3.11. (Go to Solution) -(-1) Exercise 10.3.12. (Go to Solution) – [ – ( – 7 ) ] Exercise 10.3.13. (Go to Solution) Suppose a is a positive number. Is − a positive or negative? Exercise 10.3.14. (Go to Solution) Suppose a is a negative number. Is − a positive or negative? Exercise 10.3.15. (Go to Solution) Suppose we do not know the sign of the number k . Is − k positive, negative, or do we not know? The Double-Negative Property The number a is opposite − a on the number line. Therefore, − ( − a) is opposite − a on the number line. This means that − ( − a ) = a From this property of opposites, we can suggest the double-negative property for real numbers. Double-Negative Property: − ( − a) = a If a is a real number, then − ( − a ) = a Sample Set B Find the opposite of each number. Example 10.12.  If a = 2, then – a = – 2. Also, − ( − a) = − ( − 2) = 2. Example 10.13.  If a = – 4, then – a = – ( – 4) = 4. Also, – ( – a) = a = – 4. Practice Set B Find the opposite of each number. Exercise 10.3.7. (Go to Solution) 8 Exercise 10.3.8. (Go to Solution) 17 Exercise 10.3.9. (Go to Solution) -6 Exercise 10.3.10. (Go to Solution) -15 Exercise 10.3.11. (Go to Solution) -(-1) Exercise 10.3.12. (Go to Solution) – [ – ( – 7 ) ] Exercise 10.3.13. (Go to Solution) Suppose a is a positive number. Is − a positive or negative? Exercise 10.3.14. (Go to Solution) Suppose a is a negative number. Is − a positive or negative? Exercise 10.3.15. (Go to Solution) Suppose we do not know the sign of the number k . Is − k positive, negative, or do we not know?  || 
book4_ch10_4	 || Geometric Definition of Absolute Value Absolute Value-Geometric Approach Geometric definition of absolute value: The absolute value of a number a , denoted ∣ a ∣ , is the distance from a to 0 on the number line. Absolute value answers the question of "how far," and not "which way." The phrase "how far" implies "length" and length is always a nonnegative quantity. Thus, the absolute value of a number is a nonnegative number. Sample Set A Determine each value. Example 10.14.  ∣ 4 ∣ = 4 Example 10.15.  ∣ − 4 ∣ = 4 Example 10.16.  ∣ 0 ∣ = 0 Example 10.17.  − ∣ 5 ∣ = − 5. The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of 5." The absolute value of 5 is 5. Hence, negative the absolute value of 5 is -5. Example 10.18.  − ∣ − 3 ∣ = − 3. The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of -3." The absolute value of -3 is 3. Hence, negative the absolute value of -3 is – ( 3 ) = – 3 . Practice Set A By reasoning geometrically, determine each absolute value. Exercise 10.4.1. (Go to Solution) ∣ 7 ∣ Exercise 10.4.2. (Go to Solution) ∣ − 3 ∣ Exercise 10.4.3. (Go to Solution) ∣ 12 ∣ Exercise 10.4.4. (Go to Solution) ∣ 0 ∣ Exercise 10.4.5. (Go to Solution) − ∣ 9 ∣ Exercise 10.4.6. (Go to Solution) − ∣ − 6 ∣  || Algebraic Definition of Absolute Value From the problems in the section called “Sample Set A”, we can suggest the following algebraic defini­tion of absolute value. Note that the definition has two parts. Absolute Value—Algebraic Approach Algebraic definition of absolute value The absolute value of a number a is The algebraic definition takes into account the fact that the number a could be either positive or zero (a ≥ 0) or negative (a < 0). If the number a is positive or zero (a ≥ 0), the upper part of the definition applies. The upper part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed in the absolute value bars is a nonnegative number, the absolute value of the number is the number itself. The lower part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a negative number, the absolute value of the number is the opposite of the number. The opposite of a negative number is a positive number. Note The definition says that the vertical absolute value lines may be elimi­nated only if we know whether the number inside is positive or negative. Sample Set B Use the algebraic definition of absolute value to find the following values. Example 10.19.  ∣ 8 ∣ . The number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a nonnegative number, so the upper part of the definition applies. This part says that the absolute value of 8 is 8 itself. ∣ 8 ∣ = 8 Example 10.20.  ∣ − 3 ∣ . The number enclosed within absolute value bars is a negative number, so the lower part of the definition applies. This part says that the absolute value of -3 is the opposite of -3, which is − ( − 3). By the definition of absolute value and the double-negative property, ∣ − 3 ∣ = − ( − 3 ) = 3 Practice Set B Use the algebraic definition of absolute value to find the following values. Exercise 10.4.7. (Go to Solution) ∣ 7 ∣ Exercise 10.4.8. (Go to Solution) ∣ 9 ∣ Exercise 10.4.9. (Go to Solution) ∣ − 12 ∣ Exercise 10.4.10. (Go to Solution) ∣ − 5 ∣ Exercise 10.4.11. (Go to Solution) − ∣ 8 ∣ Exercise 10.4.12. (Go to Solution) − ∣ 1 ∣ Exercise 10.4.13. (Go to Solution) − ∣ − 52 ∣ Exercise 10.4.14. (Go to Solution) − ∣ − 31 ∣  || 
book4_ch10_4_2	Geometric Definition of Absolute Value Absolute Value-Geometric Approach Geometric definition of absolute value: The absolute value of a number a , denoted ∣ a ∣ , is the distance from a to 0 on the number line. Absolute value answers the question of "how far," and not "which way." The phrase "how far" implies "length" and length is always a nonnegative quantity. Thus, the absolute value of a number is a nonnegative number. Sample Set A Determine each value. Example 10.14.  ∣ 4 ∣ = 4 Example 10.15.  ∣ − 4 ∣ = 4 Example 10.16.  ∣ 0 ∣ = 0 Example 10.17.  − ∣ 5 ∣ = − 5. The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of 5." The absolute value of 5 is 5. Hence, negative the absolute value of 5 is -5. Example 10.18.  − ∣ − 3 ∣ = − 3. The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of -3." The absolute value of -3 is 3. Hence, negative the absolute value of -3 is – ( 3 ) = – 3 . Practice Set A By reasoning geometrically, determine each absolute value. Exercise 10.4.1. (Go to Solution) ∣ 7 ∣ Exercise 10.4.2. (Go to Solution) ∣ − 3 ∣ Exercise 10.4.3. (Go to Solution) ∣ 12 ∣ Exercise 10.4.4. (Go to Solution) ∣ 0 ∣ Exercise 10.4.5. (Go to Solution) − ∣ 9 ∣ Exercise 10.4.6. (Go to Solution) − ∣ − 6 ∣ Geometric Definition of Absolute Value Absolute Value-Geometric Approach Geometric definition of absolute value: The absolute value of a number a , denoted ∣ a ∣ , is the distance from a to 0 on the number line. Absolute value answers the question of "how far," and not "which way." The phrase "how far" implies "length" and length is always a nonnegative quantity. Thus, the absolute value of a number is a nonnegative number. Sample Set A Determine each value. Example 10.14.  ∣ 4 ∣ = 4 Example 10.15.  ∣ − 4 ∣ = 4 Example 10.16.  ∣ 0 ∣ = 0 Example 10.17.  − ∣ 5 ∣ = − 5. The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of 5." The absolute value of 5 is 5. Hence, negative the absolute value of 5 is -5. Example 10.18.  − ∣ − 3 ∣ = − 3. The quantity on the left side of the equal sign is read as "negative the absolute value of -3." The absolute value of -3 is 3. Hence, negative the absolute value of -3 is – ( 3 ) = – 3 . Practice Set A By reasoning geometrically, determine each absolute value. Exercise 10.4.1. (Go to Solution) ∣ 7 ∣ Exercise 10.4.2. (Go to Solution) ∣ − 3 ∣ Exercise 10.4.3. (Go to Solution) ∣ 12 ∣ Exercise 10.4.4. (Go to Solution) ∣ 0 ∣ Exercise 10.4.5. (Go to Solution) − ∣ 9 ∣ Exercise 10.4.6. (Go to Solution) − ∣ − 6 ∣  || 
book4_ch10_4_5	Algebraic Definition of Absolute Value From the problems in the section called “Sample Set A”, we can suggest the following algebraic defini­tion of absolute value. Note that the definition has two parts. Absolute Value—Algebraic Approach Algebraic definition of absolute value The absolute value of a number a is The algebraic definition takes into account the fact that the number a could be either positive or zero (a ≥ 0) or negative (a < 0). If the number a is positive or zero (a ≥ 0), the upper part of the definition applies. The upper part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed in the absolute value bars is a nonnegative number, the absolute value of the number is the number itself. The lower part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a negative number, the absolute value of the number is the opposite of the number. The opposite of a negative number is a positive number. Note The definition says that the vertical absolute value lines may be elimi­nated only if we know whether the number inside is positive or negative. Sample Set B Use the algebraic definition of absolute value to find the following values. Example 10.19.  ∣ 8 ∣ . The number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a nonnegative number, so the upper part of the definition applies. This part says that the absolute value of 8 is 8 itself. ∣ 8 ∣ = 8 Example 10.20.  ∣ − 3 ∣ . The number enclosed within absolute value bars is a negative number, so the lower part of the definition applies. This part says that the absolute value of -3 is the opposite of -3, which is − ( − 3). By the definition of absolute value and the double-negative property, ∣ − 3 ∣ = − ( − 3 ) = 3 Practice Set B Use the algebraic definition of absolute value to find the following values. Exercise 10.4.7. (Go to Solution) ∣ 7 ∣ Exercise 10.4.8. (Go to Solution) ∣ 9 ∣ Exercise 10.4.9. (Go to Solution) ∣ − 12 ∣ Exercise 10.4.10. (Go to Solution) ∣ − 5 ∣ Exercise 10.4.11. (Go to Solution) − ∣ 8 ∣ Exercise 10.4.12. (Go to Solution) − ∣ 1 ∣ Exercise 10.4.13. (Go to Solution) − ∣ − 52 ∣ Exercise 10.4.14. (Go to Solution) − ∣ − 31 ∣ Algebraic Definition of Absolute Value From the problems in the section called “Sample Set A”, we can suggest the following algebraic defini­tion of absolute value. Note that the definition has two parts. Absolute Value—Algebraic Approach Algebraic definition of absolute value The absolute value of a number a is The algebraic definition takes into account the fact that the number a could be either positive or zero (a ≥ 0) or negative (a < 0). If the number a is positive or zero (a ≥ 0), the upper part of the definition applies. The upper part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed in the absolute value bars is a nonnegative number, the absolute value of the number is the number itself. The lower part of the definition tells us that if the number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a negative number, the absolute value of the number is the opposite of the number. The opposite of a negative number is a positive number. Note The definition says that the vertical absolute value lines may be elimi­nated only if we know whether the number inside is positive or negative. Sample Set B Use the algebraic definition of absolute value to find the following values. Example 10.19.  ∣ 8 ∣ . The number enclosed within the absolute value bars is a nonnegative number, so the upper part of the definition applies. This part says that the absolute value of 8 is 8 itself. ∣ 8 ∣ = 8 Example 10.20.  ∣ − 3 ∣ . The number enclosed within absolute value bars is a negative number, so the lower part of the definition applies. This part says that the absolute value of -3 is the opposite of -3, which is − ( − 3). By the definition of absolute value and the double-negative property, ∣ − 3 ∣ = − ( − 3 ) = 3 Practice Set B Use the algebraic definition of absolute value to find the following values. Exercise 10.4.7. (Go to Solution) ∣ 7 ∣ Exercise 10.4.8. (Go to Solution) ∣ 9 ∣ Exercise 10.4.9. (Go to Solution) ∣ − 12 ∣ Exercise 10.4.10. (Go to Solution) ∣ − 5 ∣ Exercise 10.4.11. (Go to Solution) − ∣ 8 ∣ Exercise 10.4.12. (Go to Solution) − ∣ 1 ∣ Exercise 10.4.13. (Go to Solution) − ∣ − 52 ∣ Exercise 10.4.14. (Go to Solution) − ∣ − 31 ∣  || 
book4_ch10_5	 || Addition of Numbers with Like Signs The addition of the two positive numbers 2 and 3 is performed on the number line as follows. Begin at 0, the origin. Since 2 is positive, move 2 units to the right. Since 3 is positive, move 3 more units to the right. We are now located at 5. Thus, 2 + 3 = 5. Summarizing, we have ( 2 positive units ) + ( 3 positive units ) = ( 5 positive units ) The addition of the two negative numbers -2 and -3 is performed on the number line as follows. Begin at 0, the origin. Since -2 is negative, move 2 units to the left. Since -3 is negative, move 3 more units to the left. We are now located at -5. Thus, ( − 2) + ( − 3) = − 5. Summarizing, we have ( 2 negative units ) + ( 3 negative units ) = ( 5 negative units ) Observing these two examples, we can suggest these relationships: ( positive number ) + ( positive number ) = ( positive number ) ( negative number ) + ( negative number ) = ( negative number ) Adding Numbers with the Same Sign Addition of numbers with like sign: To add two real numbers that have the same sign, add the absolute values of the numbers and associate with the sum the common sign. Sample Set A Find the sums. Example 10.21.  3 + 7 Add these absolute values. 3 + 7 = 10 The common sign is “+.” Thus, 3 + 7 = + 10, or 3 + 7 = 10. Example 10.22.  ( − 4) + ( − 9) Add these absolute values. 4 + 9 = 13 The common sign is “ – .“ Thus, ( − 4) + ( − 9) = − 13. Practice Set A Find the sums. Exercise 10.5.1. (Go to Solution) 8 + 6 Exercise 10.5.2. (Go to Solution) 41 + 11 Exercise 10.5.3. (Go to Solution) ( – 4) + ( – 8) Exercise 10.5.4. (Go to Solution) ( − 36) + ( − 9) Exercise 10.5.5. (Go to Solution) − 14 + ( − 20) Exercise 10.5.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.5.7. (Go to Solution) – 2.8 + ( – 4.6) Exercise 10.5.8. (Go to Solution) 0 + ( − 16)  || Addition With Zero Addition with Zero Notice that (0) + (a positive number) = (that same positive number). (0) + (a negative number) = (that same negative number). The Additive Identity Is Zero Since adding zero to a real number leaves that number unchanged, zero is called the additive identity.  || Addition of Numbers with Unlike Signs The addition 2 + ( – 6), two numbers with unlike signs, can also be illustrated using the number line. Begin at 0, the origin. Since 2 is positive, move 2 units to the right. Since -6 is negative, move, from 2, 6 units to the left. We are now located at -4. We can suggest a rule for adding two numbers that have unlike signs by noting that if the signs are disregarded, 4 can be obtained by subtracting 2 from 6. But 2 and 6 are precisely the absolute values of 2 and -6. Also, notice that the sign of the number with the larger absolute value is negative and that the sign of the resulting sum is negative. Adding Numbers with Unlike Signs Addition of numbers with unlike signs: To add two real numbers that have unlike signs, subtract the smaller absolute value from the larger absolute value and associate with this difference the sign of the number with the larger absolute value. Sample Set B Find the following sums. Example 10.23.  7 + ( – 2)       Subtract absolute values: 7 – 2 = 5. Attach the proper sign: "+." Thus, 7 + ( – 2) = + 5 or 7 + ( – 2) = 5. Example 10.24.  3 + ( – 11 )       Subtract absolute values: 11 – 3 = 8. Attach the proper sign: " – ." Thus, 3 + ( – 11) = – 8. Example 10.25.  The morning temperature on a winter's day in Lake Tahoe was -12 degrees. The afternoon temperature was 25 degrees warmer. What was the afternoon temperature? We need to find – 12 + 25.       Subtract absolute values: 25 – 12 = 16. Attach the proper sign: "+." Thus, – 12 + 25 = 13. Practice Set B Find the sums. Exercise 10.5.9. (Go to Solution) 4 + ( – 3) Exercise 10.5.10. (Go to Solution) − 3 + 5 Exercise 10.5.11. (Go to Solution) 15 + ( − 18) Exercise 10.5.12. (Go to Solution) 0 + ( − 6) Exercise 10.5.13. (Go to Solution) − 26 + 12 Exercise 10.5.14. (Go to Solution) 35 + ( − 78) Exercise 10.5.15. (Go to Solution) 15 + ( – 10) Exercise 10.5.16. (Go to Solution) 1.5 + ( − 2) Exercise 10.5.17. (Go to Solution) − 8 + 0 Exercise 10.5.18. (Go to Solution) 0 + (0.57) Exercise 10.5.19. (Go to Solution) − 879 + 454  || Calculators Calculators having the key can be used for finding sums of signed numbers. Sample Set C Use a calculator to find the sum of -147 and 84. Table 10.1.     Display Reads   Type 147 147   Press -147 This key changes the sign of a number. It is different than – . Press + -147   Type 84 84   Press = -63   Practice Set C Use a calculator to find each sum. Exercise 10.5.20. (Go to Solution) 673 + ( – 721) Exercise 10.5.21. (Go to Solution) – 8,261 + 2,206 Exercise 10.5.22. (Go to Solution) – 1,345.6 + ( – 6,648.1)  || 
book4_ch10_5_2	Addition of Numbers with Like Signs The addition of the two positive numbers 2 and 3 is performed on the number line as follows. Begin at 0, the origin. Since 2 is positive, move 2 units to the right. Since 3 is positive, move 3 more units to the right. We are now located at 5. Thus, 2 + 3 = 5. Summarizing, we have ( 2 positive units ) + ( 3 positive units ) = ( 5 positive units ) The addition of the two negative numbers -2 and -3 is performed on the number line as follows. Begin at 0, the origin. Since -2 is negative, move 2 units to the left. Since -3 is negative, move 3 more units to the left. We are now located at -5. Thus, ( − 2) + ( − 3) = − 5. Summarizing, we have ( 2 negative units ) + ( 3 negative units ) = ( 5 negative units ) Observing these two examples, we can suggest these relationships: ( positive number ) + ( positive number ) = ( positive number ) ( negative number ) + ( negative number ) = ( negative number ) Adding Numbers with the Same Sign Addition of numbers with like sign: To add two real numbers that have the same sign, add the absolute values of the numbers and associate with the sum the common sign. Sample Set A Find the sums. Example 10.21.  3 + 7 Add these absolute values. 3 + 7 = 10 The common sign is “+.” Thus, 3 + 7 = + 10, or 3 + 7 = 10. Example 10.22.  ( − 4) + ( − 9) Add these absolute values. 4 + 9 = 13 The common sign is “ – .“ Thus, ( − 4) + ( − 9) = − 13. Practice Set A Find the sums. Exercise 10.5.1. (Go to Solution) 8 + 6 Exercise 10.5.2. (Go to Solution) 41 + 11 Exercise 10.5.3. (Go to Solution) ( – 4) + ( – 8) Exercise 10.5.4. (Go to Solution) ( − 36) + ( − 9) Exercise 10.5.5. (Go to Solution) − 14 + ( − 20) Exercise 10.5.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.5.7. (Go to Solution) – 2.8 + ( – 4.6) Exercise 10.5.8. (Go to Solution) 0 + ( − 16) Addition of Numbers with Like Signs The addition of the two positive numbers 2 and 3 is performed on the number line as follows. Begin at 0, the origin. Since 2 is positive, move 2 units to the right. Since 3 is positive, move 3 more units to the right. We are now located at 5. Thus, 2 + 3 = 5. Summarizing, we have ( 2 positive units ) + ( 3 positive units ) = ( 5 positive units ) The addition of the two negative numbers -2 and -3 is performed on the number line as follows. Begin at 0, the origin. Since -2 is negative, move 2 units to the left. Since -3 is negative, move 3 more units to the left. We are now located at -5. Thus, ( − 2) + ( − 3) = − 5. Summarizing, we have ( 2 negative units ) + ( 3 negative units ) = ( 5 negative units ) Observing these two examples, we can suggest these relationships: ( positive number ) + ( positive number ) = ( positive number ) ( negative number ) + ( negative number ) = ( negative number ) Adding Numbers with the Same Sign Addition of numbers with like sign: To add two real numbers that have the same sign, add the absolute values of the numbers and associate with the sum the common sign. Sample Set A Find the sums. Example 10.21.  3 + 7 Add these absolute values. 3 + 7 = 10 The common sign is “+.” Thus, 3 + 7 = + 10, or 3 + 7 = 10. Example 10.22.  ( − 4) + ( − 9) Add these absolute values. 4 + 9 = 13 The common sign is “ – .“ Thus, ( − 4) + ( − 9) = − 13. Practice Set A Find the sums. Exercise 10.5.1. (Go to Solution) 8 + 6 Exercise 10.5.2. (Go to Solution) 41 + 11 Exercise 10.5.3. (Go to Solution) ( – 4) + ( – 8) Exercise 10.5.4. (Go to Solution) ( − 36) + ( − 9) Exercise 10.5.5. (Go to Solution) − 14 + ( − 20) Exercise 10.5.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.5.7. (Go to Solution) – 2.8 + ( – 4.6) Exercise 10.5.8. (Go to Solution) 0 + ( − 16)  || 
book4_ch10_5_5	Addition With Zero Addition with Zero Notice that (0) + (a positive number) = (that same positive number). (0) + (a negative number) = (that same negative number). The Additive Identity Is Zero Since adding zero to a real number leaves that number unchanged, zero is called the additive identity. Addition With Zero Addition with Zero Notice that (0) + (a positive number) = (that same positive number). (0) + (a negative number) = (that same negative number). The Additive Identity Is Zero Since adding zero to a real number leaves that number unchanged, zero is called the additive identity.  || 
book4_ch10_5_6	Addition of Numbers with Unlike Signs The addition 2 + ( – 6), two numbers with unlike signs, can also be illustrated using the number line. Begin at 0, the origin. Since 2 is positive, move 2 units to the right. Since -6 is negative, move, from 2, 6 units to the left. We are now located at -4. We can suggest a rule for adding two numbers that have unlike signs by noting that if the signs are disregarded, 4 can be obtained by subtracting 2 from 6. But 2 and 6 are precisely the absolute values of 2 and -6. Also, notice that the sign of the number with the larger absolute value is negative and that the sign of the resulting sum is negative. Adding Numbers with Unlike Signs Addition of numbers with unlike signs: To add two real numbers that have unlike signs, subtract the smaller absolute value from the larger absolute value and associate with this difference the sign of the number with the larger absolute value. Sample Set B Find the following sums. Example 10.23.  7 + ( – 2)       Subtract absolute values: 7 – 2 = 5. Attach the proper sign: "+." Thus, 7 + ( – 2) = + 5 or 7 + ( – 2) = 5. Example 10.24.  3 + ( – 11 )       Subtract absolute values: 11 – 3 = 8. Attach the proper sign: " – ." Thus, 3 + ( – 11) = – 8. Example 10.25.  The morning temperature on a winter's day in Lake Tahoe was -12 degrees. The afternoon temperature was 25 degrees warmer. What was the afternoon temperature? We need to find – 12 + 25.       Subtract absolute values: 25 – 12 = 16. Attach the proper sign: "+." Thus, – 12 + 25 = 13. Practice Set B Find the sums. Exercise 10.5.9. (Go to Solution) 4 + ( – 3) Exercise 10.5.10. (Go to Solution) − 3 + 5 Exercise 10.5.11. (Go to Solution) 15 + ( − 18) Exercise 10.5.12. (Go to Solution) 0 + ( − 6) Exercise 10.5.13. (Go to Solution) − 26 + 12 Exercise 10.5.14. (Go to Solution) 35 + ( − 78) Exercise 10.5.15. (Go to Solution) 15 + ( – 10) Exercise 10.5.16. (Go to Solution) 1.5 + ( − 2) Exercise 10.5.17. (Go to Solution) − 8 + 0 Exercise 10.5.18. (Go to Solution) 0 + (0.57) Exercise 10.5.19. (Go to Solution) − 879 + 454 Addition of Numbers with Unlike Signs The addition 2 + ( – 6), two numbers with unlike signs, can also be illustrated using the number line. Begin at 0, the origin. Since 2 is positive, move 2 units to the right. Since -6 is negative, move, from 2, 6 units to the left. We are now located at -4. We can suggest a rule for adding two numbers that have unlike signs by noting that if the signs are disregarded, 4 can be obtained by subtracting 2 from 6. But 2 and 6 are precisely the absolute values of 2 and -6. Also, notice that the sign of the number with the larger absolute value is negative and that the sign of the resulting sum is negative. Adding Numbers with Unlike Signs Addition of numbers with unlike signs: To add two real numbers that have unlike signs, subtract the smaller absolute value from the larger absolute value and associate with this difference the sign of the number with the larger absolute value. Sample Set B Find the following sums. Example 10.23.  7 + ( – 2)       Subtract absolute values: 7 – 2 = 5. Attach the proper sign: "+." Thus, 7 + ( – 2) = + 5 or 7 + ( – 2) = 5. Example 10.24.  3 + ( – 11 )       Subtract absolute values: 11 – 3 = 8. Attach the proper sign: " – ." Thus, 3 + ( – 11) = – 8. Example 10.25.  The morning temperature on a winter's day in Lake Tahoe was -12 degrees. The afternoon temperature was 25 degrees warmer. What was the afternoon temperature? We need to find – 12 + 25.       Subtract absolute values: 25 – 12 = 16. Attach the proper sign: "+." Thus, – 12 + 25 = 13. Practice Set B Find the sums. Exercise 10.5.9. (Go to Solution) 4 + ( – 3) Exercise 10.5.10. (Go to Solution) − 3 + 5 Exercise 10.5.11. (Go to Solution) 15 + ( − 18) Exercise 10.5.12. (Go to Solution) 0 + ( − 6) Exercise 10.5.13. (Go to Solution) − 26 + 12 Exercise 10.5.14. (Go to Solution) 35 + ( − 78) Exercise 10.5.15. (Go to Solution) 15 + ( – 10) Exercise 10.5.16. (Go to Solution) 1.5 + ( − 2) Exercise 10.5.17. (Go to Solution) − 8 + 0 Exercise 10.5.18. (Go to Solution) 0 + (0.57) Exercise 10.5.19. (Go to Solution) − 879 + 454  || 
book4_ch10_5_9	Calculators Calculators having the key can be used for finding sums of signed numbers. Sample Set C Use a calculator to find the sum of -147 and 84. Table 10.1.     Display Reads   Type 147 147   Press -147 This key changes the sign of a number. It is different than – . Press + -147   Type 84 84   Press = -63   Practice Set C Use a calculator to find each sum. Exercise 10.5.20. (Go to Solution) 673 + ( – 721) Exercise 10.5.21. (Go to Solution) – 8,261 + 2,206 Exercise 10.5.22. (Go to Solution) – 1,345.6 + ( – 6,648.1) Calculators Calculators having the key can be used for finding sums of signed numbers. Sample Set C Use a calculator to find the sum of -147 and 84. Table 10.1.     Display Reads   Type 147 147   Press -147 This key changes the sign of a number. It is different than – . Press + -147   Type 84 84   Press = -63   Practice Set C Use a calculator to find each sum. Exercise 10.5.20. (Go to Solution) 673 + ( – 721) Exercise 10.5.21. (Go to Solution) – 8,261 + 2,206 Exercise 10.5.22. (Go to Solution) – 1,345.6 + ( – 6,648.1)  || 
book4_ch10_6	 || Definition of Subtraction We know from experience with arithmetic that the subtraction 5 – 2 produces 3, that is 5 – 2 = 3. We can suggest a rule for subtracting signed numbers by illus­trating this process on the number line. Begin at 0, the origin. Since 5 is positive, move 5 units to the right. Then, move 2 units to the left to get to 6. (This reminds us of addition with a negative number.) From this illustration we can see that 5 – 2 is the same as 5 + ( – 2). This leads us directly to the definition of subtraction. Definition of Subtraction If a and b are real numbers, a – b is the same as a + ( – b), where – b is the opposite of b .  || The Process of Subtraction From this definition, we suggest the following rule for subtracting signed numbers. Subtraction of Signed Numbers To perform the subtraction a – b , add the opposite of b to a , that is, change the sign of b and add. Sample Set A Perform the indicated subtractions. Example 10.26.  5 − 3 = 5 + ( − 3) = 2 Example 10.27.  4 – 9 = 4 + ( – 9) = – 5 Example 10.28.  − 4 − 6 = − 4 + ( − 6) = − 10 Example 10.29.  − 3 − ( − 12) = − 3 + 12 = 9 Example 10.30.  0 – ( – 15) = 0 + 15 = 15 Example 10.31.  The high temperature today in Lake Tahoe was 26°F. The low temperature tonight is expected to be -7°F. How many degrees is the temperature expected to drop? We need to find the difference between 26 and -7. 26 – ( – 7 ) = 26 + 7 = 33 Thus, the expected temperature drop is 33°F. Example 10.32.  Practice Set A Perform the indicated subtractions. Exercise 10.6.1. (Go to Solution) 9 − 6 Exercise 10.6.2. (Go to Solution) 6 − 9 Exercise 10.6.3. (Go to Solution) 0 − 7 Exercise 10.6.4. (Go to Solution) 1 − 14 Exercise 10.6.5. (Go to Solution) − 8 − 12 Exercise 10.6.6. (Go to Solution) − 21 − 6 Exercise 10.6.7. (Go to Solution) − 6 − ( − 4) Exercise 10.6.8. (Go to Solution) 8 − ( − 10) Exercise 10.6.9. (Go to Solution) 1 − ( − 12) Exercise 10.6.10. (Go to Solution) 86 − ( − 32) Exercise 10.6.11. (Go to Solution) 0 − 16 Exercise 10.6.12. (Go to Solution) 0 − ( − 16) Exercise 10.6.13. (Go to Solution) 0 − (8) Exercise 10.6.14. (Go to Solution) 5 − ( − 5) Exercise 10.6.15. (Go to Solution) 24 − [ − ( − 24)]  || Calculators Calculators can be used for subtraction of signed numbers. The most efficient calculators are those with a key. Sample Set B Use a calculator to find each difference. Example 10.33.  3,187 − 8,719 Table 10.2. Display Reads Type 3187 3187 Press - 3187 Type 8719 8719 Press = -5532 Thus, 3,187 − 8,719 = − 5,532. Example 10.34.  − 156 − ( − 211) Method A: Table 10.3. Display Reads Type 156 156 Press -156 Type - -156 Press 211 211 Type -211 Press = 55 Thus, − 156 − ( − 211) = 55. Method B: We manually change the subtraction to an addition and change the sign of the number to be subtracted. − 156 − ( − 211) becomes − 156 + 211 Table 10.4. Display Reads Type 156 156 Press -156 Press + -156 Type 211 211 Press = 55 Practice Set B Use a calculator to find each difference. Exercise 10.6.16. (Go to Solution) 44 − 315 Exercise 10.6.17. (Go to Solution) 12.756 − 15.003 Exercise 10.6.18. (Go to Solution) − 31.89 − 44.17 Exercise 10.6.19. (Go to Solution) − 0.797 − ( − 0.615)  || 
book4_ch10_6_2	Definition of Subtraction We know from experience with arithmetic that the subtraction 5 – 2 produces 3, that is 5 – 2 = 3. We can suggest a rule for subtracting signed numbers by illus­trating this process on the number line. Begin at 0, the origin. Since 5 is positive, move 5 units to the right. Then, move 2 units to the left to get to 6. (This reminds us of addition with a negative number.) From this illustration we can see that 5 – 2 is the same as 5 + ( – 2). This leads us directly to the definition of subtraction. Definition of Subtraction If a and b are real numbers, a – b is the same as a + ( – b), where – b is the opposite of b . Definition of Subtraction We know from experience with arithmetic that the subtraction 5 – 2 produces 3, that is 5 – 2 = 3. We can suggest a rule for subtracting signed numbers by illus­trating this process on the number line. Begin at 0, the origin. Since 5 is positive, move 5 units to the right. Then, move 2 units to the left to get to 6. (This reminds us of addition with a negative number.) From this illustration we can see that 5 – 2 is the same as 5 + ( – 2). This leads us directly to the definition of subtraction. Definition of Subtraction If a and b are real numbers, a – b is the same as a + ( – b), where – b is the opposite of b .  || 
book4_ch10_6_3	The Process of Subtraction From this definition, we suggest the following rule for subtracting signed numbers. Subtraction of Signed Numbers To perform the subtraction a – b , add the opposite of b to a , that is, change the sign of b and add. Sample Set A Perform the indicated subtractions. Example 10.26.  5 − 3 = 5 + ( − 3) = 2 Example 10.27.  4 – 9 = 4 + ( – 9) = – 5 Example 10.28.  − 4 − 6 = − 4 + ( − 6) = − 10 Example 10.29.  − 3 − ( − 12) = − 3 + 12 = 9 Example 10.30.  0 – ( – 15) = 0 + 15 = 15 Example 10.31.  The high temperature today in Lake Tahoe was 26°F. The low temperature tonight is expected to be -7°F. How many degrees is the temperature expected to drop? We need to find the difference between 26 and -7. 26 – ( – 7 ) = 26 + 7 = 33 Thus, the expected temperature drop is 33°F. Example 10.32.  Practice Set A Perform the indicated subtractions. Exercise 10.6.1. (Go to Solution) 9 − 6 Exercise 10.6.2. (Go to Solution) 6 − 9 Exercise 10.6.3. (Go to Solution) 0 − 7 Exercise 10.6.4. (Go to Solution) 1 − 14 Exercise 10.6.5. (Go to Solution) − 8 − 12 Exercise 10.6.6. (Go to Solution) − 21 − 6 Exercise 10.6.7. (Go to Solution) − 6 − ( − 4) Exercise 10.6.8. (Go to Solution) 8 − ( − 10) Exercise 10.6.9. (Go to Solution) 1 − ( − 12) Exercise 10.6.10. (Go to Solution) 86 − ( − 32) Exercise 10.6.11. (Go to Solution) 0 − 16 Exercise 10.6.12. (Go to Solution) 0 − ( − 16) Exercise 10.6.13. (Go to Solution) 0 − (8) Exercise 10.6.14. (Go to Solution) 5 − ( − 5) Exercise 10.6.15. (Go to Solution) 24 − [ − ( − 24)] The Process of Subtraction From this definition, we suggest the following rule for subtracting signed numbers. Subtraction of Signed Numbers To perform the subtraction a – b , add the opposite of b to a , that is, change the sign of b and add. Sample Set A Perform the indicated subtractions. Example 10.26.  5 − 3 = 5 + ( − 3) = 2 Example 10.27.  4 – 9 = 4 + ( – 9) = – 5 Example 10.28.  − 4 − 6 = − 4 + ( − 6) = − 10 Example 10.29.  − 3 − ( − 12) = − 3 + 12 = 9 Example 10.30.  0 – ( – 15) = 0 + 15 = 15 Example 10.31.  The high temperature today in Lake Tahoe was 26°F. The low temperature tonight is expected to be -7°F. How many degrees is the temperature expected to drop? We need to find the difference between 26 and -7. 26 – ( – 7 ) = 26 + 7 = 33 Thus, the expected temperature drop is 33°F. Example 10.32.  Practice Set A Perform the indicated subtractions. Exercise 10.6.1. (Go to Solution) 9 − 6 Exercise 10.6.2. (Go to Solution) 6 − 9 Exercise 10.6.3. (Go to Solution) 0 − 7 Exercise 10.6.4. (Go to Solution) 1 − 14 Exercise 10.6.5. (Go to Solution) − 8 − 12 Exercise 10.6.6. (Go to Solution) − 21 − 6 Exercise 10.6.7. (Go to Solution) − 6 − ( − 4) Exercise 10.6.8. (Go to Solution) 8 − ( − 10) Exercise 10.6.9. (Go to Solution) 1 − ( − 12) Exercise 10.6.10. (Go to Solution) 86 − ( − 32) Exercise 10.6.11. (Go to Solution) 0 − 16 Exercise 10.6.12. (Go to Solution) 0 − ( − 16) Exercise 10.6.13. (Go to Solution) 0 − (8) Exercise 10.6.14. (Go to Solution) 5 − ( − 5) Exercise 10.6.15. (Go to Solution) 24 − [ − ( − 24)]  || 
book4_ch10_6_6	Calculators Calculators can be used for subtraction of signed numbers. The most efficient calculators are those with a key. Sample Set B Use a calculator to find each difference. Example 10.33.  3,187 − 8,719 Table 10.2. Display Reads Type 3187 3187 Press - 3187 Type 8719 8719 Press = -5532 Thus, 3,187 − 8,719 = − 5,532. Example 10.34.  − 156 − ( − 211) Method A: Table 10.3. Display Reads Type 156 156 Press -156 Type - -156 Press 211 211 Type -211 Press = 55 Thus, − 156 − ( − 211) = 55. Method B: We manually change the subtraction to an addition and change the sign of the number to be subtracted. − 156 − ( − 211) becomes − 156 + 211 Table 10.4. Display Reads Type 156 156 Press -156 Press + -156 Type 211 211 Press = 55 Practice Set B Use a calculator to find each difference. Exercise 10.6.16. (Go to Solution) 44 − 315 Exercise 10.6.17. (Go to Solution) 12.756 − 15.003 Exercise 10.6.18. (Go to Solution) − 31.89 − 44.17 Exercise 10.6.19. (Go to Solution) − 0.797 − ( − 0.615) Calculators Calculators can be used for subtraction of signed numbers. The most efficient calculators are those with a key. Sample Set B Use a calculator to find each difference. Example 10.33.  3,187 − 8,719 Table 10.2. Display Reads Type 3187 3187 Press - 3187 Type 8719 8719 Press = -5532 Thus, 3,187 − 8,719 = − 5,532. Example 10.34.  − 156 − ( − 211) Method A: Table 10.3. Display Reads Type 156 156 Press -156 Type - -156 Press 211 211 Type -211 Press = 55 Thus, − 156 − ( − 211) = 55. Method B: We manually change the subtraction to an addition and change the sign of the number to be subtracted. − 156 − ( − 211) becomes − 156 + 211 Table 10.4. Display Reads Type 156 156 Press -156 Press + -156 Type 211 211 Press = 55 Practice Set B Use a calculator to find each difference. Exercise 10.6.16. (Go to Solution) 44 − 315 Exercise 10.6.17. (Go to Solution) 12.756 − 15.003 Exercise 10.6.18. (Go to Solution) − 31.89 − 44.17 Exercise 10.6.19. (Go to Solution) − 0.797 − ( − 0.615)  || 
book4_ch10_7	 || Multiplication of Signed Numbers Let us consider first, the product of two positive numbers. Multiply: 3 ⋅ 5. 3 ⋅ 5 means 5 + 5 + 5 = 15 This suggests[1] that ( positive number ) ⋅ ( positive number ) = ( positive number ) More briefly, ( + ) ( + ) = ( + ) Now consider the product of a positive number and a negative number. Multiply: (3)( − 5). (3)( − 5) means ( − 5) + ( − 5) + ( − 5) = − 15 This suggests that ( positive number ) ⋅ ( negative number ) = ( negative number ) More briefly, ( + ) ( – ) = ( – ) By the commutative property of multiplication, we get ( negative number ) ⋅ ( positive number ) = ( negative number ) More briefly, ( − ) ( + ) = ( − ) The sign of the product of two negative numbers can be suggested after observing the following illustration. Multiply -2 by, respectively, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0, -1, -2, -3, -4. We have the following rules for multiplying signed numbers. Rules for Multiplying Signed Numbers Multiplying signed numbers: To multiply two real numbers that have the same sign, multiply their absolute values. The product is positive. ( + ) ( + ) = ( + ) ( − ) ( − ) = ( + ) To multiply two real numbers that have opposite signs, multiply their abso­lute values. The product is negative. ( + ) ( − ) = ( − ) ( − ) ( + ) = ( − ) Sample Set A Find the following products. Example 10.35.  8 ⋅ 6 Multiply these absolute values. 8 ⋅ 6 = 48 Since the numbers have the same sign, the product is positive. Thus, 8⋅6=+48, or 8⋅6 = 48. Example 10.36.  ( − 8)( − 6) Multiply these absolute values. 8 ⋅ 6 = 48 Since the numbers have the same sign, the product is positive. Thus, ( − 8)( − 6)=+48, or ( − 8)( − 6) = 48. Example 10.37.  ( − 4)(7) Multiply these absolute values. 4 ⋅ 7 = 28 Since the numbers have opposite signs, the product is negative. Thus, ( − 4)(7) = − 28. Example 10.38.  6( − 3) Multiply these absolute values. 6 ⋅ 3 = 18 Since the numbers have opposite signs, the product is negative. Thus, 6( − 3) = − 18. Practice Set A Find the following products. Exercise 10.7.1. (Go to Solution) 3( − 8) Exercise 10.7.2. (Go to Solution) 4(16) Exercise 10.7.3. (Go to Solution) ( − 6)( − 5) Exercise 10.7.4. (Go to Solution) ( − 7)( − 2) Exercise 10.7.5. (Go to Solution) ( − 1)(4) Exercise 10.7.6. (Go to Solution) ( − 7)7  || Division of Signed Numbers To determine the signs in a division problem, recall that since 12 = 3⋅4 This suggests that   since ( + ) = ( + )( + ) What is ? − 12 = ( − 3)( − 4) suggests that . That is,   ( + ) = ( − )( − ) suggests that What is ? − 12 = (3)( − 4) suggests that . That is,   ( − ) = ( + )( − ) suggests that What is ? − 12 = ( − 3)(4) suggests that . That is,   ( − ) = ( − )( + ) suggests that We have the following rules for dividing signed numbers. Rules for Dividing Signed Numbers Dividing signed numbers: To divide two real numbers that have the same sign, divide their absolute values. The quotient is positive. To divide two real numbers that have opposite signs, divide their absolute values. The quotient is negative. Sample Set B Find the following quotients. Example 10.39.  Divide these absolute values. Since the numbers have opposite signs, the quotient is negative. Thus . Example 10.40.  Divide these absolute values. Since the numbers have the same signs, the quotient is positive. Thus, . Example 10.41.  Divide these absolute values. Since the numbers have opposite signs, the quotient is negative. Thus, . Practice Set B Find the following quotients. Exercise 10.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.7.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.7.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.7.10. (Go to Solution) Sample Set C Example 10.42.  Find the value of . Using the order of operations and what we know about signed numbers, we get, Practice Set C Exercise 10.7.11. (Go to Solution) Find the value of .  || Calculators Calculators with the key can be used for multiplying and dividing signed numbers. Sample Set D Use a calculator to find each quotient or product. Example 10.43.  ( − 186)⋅( − 43) Since this product involves a (negative)⋅(negative), we know the result should be a positive number. We'll illustrate this on the calculator. Table 10.5.     Display Reads Type 186 186 Press -186 Press × -186 Type 43 43 Press -43 Press = 7998 Thus, ( − 186)⋅( − 43) = 7,998. Example 10.44.  . Round to one decimal place. Table 10.6.     Display Reads Type 158.64 158.64 Press ÷ 158.64 Type 54.3 54.3 Press -54.3 Press = -2.921546961 Rounding to one decimal place we get -2.9. Practice Set D Use a calculator to find each value. Exercise 10.7.12. (Go to Solution) ( – 51.3)⋅( – 21.6) Exercise 10.7.13. (Go to Solution) – 2.5746÷ – 2.1 Exercise 10.7.14. (Go to Solution) (0.006)⋅( – 0.241). Round to three decimal places.  || 
book4_ch10_7_2	Multiplication of Signed Numbers Let us consider first, the product of two positive numbers. Multiply: 3 ⋅ 5. 3 ⋅ 5 means 5 + 5 + 5 = 15 This suggests[1] that ( positive number ) ⋅ ( positive number ) = ( positive number ) More briefly, ( + ) ( + ) = ( + ) Now consider the product of a positive number and a negative number. Multiply: (3)( − 5). (3)( − 5) means ( − 5) + ( − 5) + ( − 5) = − 15 This suggests that ( positive number ) ⋅ ( negative number ) = ( negative number ) More briefly, ( + ) ( – ) = ( – ) By the commutative property of multiplication, we get ( negative number ) ⋅ ( positive number ) = ( negative number ) More briefly, ( − ) ( + ) = ( − ) The sign of the product of two negative numbers can be suggested after observing the following illustration. Multiply -2 by, respectively, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0, -1, -2, -3, -4. We have the following rules for multiplying signed numbers. Rules for Multiplying Signed Numbers Multiplying signed numbers: To multiply two real numbers that have the same sign, multiply their absolute values. The product is positive. ( + ) ( + ) = ( + ) ( − ) ( − ) = ( + ) To multiply two real numbers that have opposite signs, multiply their abso­lute values. The product is negative. ( + ) ( − ) = ( − ) ( − ) ( + ) = ( − ) Sample Set A Find the following products. Example 10.35.  8 ⋅ 6 Multiply these absolute values. 8 ⋅ 6 = 48 Since the numbers have the same sign, the product is positive. Thus, 8⋅6=+48, or 8⋅6 = 48. Example 10.36.  ( − 8)( − 6) Multiply these absolute values. 8 ⋅ 6 = 48 Since the numbers have the same sign, the product is positive. Thus, ( − 8)( − 6)=+48, or ( − 8)( − 6) = 48. Example 10.37.  ( − 4)(7) Multiply these absolute values. 4 ⋅ 7 = 28 Since the numbers have opposite signs, the product is negative. Thus, ( − 4)(7) = − 28. Example 10.38.  6( − 3) Multiply these absolute values. 6 ⋅ 3 = 18 Since the numbers have opposite signs, the product is negative. Thus, 6( − 3) = − 18. Practice Set A Find the following products. Exercise 10.7.1. (Go to Solution) 3( − 8) Exercise 10.7.2. (Go to Solution) 4(16) Exercise 10.7.3. (Go to Solution) ( − 6)( − 5) Exercise 10.7.4. (Go to Solution) ( − 7)( − 2) Exercise 10.7.5. (Go to Solution) ( − 1)(4) Exercise 10.7.6. (Go to Solution) ( − 7)7 Multiplication of Signed Numbers Let us consider first, the product of two positive numbers. Multiply: 3 ⋅ 5. 3 ⋅ 5 means 5 + 5 + 5 = 15 This suggests[1] that ( positive number ) ⋅ ( positive number ) = ( positive number ) More briefly, ( + ) ( + ) = ( + ) Now consider the product of a positive number and a negative number. Multiply: (3)( − 5). (3)( − 5) means ( − 5) + ( − 5) + ( − 5) = − 15 This suggests that ( positive number ) ⋅ ( negative number ) = ( negative number ) More briefly, ( + ) ( – ) = ( – ) By the commutative property of multiplication, we get ( negative number ) ⋅ ( positive number ) = ( negative number ) More briefly, ( − ) ( + ) = ( − ) The sign of the product of two negative numbers can be suggested after observing the following illustration. Multiply -2 by, respectively, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0, -1, -2, -3, -4. We have the following rules for multiplying signed numbers. Rules for Multiplying Signed Numbers Multiplying signed numbers: To multiply two real numbers that have the same sign, multiply their absolute values. The product is positive. ( + ) ( + ) = ( + ) ( − ) ( − ) = ( + ) To multiply two real numbers that have opposite signs, multiply their abso­lute values. The product is negative. ( + ) ( − ) = ( − ) ( − ) ( + ) = ( − ) Sample Set A Find the following products. Example 10.35.  8 ⋅ 6 Multiply these absolute values. 8 ⋅ 6 = 48 Since the numbers have the same sign, the product is positive. Thus, 8⋅6=+48, or 8⋅6 = 48. Example 10.36.  ( − 8)( − 6) Multiply these absolute values. 8 ⋅ 6 = 48 Since the numbers have the same sign, the product is positive. Thus, ( − 8)( − 6)=+48, or ( − 8)( − 6) = 48. Example 10.37.  ( − 4)(7) Multiply these absolute values. 4 ⋅ 7 = 28 Since the numbers have opposite signs, the product is negative. Thus, ( − 4)(7) = − 28. Example 10.38.  6( − 3) Multiply these absolute values. 6 ⋅ 3 = 18 Since the numbers have opposite signs, the product is negative. Thus, 6( − 3) = − 18. Practice Set A Find the following products. Exercise 10.7.1. (Go to Solution) 3( − 8) Exercise 10.7.2. (Go to Solution) 4(16) Exercise 10.7.3. (Go to Solution) ( − 6)( − 5) Exercise 10.7.4. (Go to Solution) ( − 7)( − 2) Exercise 10.7.5. (Go to Solution) ( − 1)(4) Exercise 10.7.6. (Go to Solution) ( − 7)7  || 
book4_ch10_7_5	Division of Signed Numbers To determine the signs in a division problem, recall that since 12 = 3⋅4 This suggests that   since ( + ) = ( + )( + ) What is ? − 12 = ( − 3)( − 4) suggests that . That is,   ( + ) = ( − )( − ) suggests that What is ? − 12 = (3)( − 4) suggests that . That is,   ( − ) = ( + )( − ) suggests that What is ? − 12 = ( − 3)(4) suggests that . That is,   ( − ) = ( − )( + ) suggests that We have the following rules for dividing signed numbers. Rules for Dividing Signed Numbers Dividing signed numbers: To divide two real numbers that have the same sign, divide their absolute values. The quotient is positive. To divide two real numbers that have opposite signs, divide their absolute values. The quotient is negative. Sample Set B Find the following quotients. Example 10.39.  Divide these absolute values. Since the numbers have opposite signs, the quotient is negative. Thus . Example 10.40.  Divide these absolute values. Since the numbers have the same signs, the quotient is positive. Thus, . Example 10.41.  Divide these absolute values. Since the numbers have opposite signs, the quotient is negative. Thus, . Practice Set B Find the following quotients. Exercise 10.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.7.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.7.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.7.10. (Go to Solution) Sample Set C Example 10.42.  Find the value of . Using the order of operations and what we know about signed numbers, we get, Practice Set C Exercise 10.7.11. (Go to Solution) Find the value of . Division of Signed Numbers To determine the signs in a division problem, recall that since 12 = 3⋅4 This suggests that   since ( + ) = ( + )( + ) What is ? − 12 = ( − 3)( − 4) suggests that . That is,   ( + ) = ( − )( − ) suggests that What is ? − 12 = (3)( − 4) suggests that . That is,   ( − ) = ( + )( − ) suggests that What is ? − 12 = ( − 3)(4) suggests that . That is,   ( − ) = ( − )( + ) suggests that We have the following rules for dividing signed numbers. Rules for Dividing Signed Numbers Dividing signed numbers: To divide two real numbers that have the same sign, divide their absolute values. The quotient is positive. To divide two real numbers that have opposite signs, divide their absolute values. The quotient is negative. Sample Set B Find the following quotients. Example 10.39.  Divide these absolute values. Since the numbers have opposite signs, the quotient is negative. Thus . Example 10.40.  Divide these absolute values. Since the numbers have the same signs, the quotient is positive. Thus, . Example 10.41.  Divide these absolute values. Since the numbers have opposite signs, the quotient is negative. Thus, . Practice Set B Find the following quotients. Exercise 10.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.7.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.7.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 10.7.10. (Go to Solution) Sample Set C Example 10.42.  Find the value of . Using the order of operations and what we know about signed numbers, we get, Practice Set C Exercise 10.7.11. (Go to Solution) Find the value of .  || 
book4_ch10_7_10	Calculators Calculators with the key can be used for multiplying and dividing signed numbers. Sample Set D Use a calculator to find each quotient or product. Example 10.43.  ( − 186)⋅( − 43) Since this product involves a (negative)⋅(negative), we know the result should be a positive number. We'll illustrate this on the calculator. Table 10.5.     Display Reads Type 186 186 Press -186 Press × -186 Type 43 43 Press -43 Press = 7998 Thus, ( − 186)⋅( − 43) = 7,998. Example 10.44.  . Round to one decimal place. Table 10.6.     Display Reads Type 158.64 158.64 Press ÷ 158.64 Type 54.3 54.3 Press -54.3 Press = -2.921546961 Rounding to one decimal place we get -2.9. Practice Set D Use a calculator to find each value. Exercise 10.7.12. (Go to Solution) ( – 51.3)⋅( – 21.6) Exercise 10.7.13. (Go to Solution) – 2.5746÷ – 2.1 Exercise 10.7.14. (Go to Solution) (0.006)⋅( – 0.241). Round to three decimal places. Calculators Calculators with the key can be used for multiplying and dividing signed numbers. Sample Set D Use a calculator to find each quotient or product. Example 10.43.  ( − 186)⋅( − 43) Since this product involves a (negative)⋅(negative), we know the result should be a positive number. We'll illustrate this on the calculator. Table 10.5.     Display Reads Type 186 186 Press -186 Press × -186 Type 43 43 Press -43 Press = 7998 Thus, ( − 186)⋅( − 43) = 7,998. Example 10.44.  . Round to one decimal place. Table 10.6.     Display Reads Type 158.64 158.64 Press ÷ 158.64 Type 54.3 54.3 Press -54.3 Press = -2.921546961 Rounding to one decimal place we get -2.9. Practice Set D Use a calculator to find each value. Exercise 10.7.12. (Go to Solution) ( – 51.3)⋅( – 21.6) Exercise 10.7.13. (Go to Solution) – 2.5746÷ – 2.1 Exercise 10.7.14. (Go to Solution) (0.006)⋅( – 0.241). Round to three decimal places.  || 
book4_ch04	 ||  || More Numbers on the Number Line In Chapters Section 1.1, Section 2.1, and Section 3.1, we studied the whole numbers and methods of combining them. We noted that we could visually display the whole numbers by drawing a number line and placing closed circles at whole number locations. By observing this number line, we can see that the whole numbers do not account for every point on the line. What numbers, if any, can be associated with these points? In this section we will see that many of the points on the number line, including the points already associated with whole numbers, can be associated with numbers called fractions.  || Fractions of Whole Numbers The Nature of the Positive Fractions We can extend our collection of numbers, which now contains only the whole numbers, by including fractions of whole numbers. We can determine the nature of these fractions using the number line. If we place a pencil at some whole number and proceed to travel to the right to the next whole number, we see that our journey can be broken into different types of equal parts as shown in the following examples. 1 part. 2 equal parts. 3 equal parts. 4 equal parts. The Latin Word Fractio Notice that the number of parts, 2, 3, and 4, that we are breaking the original quantity into is always a nonzero whole number. The idea of breaking up a whole quantity gives us the word fraction. The word fraction comes from the Latin word "fractio" which means a breaking, or fracture. Suppose we break up the interval from some whole number to the next whole number into five equal parts. After starting to move from one whole number to the next, we decide to stop after covering only two parts. We have covered 2 parts of 5 equal parts. This situation is described by writing . Positive Fraction A number such as is called a positive fraction, or more simply, a fraction.  || The Parts of a Fraction A fraction has three parts. The fraction bar . Fraction Bar The fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol. It separates a quantity into individual groups. These groups have names, as noted in 2 and 3 below. The nonzero number below the fraction bar. Denominator This number is called the denominator of the fraction, and it indicates the number of parts the whole quantity has been divided into. Notice that the denominator must be a nonzero whole number since the least number of parts any quantity can have is one. The number above the fraction bar. Numerator This number is called the numerator of the fraction, and it indicates how many of the specified parts are being considered. Notice that the numerator can be any whole number (including zero) since any number of the specified parts can be considered. Sample Set A The diagrams in the following problems are illustrations of fractions. Example 4.1.  Figure 4.1.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 3 equal parts (c) 1 of the 3 equal parts The fraction is read as "one third." Example 4.2.  Figure 4.2.  (a) A whole rectangle (b) The whole rectangle divided into 5 equal parts (c) 3 of the 5 equal parts The fraction "is read as "three fifths." Example 4.3.  Figure 4.3.  (a) The number line between 0 and 1 (b) The number line between 0 and 1 divided into 7 equal parts (c) 6 of the 7 equal parts The fraction is read as "six sevenths." Example 4.4.  Figure 4.4.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 4 equal parts (c) 4 of the 4 equal parts When the numerator and denominator are equal, the fraction represents the entire quantity, and its value is 1. Practice Set A Specify the numerator and denominator of the following fractions. Exercise 4.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.5. (Go to Solution)  || Reading and Writing Fractions In order to properly translate fractions from word form to number form, or from number form to word form, it is necessary to understand the use of the hyphen. Use of the Hyphen One of the main uses of the hyphen is to tell the reader that two words not ordinarily joined are to be taken in combination as a unit. Hyphens are always used for numbers between and including 21 and 99 (except those ending in zero). Sample Set B Write each fraction using whole numbers. Example 4.5.  Fifty three-hundredths. The hyphen joins the words three and hundredths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty three-hundredths translates as Example 4.6.  Fifty-three hundredths. The hyphen joins the numbers fifty and three and tells us to con­sider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty-three hundredths translates as Example 4.7.  Four hundred seven-thousandths. The hyphen joins the words seven and thousandths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, four hundred seven-thousandths translates as Example 4.8.  Four hundred seven thousandths. The absence of hyphens indicates that the words seven and thousandths are to be considered individually. four hundred seven thousandths translates as Write each fraction using words. Example 4.9.  translates as twenty-one eighty-fifths. Example 4.10.  translates as two hundred three-thousandths. A hyphen is needed between the words three and thousandths to tell the reader that these words are to be considered as a single unit. Example 4.11.  translates as two hundred three thousandths. Practice Set B Write the following fractions using whole numbers. Exercise 4.2.6. (Go to Solution) one tenth Exercise 4.2.7. (Go to Solution) eleven fourteenths Exercise 4.2.8. (Go to Solution) sixteen thirty-fifths Exercise 4.2.9. (Go to Solution) eight hundred seven-thousandths Write the following using words. Exercise 4.2.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.13. (Go to Solution) Name the fraction that describes each shaded portion. Exercise 4.2.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.15. (Go to Solution) In the following 2 problems, state the numerator and denominator, and write each fraction in words. Exercise 4.2.16. (Go to Solution) The number is used in converting from Fahrenheit to Celsius. Exercise 4.2.17. (Go to Solution) A dime is of a dollar.  ||  || Positive Proper Fractions Positive Proper Fraction Fractions in which the whole number in the numerator is strictly less than the whole number in the denominator are called positive proper fractions. On the number line, proper fractions are located in the interval from 0 to 1. Positive proper fractions are always less than one. The closed circle at 0 indicates that 0 is included, while the open circle at 1 indicates that 1 is not included. Some examples of positive proper fractions are , , , and Note that 1 < 2, 3 < 5, 20 < 27, and 106 < 225.  || Positive Improper Fractions Positive Improper Fractions Fractions in which the whole number in the numerator is greater than or equal to the whole number in the denominator are called positive improper fractions. On the number line, improper fractions lie to the right of (and including) 1. Positive improper fractions are always greater than or equal to 1. Some examples of positive improper fractions are , , , and Note that 3 ≥ 2, 8 ≥ 5, 4 ≥ 4, and 105 ≥ 16.  || Positive Mixed Numbers Positive Mixed Numbers A number of the form nonzero whole number + proper fraction is called a positive mixed number. For example, is a mixed number. On the number line, mixed numbers are located in the interval to the right of (and includ­ing) 1. Mixed numbers are always greater than or equal to 1.  || Relating Positive Improper Fractions and Positive Mixed Numbers A relationship between improper fractions and mixed numbers is suggested by two facts. The first is that improper fractions and mixed numbers are located in the same interval on the number line. The second fact, that mixed numbers are the sum of a natural number and a fraction, can be seen by making the following observa­tions. Divide a whole quantity into 3 equal parts. Now, consider the following examples by observing the respective shaded areas. In the shaded region, there are 2 one thirds, or . There are 3 one thirds, or , or 1. Thus, Improper fraction = whole number. There are 4 one thirds, or , or 1 and . or The terms 1 and can be represented as or Thus, . Improper fraction = mixed number. There are 5 one thirds, or , or 1 and . The terms 1 and can be represented as or . Thus, . Improper fraction = mixed number. There are 6 one thirds, or , or 2. Thus, Improper fraction = whole number. The following important fact is illustrated in the preceding examples. Mixed Number = Natural Number + Proper Fraction Mixed numbers are the sum of a natural number and a proper fraction. Mixed number = (natural number) + (proper fraction) For example can be expressed as The fraction can be expressed as . It is important to note that a number such as does not indicate multiplication. To indicate multiplication, we would need to use a multiplication symbol (such as ⋅) Note means and not , which means 5 times or 5 multiplied by . Thus, mixed numbers may be represented by improper fractions, and improper fractions may be represented by mixed numbers.  || Converting Improper Fractions to Mixed Numbers To understand how we might convert an improper fraction to a mixed number, let's consider the fraction, . Thus, . We can illustrate a procedure for converting an improper fraction to a mixed number using this example. However, the conversion is more easily accomplished by dividing the numerator by the denominator and using the result to write the mixed number. Converting an Improper Fraction to a Mixed Number To convert an improper fraction to a mixed number, divide the numerator by the denominator. The whole number part of the mixed number is the quotient. The fractional part of the mixed number is the remainder written over the divisor (the denominator of the improper fraction). Sample Set A Convert each improper fraction to its corresponding mixed number. Example 4.12.  Divide 5 by 3. The improper fraction . Example 4.13.  . Divide 46 by 9. The improper fraction . Example 4.14.  . Divide 83 by 11. The improper fraction . Example 4.15.  Divide 104 by 4. The improper fraction . Practice Set A Convert each improper fraction to its corresponding mixed number. Exercise 4.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.6. (Go to Solution)  || Converting Mixed Numbers to Improper Fractions To understand how to convert a mixed number to an improper fraction, we'll recall mixed number = (natural number) + (proper fraction) and consider the following diagram. Recall that multiplication describes repeated addition. Notice that can be obtained from using multiplication in the following way. Multiply: 3⋅1 = 3 Add: 3 + 2 = 5. Place the 5 over the 3: The procedure for converting a mixed number to an improper fraction is illustrated in this example. Converting a Mixed Number to an Improper Fraction To convert a mixed number to an improper fraction, Multiply the denominator of the fractional part of the mixed number by the whole number part. To this product, add the numerator of the fractional part. Place this result over the denominator of the fractional part. Sample Set B Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. Example 4.16.  Multiply: 8⋅5 = 40. Add: 40 + 7 = 47. Place 47 over 8: . Thus, . Example 4.17.  Multiply: 3 ⋅ 16 = 48. Add: 48 + 2 = 50. Place 50 over 3: Thus, Practice Set B Convert each mixed number to its corresponding improper fraction. Exercise 4.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.10. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Equivalent Fractions Let's examine the following two diagrams. Notice that both and represent the same part of the whole, that is, they represent the same number. Equivalent Fractions Fractions that have the same value are called equivalent fractions. Equiva­lent fractions may look different, but they are still the same point on the number line. There is an interesting property that equivalent fractions satisfy. A Test for Equivalent Fractions Using the Cross Product These pairs of products are called cross products. If the cross products are equal, the fractions are equivalent. If the cross products are not equal, the fractions are not equivalent. Thus, and are equivalent, that is, . Sample Set A Determine if the following pairs of fractions are equivalent. Example 4.18.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are equals. The fractions and are equivalent, so . Example 4.19.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are not equal. The fractions and are not equivalent. Practice Set A Determine if the pairs of fractions are equivalent. Exercise 4.4.1. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.2. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.3. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.4. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.5. (Go to Solution) ,  || Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms It is often very useful to convert one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. We can suggest a method for doing so by considering the equivalent fractions and . First, divide both the numerator and denominator of by 3. The fractions and are equivalent. (Can you prove this?) So, . We wish to convert to . Now divide the numerator and denominator of by 3, and see what happens. The fraction is converted to . A natural question is "Why did we choose to divide by 3?" Notice that We can see that the factor 3 is common to both the numerator and denominator. Reducing a Fraction From these observations we can suggest the following method for converting one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. The method is called reducing a fraction. A fraction can be reduced by dividing both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero whole number. Consider the collection of equivalent fractions , , , , Reduced to Lowest Terms Notice that each of the first four fractions can be reduced to the last fraction, , by dividing both the numerator and denominator by, respectively, 5, 4, 3, and 2. When a fraction is converted to the fraction that has the smallest numerator and denomi­nator in its collection of equivalent fractions, it is said to be reduced to lowest terms. The fractions , , , and are all reduced to lowest terms. Observe a very important property of a fraction that has been reduced to lowest terms. The only whole number that divides both the numerator and denominator without a remainder is the number 1. When 1 is the only whole number that divides two whole numbers, the two whole numbers are said to be relatively prime. Relatively Prime A fraction is reduced to lowest terms if its numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Methods of Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms Method 1: Dividing Out Common Primes Write the numerator and denominator as a product of primes. Divide the numerator and denominator by each of the common prime factors. We often indicate this division by drawing a slanted line through each divided out factor. This process is also called cancelling common factors. The product of the remaining factors in the numerator and the product of remaining factors of the denominator are relatively prime, and this fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Sample Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.20.  1 and 3 are relatively prime. Example 4.21.  4 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.22.  7 and 13 are relatively prime (and also truly prime) Example 4.23.  15 and 16 are relatively prime. Example 4.24.  No common prime factors, so 8 and 15 are relatively prime. The fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Practice Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.11. (Go to Solution) Method 2: Dividing Out Common Factors Mentally divide the numerator and the denominator by a factor that is com­mon to each. Write the quotient above the original number. Continue this process until the numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Sample Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.25.  . 5 divides into both 25 and 30. 5 and 6 are relatively prime. Example 4.26.  . Both numbers are even so we can divide by 2. Now, both 9 and 12 are divisible by 3. 3 and 4 are relatively prime. Example 4.27.  . 7 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.28.  . 3 and 8 are relatively prime. Practice Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.17. (Go to Solution)  || Methods of Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms Method 1: Dividing Out Common Primes Write the numerator and denominator as a product of primes. Divide the numerator and denominator by each of the common prime factors. We often indicate this division by drawing a slanted line through each divided out factor. This process is also called cancelling common factors. The product of the remaining factors in the numerator and the product of remaining factors of the denominator are relatively prime, and this fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Sample Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.20.  1 and 3 are relatively prime. Example 4.21.  4 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.22.  7 and 13 are relatively prime (and also truly prime) Example 4.23.  15 and 16 are relatively prime. Example 4.24.  No common prime factors, so 8 and 15 are relatively prime. The fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Practice Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.11. (Go to Solution) Method 2: Dividing Out Common Factors Mentally divide the numerator and the denominator by a factor that is com­mon to each. Write the quotient above the original number. Continue this process until the numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Sample Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.25.  . 5 divides into both 25 and 30. 5 and 6 are relatively prime. Example 4.26.  . Both numbers are even so we can divide by 2. Now, both 9 and 12 are divisible by 3. 3 and 4 are relatively prime. Example 4.27.  . 7 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.28.  . 3 and 8 are relatively prime. Practice Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.17. (Go to Solution)  || Raising Fractions to Higher Terms Equally as important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator than the original fraction. The fractions and are equivalent, that is, . Notice also, Notice that and that . We are not changing the value of . From these observations we can suggest the following method for converting one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. This method is called raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to an equivalent fraction that has higher terms in the numerator and denominator by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero whole number. The fraction can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8. Most often, we will want to convert a given fraction to an equivalent fraction with a higher specified denominator. For example, we may wish to convert to an equivalent fraction that has denominator 32, that is, This is possible to do because we know the process. We must multiply both the numerator and denominator of by the same nonzero whole number in order to 8 obtain an equivalent fraction. We have some information. The denominator 8 was raised to 32 by multiplying it by some nonzero whole number. Division will give us the proper factor. Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 32 ÷ 8 = 4 Now, multiply the numerator 5 by 4. 5 ⋅ 4 = 20 Thus, So, Sample Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Example 4.29.  . Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 35 ÷ 7 = 5 The quotient is 5. Multiply the original numerator by 5. The missing numerator is 15. Example 4.30.  . Divide the original numerator into the new numerator. 45 ÷ 5 = 9 The quotient is 9. Multiply the original denominator by 9. The missing denominator is 45. Practice Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Exercise 4.4.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.20. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.22. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Fractions of Fractions We know that a fraction represents a part of a whole quantity. For example, two fifths of one unit can be represented by of the whole is shaded. A natural question is, what is a fractional part of a fractional quantity, or, what is a fraction of a fraction? For example, what of ? We can suggest an answer to this question by using a picture to examine of . First, let’s represent . of the whole is shaded. Then divide each of the parts into 3 equal parts. Each part is of the whole. Now we’ll take of the unit. of is , which reduces to .  || Multiplication of Fractions Now we ask, what arithmetic operation (+, –, ×, ÷) will produce from of ? Notice that, if in the fractions and , we multiply the numerators together and the denominators together, we get precisely . This reduces to as before. Using this observation, we can suggest the following: The Word "OF" Indicates Multiplication: The word "of" translates to the arithmetic operation "times." The Method of Multiplying Fractions: To multiply two or more fractions, multiply the numerators together and then multiply the denominators together. Reduce if necessary. Sample Set A Perform the following multiplications. Example 4.31.  Thus This means that of is , that is, of of a unit is of the original unit. Example 4.32.  . Write 4 as a fraction by writing This means that of 4 whole units is of one whole unit. Example 4.33.  This means that of of of a whole unit is of the original unit. Practice Set A Perform the following multiplications. Exercise 4.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.9. (Go to Solution)  || Multiplying Fractions by Dividing Out Common Factors We have seen that to multiply two fractions together, we multiply numerators together, then denominators together, then reduce to lowest terms, if necessary. The reduction can be tedious if the numbers in the fractions are large. For example, We avoid the process of reducing if we divide out common factors before we multi­ply. Divide 3 into 9 and 21, and divide 2 into 10 and 16. The product is a fraction that is reduced to lowest terms. The Process of Multiplication by Dividing Out Common Factors To multiply fractions by dividing out common factors, divide out factors that are common to both a numerator and a denominator. The factor being divided out can appear in any numerator and any denominator. Sample Set B Perform the following multiplications. Example 4.34.  Divide 4 and 6 by 2 Divide 5 and 5 by 5 Example 4.35.  Divide 8 and 10 by 2. Divide 8 and 12 by 4. Example 4.36.  Example 4.37.  Example 4.38.  Practice Set B Perform the following multiplications. Exercise 4.5.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.16. (Go to Solution)  || Multiplication of Mixed Numbers Multiplying Mixed Numbers To perform a multiplication in which there are mixed numbers, it is convenient to first convert each mixed number to an improper fraction, then multiply. Sample Set C Perform the following multiplications. Convert improper fractions to mixed numbers. Example 4.39.  Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. Example 4.40.  Convert to an improper fraction. . There are no common factors to divide out. Example 4.41.  Convert to improper fractions. Example 4.42.  Practice Set C Perform the following multiplications. Convert improper fractions to mixed numbers. Exercise 4.5.17. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.20. (Go to Solution)  || Powers and Roots of Fractions Sample Set D Find the value of each of the following. Example 4.43.  Example 4.44.  . We’re looking for a number, call it ?, such that when it is squared, is produced. We know that 32 = 9 and 102 = 100 We’ll try . Since Example 4.45.  Practice Set D Find the value of each of the following. Exercise 4.5.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.22. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.23. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.24. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.25. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.26. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.27. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Reciprocals Reciprocals Two numbers whose product is 1 are called reciprocals of each other. Sample Set A The following pairs of numbers are reciprocals. Example 4.46.  Example 4.47.  Example 4.48.  Notice that we can find the reciprocal of a nonzero number in fractional form by inverting it (exchanging positions of the numerator and denominator). Practice Set A Find the reciprocal of each number. Exercise 4.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.5. (Go to Solution) Hint Write this number as an improper fraction first. Exercise 4.6.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.7. (Go to Solution)  || Dividing Fractions Our concept of division is that it indicates how many times one quantity is con­tained in another quantity. For example, using the diagram we can see that there are 6 one-thirds in 2. There are 6 one-thirds in 2. Since 2 contains six 's we express this as Using these observations, we can suggest the following method for dividing a number by a fraction. Dividing One Fraction by Another Fraction To divide a first fraction by a second, nonzero fraction, multiply the first traction by the reciprocal of the second fraction. Invert and Multiply This method is commonly referred to as "invert the divisor and multiply." Sample Set B Perform the following divisions. Example 4.49.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.50.  The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.51.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.52.  . Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. . . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.53.  . First conveniently write 8 as . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.54.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Example 4.55.  How many -inch-wide packages can be placed in a box 19 inches wide? The problem is to determine how many two and three eighths are contained in 19, that is, what is ? Convert the divisor to an improper fraction. Write the dividend 19 as . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Thus, 8 packages will fit into the box. Practice Set B Perform the following divisions. Exercise 4.6.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.15. (Go to Solution) A container will hold 106 ounces of grape juice. How many -ounce glasses of grape juice can be served from this container? Determine each of the following quotients and then write a rule for this type of division. Exercise 4.6.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.17. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.20. (Go to Solution) When dividing 1 by a fraction, the quotient is the ________________________________________.  ||  || Multiplication Statements Statement, Multiplication Statement A statement is a sentence that is either true or false. A mathematical statement of the form product = (factor 1) ⋅ (factor 2) is a multiplication statement. Depending on the numbers that are used, it can be either true or false. Omitting exactly one of the three numbers in the statement will produce exactly one of the following three problems. For convenience, we'll represent the omitted (or missing) number with the letter M (M for Missing). M = (factor 1) ⋅ (factor 2) Missing product statement. M ⋅ (factor 2) = product Missing factor statement. (factor 1) ⋅ M = product Missing factor statement. We are interested in developing and working with methods to determine the missing number that makes the statement true. Fundamental to these methods is the ability to translate two words to mathematical symbols. The word of translates to times is translates to equals  || Missing Products Statements The equation M = 8 ⋅ 4 is a missing product statement. We can find the value of M that makes this statement true by multiplying the known factors. Missing product statements can be used to determine the answer to a question such as, "What number is fraction 1 of fraction 2? Sample Set A Find of . We are being asked the question, "What number is of ?" We must translate from words to mathematical symbols. Thus, of is . Thus, 18 is of 24. Practice Set A Exercise 4.7.1. (Go to Solution) Find of . Exercise 4.7.2. (Go to Solution) What number is of ? Exercise 4.7.3. (Go to Solution) of is what number?  || Missing Factor Statements The equation 8 ⋅ M = 32 is a missing factor statement. We can find the value of M that makes this statement true by dividing (since we know that 32 ÷ 8 = 4). Finding the Missing Factor To find the missing factor in a missing factor statement, divide the product by the known factor. missing factor = (product) ÷ (known factor) Missing factor statements can be used to answer such questions as of what number is ? What part of is ? Sample Set B Now, using missing factor = (product) ÷ (known factor) We get Thus, of 6 is . For convenience, let's convert the mixed numbers to improper fractions. Now, using missing factor = (product)÷(known factor) we get Thus, of is . Practice Set B Exercise 4.7.4. (Go to Solution) of what number is ? Exercise 4.7.5. (Go to Solution) of what number is ? Exercise 4.7.6. (Go to Solution) What part of is ? Exercise 4.7.7. (Go to Solution) What part of is ?  || 
book4_ch04_2	 || More Numbers on the Number Line In Chapters Section 1.1, Section 2.1, and Section 3.1, we studied the whole numbers and methods of combining them. We noted that we could visually display the whole numbers by drawing a number line and placing closed circles at whole number locations. By observing this number line, we can see that the whole numbers do not account for every point on the line. What numbers, if any, can be associated with these points? In this section we will see that many of the points on the number line, including the points already associated with whole numbers, can be associated with numbers called fractions.  || Fractions of Whole Numbers The Nature of the Positive Fractions We can extend our collection of numbers, which now contains only the whole numbers, by including fractions of whole numbers. We can determine the nature of these fractions using the number line. If we place a pencil at some whole number and proceed to travel to the right to the next whole number, we see that our journey can be broken into different types of equal parts as shown in the following examples. 1 part. 2 equal parts. 3 equal parts. 4 equal parts. The Latin Word Fractio Notice that the number of parts, 2, 3, and 4, that we are breaking the original quantity into is always a nonzero whole number. The idea of breaking up a whole quantity gives us the word fraction. The word fraction comes from the Latin word "fractio" which means a breaking, or fracture. Suppose we break up the interval from some whole number to the next whole number into five equal parts. After starting to move from one whole number to the next, we decide to stop after covering only two parts. We have covered 2 parts of 5 equal parts. This situation is described by writing . Positive Fraction A number such as is called a positive fraction, or more simply, a fraction.  || The Parts of a Fraction A fraction has three parts. The fraction bar . Fraction Bar The fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol. It separates a quantity into individual groups. These groups have names, as noted in 2 and 3 below. The nonzero number below the fraction bar. Denominator This number is called the denominator of the fraction, and it indicates the number of parts the whole quantity has been divided into. Notice that the denominator must be a nonzero whole number since the least number of parts any quantity can have is one. The number above the fraction bar. Numerator This number is called the numerator of the fraction, and it indicates how many of the specified parts are being considered. Notice that the numerator can be any whole number (including zero) since any number of the specified parts can be considered. Sample Set A The diagrams in the following problems are illustrations of fractions. Example 4.1.  Figure 4.1.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 3 equal parts (c) 1 of the 3 equal parts The fraction is read as "one third." Example 4.2.  Figure 4.2.  (a) A whole rectangle (b) The whole rectangle divided into 5 equal parts (c) 3 of the 5 equal parts The fraction "is read as "three fifths." Example 4.3.  Figure 4.3.  (a) The number line between 0 and 1 (b) The number line between 0 and 1 divided into 7 equal parts (c) 6 of the 7 equal parts The fraction is read as "six sevenths." Example 4.4.  Figure 4.4.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 4 equal parts (c) 4 of the 4 equal parts When the numerator and denominator are equal, the fraction represents the entire quantity, and its value is 1. Practice Set A Specify the numerator and denominator of the following fractions. Exercise 4.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.5. (Go to Solution)  || Reading and Writing Fractions In order to properly translate fractions from word form to number form, or from number form to word form, it is necessary to understand the use of the hyphen. Use of the Hyphen One of the main uses of the hyphen is to tell the reader that two words not ordinarily joined are to be taken in combination as a unit. Hyphens are always used for numbers between and including 21 and 99 (except those ending in zero). Sample Set B Write each fraction using whole numbers. Example 4.5.  Fifty three-hundredths. The hyphen joins the words three and hundredths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty three-hundredths translates as Example 4.6.  Fifty-three hundredths. The hyphen joins the numbers fifty and three and tells us to con­sider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty-three hundredths translates as Example 4.7.  Four hundred seven-thousandths. The hyphen joins the words seven and thousandths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, four hundred seven-thousandths translates as Example 4.8.  Four hundred seven thousandths. The absence of hyphens indicates that the words seven and thousandths are to be considered individually. four hundred seven thousandths translates as Write each fraction using words. Example 4.9.  translates as twenty-one eighty-fifths. Example 4.10.  translates as two hundred three-thousandths. A hyphen is needed between the words three and thousandths to tell the reader that these words are to be considered as a single unit. Example 4.11.  translates as two hundred three thousandths. Practice Set B Write the following fractions using whole numbers. Exercise 4.2.6. (Go to Solution) one tenth Exercise 4.2.7. (Go to Solution) eleven fourteenths Exercise 4.2.8. (Go to Solution) sixteen thirty-fifths Exercise 4.2.9. (Go to Solution) eight hundred seven-thousandths Write the following using words. Exercise 4.2.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.13. (Go to Solution) Name the fraction that describes each shaded portion. Exercise 4.2.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.15. (Go to Solution) In the following 2 problems, state the numerator and denominator, and write each fraction in words. Exercise 4.2.16. (Go to Solution) The number is used in converting from Fahrenheit to Celsius. Exercise 4.2.17. (Go to Solution) A dime is of a dollar.  || 
book4_ch04_2_2	More Numbers on the Number Line In Chapters Section 1.1, Section 2.1, and Section 3.1, we studied the whole numbers and methods of combining them. We noted that we could visually display the whole numbers by drawing a number line and placing closed circles at whole number locations. By observing this number line, we can see that the whole numbers do not account for every point on the line. What numbers, if any, can be associated with these points? In this section we will see that many of the points on the number line, including the points already associated with whole numbers, can be associated with numbers called fractions. More Numbers on the Number Line In Chapters Section 1.1, Section 2.1, and Section 3.1, we studied the whole numbers and methods of combining them. We noted that we could visually display the whole numbers by drawing a number line and placing closed circles at whole number locations. By observing this number line, we can see that the whole numbers do not account for every point on the line. What numbers, if any, can be associated with these points? In this section we will see that many of the points on the number line, including the points already associated with whole numbers, can be associated with numbers called fractions.  || 
book4_ch04_2_3	Fractions of Whole Numbers The Nature of the Positive Fractions We can extend our collection of numbers, which now contains only the whole numbers, by including fractions of whole numbers. We can determine the nature of these fractions using the number line. If we place a pencil at some whole number and proceed to travel to the right to the next whole number, we see that our journey can be broken into different types of equal parts as shown in the following examples. 1 part. 2 equal parts. 3 equal parts. 4 equal parts. The Latin Word Fractio Notice that the number of parts, 2, 3, and 4, that we are breaking the original quantity into is always a nonzero whole number. The idea of breaking up a whole quantity gives us the word fraction. The word fraction comes from the Latin word "fractio" which means a breaking, or fracture. Suppose we break up the interval from some whole number to the next whole number into five equal parts. After starting to move from one whole number to the next, we decide to stop after covering only two parts. We have covered 2 parts of 5 equal parts. This situation is described by writing . Positive Fraction A number such as is called a positive fraction, or more simply, a fraction. Fractions of Whole Numbers The Nature of the Positive Fractions We can extend our collection of numbers, which now contains only the whole numbers, by including fractions of whole numbers. We can determine the nature of these fractions using the number line. If we place a pencil at some whole number and proceed to travel to the right to the next whole number, we see that our journey can be broken into different types of equal parts as shown in the following examples. 1 part. 2 equal parts. 3 equal parts. 4 equal parts. The Latin Word Fractio Notice that the number of parts, 2, 3, and 4, that we are breaking the original quantity into is always a nonzero whole number. The idea of breaking up a whole quantity gives us the word fraction. The word fraction comes from the Latin word "fractio" which means a breaking, or fracture. Suppose we break up the interval from some whole number to the next whole number into five equal parts. After starting to move from one whole number to the next, we decide to stop after covering only two parts. We have covered 2 parts of 5 equal parts. This situation is described by writing . Positive Fraction A number such as is called a positive fraction, or more simply, a fraction.  || 
book4_ch04_2_4	The Parts of a Fraction A fraction has three parts. The fraction bar . Fraction Bar The fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol. It separates a quantity into individual groups. These groups have names, as noted in 2 and 3 below. The nonzero number below the fraction bar. Denominator This number is called the denominator of the fraction, and it indicates the number of parts the whole quantity has been divided into. Notice that the denominator must be a nonzero whole number since the least number of parts any quantity can have is one. The number above the fraction bar. Numerator This number is called the numerator of the fraction, and it indicates how many of the specified parts are being considered. Notice that the numerator can be any whole number (including zero) since any number of the specified parts can be considered. Sample Set A The diagrams in the following problems are illustrations of fractions. Example 4.1.  Figure 4.1.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 3 equal parts (c) 1 of the 3 equal parts The fraction is read as "one third." Example 4.2.  Figure 4.2.  (a) A whole rectangle (b) The whole rectangle divided into 5 equal parts (c) 3 of the 5 equal parts The fraction "is read as "three fifths." Example 4.3.  Figure 4.3.  (a) The number line between 0 and 1 (b) The number line between 0 and 1 divided into 7 equal parts (c) 6 of the 7 equal parts The fraction is read as "six sevenths." Example 4.4.  Figure 4.4.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 4 equal parts (c) 4 of the 4 equal parts When the numerator and denominator are equal, the fraction represents the entire quantity, and its value is 1. Practice Set A Specify the numerator and denominator of the following fractions. Exercise 4.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.5. (Go to Solution) The Parts of a Fraction A fraction has three parts. The fraction bar . Fraction Bar The fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol. It separates a quantity into individual groups. These groups have names, as noted in 2 and 3 below. The nonzero number below the fraction bar. Denominator This number is called the denominator of the fraction, and it indicates the number of parts the whole quantity has been divided into. Notice that the denominator must be a nonzero whole number since the least number of parts any quantity can have is one. The number above the fraction bar. Numerator This number is called the numerator of the fraction, and it indicates how many of the specified parts are being considered. Notice that the numerator can be any whole number (including zero) since any number of the specified parts can be considered. Sample Set A The diagrams in the following problems are illustrations of fractions. Example 4.1.  Figure 4.1.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 3 equal parts (c) 1 of the 3 equal parts The fraction is read as "one third." Example 4.2.  Figure 4.2.  (a) A whole rectangle (b) The whole rectangle divided into 5 equal parts (c) 3 of the 5 equal parts The fraction "is read as "three fifths." Example 4.3.  Figure 4.3.  (a) The number line between 0 and 1 (b) The number line between 0 and 1 divided into 7 equal parts (c) 6 of the 7 equal parts The fraction is read as "six sevenths." Example 4.4.  Figure 4.4.  (a) A whole circle (b) The whole circle divided into 4 equal parts (c) 4 of the 4 equal parts When the numerator and denominator are equal, the fraction represents the entire quantity, and its value is 1. Practice Set A Specify the numerator and denominator of the following fractions. Exercise 4.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.5. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch04_2_7	Reading and Writing Fractions In order to properly translate fractions from word form to number form, or from number form to word form, it is necessary to understand the use of the hyphen. Use of the Hyphen One of the main uses of the hyphen is to tell the reader that two words not ordinarily joined are to be taken in combination as a unit. Hyphens are always used for numbers between and including 21 and 99 (except those ending in zero). Sample Set B Write each fraction using whole numbers. Example 4.5.  Fifty three-hundredths. The hyphen joins the words three and hundredths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty three-hundredths translates as Example 4.6.  Fifty-three hundredths. The hyphen joins the numbers fifty and three and tells us to con­sider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty-three hundredths translates as Example 4.7.  Four hundred seven-thousandths. The hyphen joins the words seven and thousandths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, four hundred seven-thousandths translates as Example 4.8.  Four hundred seven thousandths. The absence of hyphens indicates that the words seven and thousandths are to be considered individually. four hundred seven thousandths translates as Write each fraction using words. Example 4.9.  translates as twenty-one eighty-fifths. Example 4.10.  translates as two hundred three-thousandths. A hyphen is needed between the words three and thousandths to tell the reader that these words are to be considered as a single unit. Example 4.11.  translates as two hundred three thousandths. Practice Set B Write the following fractions using whole numbers. Exercise 4.2.6. (Go to Solution) one tenth Exercise 4.2.7. (Go to Solution) eleven fourteenths Exercise 4.2.8. (Go to Solution) sixteen thirty-fifths Exercise 4.2.9. (Go to Solution) eight hundred seven-thousandths Write the following using words. Exercise 4.2.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.13. (Go to Solution) Name the fraction that describes each shaded portion. Exercise 4.2.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.15. (Go to Solution) In the following 2 problems, state the numerator and denominator, and write each fraction in words. Exercise 4.2.16. (Go to Solution) The number is used in converting from Fahrenheit to Celsius. Exercise 4.2.17. (Go to Solution) A dime is of a dollar. Reading and Writing Fractions In order to properly translate fractions from word form to number form, or from number form to word form, it is necessary to understand the use of the hyphen. Use of the Hyphen One of the main uses of the hyphen is to tell the reader that two words not ordinarily joined are to be taken in combination as a unit. Hyphens are always used for numbers between and including 21 and 99 (except those ending in zero). Sample Set B Write each fraction using whole numbers. Example 4.5.  Fifty three-hundredths. The hyphen joins the words three and hundredths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty three-hundredths translates as Example 4.6.  Fifty-three hundredths. The hyphen joins the numbers fifty and three and tells us to con­sider them as a single unit. Therefore, fifty-three hundredths translates as Example 4.7.  Four hundred seven-thousandths. The hyphen joins the words seven and thousandths and tells us to consider them as a single unit. Therefore, four hundred seven-thousandths translates as Example 4.8.  Four hundred seven thousandths. The absence of hyphens indicates that the words seven and thousandths are to be considered individually. four hundred seven thousandths translates as Write each fraction using words. Example 4.9.  translates as twenty-one eighty-fifths. Example 4.10.  translates as two hundred three-thousandths. A hyphen is needed between the words three and thousandths to tell the reader that these words are to be considered as a single unit. Example 4.11.  translates as two hundred three thousandths. Practice Set B Write the following fractions using whole numbers. Exercise 4.2.6. (Go to Solution) one tenth Exercise 4.2.7. (Go to Solution) eleven fourteenths Exercise 4.2.8. (Go to Solution) sixteen thirty-fifths Exercise 4.2.9. (Go to Solution) eight hundred seven-thousandths Write the following using words. Exercise 4.2.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.13. (Go to Solution) Name the fraction that describes each shaded portion. Exercise 4.2.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.2.15. (Go to Solution) In the following 2 problems, state the numerator and denominator, and write each fraction in words. Exercise 4.2.16. (Go to Solution) The number is used in converting from Fahrenheit to Celsius. Exercise 4.2.17. (Go to Solution) A dime is of a dollar.  || 
book4_ch04_3	 || Positive Proper Fractions Positive Proper Fraction Fractions in which the whole number in the numerator is strictly less than the whole number in the denominator are called positive proper fractions. On the number line, proper fractions are located in the interval from 0 to 1. Positive proper fractions are always less than one. The closed circle at 0 indicates that 0 is included, while the open circle at 1 indicates that 1 is not included. Some examples of positive proper fractions are , , , and Note that 1 < 2, 3 < 5, 20 < 27, and 106 < 225.  || Positive Improper Fractions Positive Improper Fractions Fractions in which the whole number in the numerator is greater than or equal to the whole number in the denominator are called positive improper fractions. On the number line, improper fractions lie to the right of (and including) 1. Positive improper fractions are always greater than or equal to 1. Some examples of positive improper fractions are , , , and Note that 3 ≥ 2, 8 ≥ 5, 4 ≥ 4, and 105 ≥ 16.  || Positive Mixed Numbers Positive Mixed Numbers A number of the form nonzero whole number + proper fraction is called a positive mixed number. For example, is a mixed number. On the number line, mixed numbers are located in the interval to the right of (and includ­ing) 1. Mixed numbers are always greater than or equal to 1.  || Relating Positive Improper Fractions and Positive Mixed Numbers A relationship between improper fractions and mixed numbers is suggested by two facts. The first is that improper fractions and mixed numbers are located in the same interval on the number line. The second fact, that mixed numbers are the sum of a natural number and a fraction, can be seen by making the following observa­tions. Divide a whole quantity into 3 equal parts. Now, consider the following examples by observing the respective shaded areas. In the shaded region, there are 2 one thirds, or . There are 3 one thirds, or , or 1. Thus, Improper fraction = whole number. There are 4 one thirds, or , or 1 and . or The terms 1 and can be represented as or Thus, . Improper fraction = mixed number. There are 5 one thirds, or , or 1 and . The terms 1 and can be represented as or . Thus, . Improper fraction = mixed number. There are 6 one thirds, or , or 2. Thus, Improper fraction = whole number. The following important fact is illustrated in the preceding examples. Mixed Number = Natural Number + Proper Fraction Mixed numbers are the sum of a natural number and a proper fraction. Mixed number = (natural number) + (proper fraction) For example can be expressed as The fraction can be expressed as . It is important to note that a number such as does not indicate multiplication. To indicate multiplication, we would need to use a multiplication symbol (such as ⋅) Note means and not , which means 5 times or 5 multiplied by . Thus, mixed numbers may be represented by improper fractions, and improper fractions may be represented by mixed numbers.  || Converting Improper Fractions to Mixed Numbers To understand how we might convert an improper fraction to a mixed number, let's consider the fraction, . Thus, . We can illustrate a procedure for converting an improper fraction to a mixed number using this example. However, the conversion is more easily accomplished by dividing the numerator by the denominator and using the result to write the mixed number. Converting an Improper Fraction to a Mixed Number To convert an improper fraction to a mixed number, divide the numerator by the denominator. The whole number part of the mixed number is the quotient. The fractional part of the mixed number is the remainder written over the divisor (the denominator of the improper fraction). Sample Set A Convert each improper fraction to its corresponding mixed number. Example 4.12.  Divide 5 by 3. The improper fraction . Example 4.13.  . Divide 46 by 9. The improper fraction . Example 4.14.  . Divide 83 by 11. The improper fraction . Example 4.15.  Divide 104 by 4. The improper fraction . Practice Set A Convert each improper fraction to its corresponding mixed number. Exercise 4.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.6. (Go to Solution)  || Converting Mixed Numbers to Improper Fractions To understand how to convert a mixed number to an improper fraction, we'll recall mixed number = (natural number) + (proper fraction) and consider the following diagram. Recall that multiplication describes repeated addition. Notice that can be obtained from using multiplication in the following way. Multiply: 3⋅1 = 3 Add: 3 + 2 = 5. Place the 5 over the 3: The procedure for converting a mixed number to an improper fraction is illustrated in this example. Converting a Mixed Number to an Improper Fraction To convert a mixed number to an improper fraction, Multiply the denominator of the fractional part of the mixed number by the whole number part. To this product, add the numerator of the fractional part. Place this result over the denominator of the fractional part. Sample Set B Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. Example 4.16.  Multiply: 8⋅5 = 40. Add: 40 + 7 = 47. Place 47 over 8: . Thus, . Example 4.17.  Multiply: 3 ⋅ 16 = 48. Add: 48 + 2 = 50. Place 50 over 3: Thus, Practice Set B Convert each mixed number to its corresponding improper fraction. Exercise 4.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.10. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch04_3_2	Positive Proper Fractions Positive Proper Fraction Fractions in which the whole number in the numerator is strictly less than the whole number in the denominator are called positive proper fractions. On the number line, proper fractions are located in the interval from 0 to 1. Positive proper fractions are always less than one. The closed circle at 0 indicates that 0 is included, while the open circle at 1 indicates that 1 is not included. Some examples of positive proper fractions are , , , and Note that 1 < 2, 3 < 5, 20 < 27, and 106 < 225. Positive Proper Fractions Positive Proper Fraction Fractions in which the whole number in the numerator is strictly less than the whole number in the denominator are called positive proper fractions. On the number line, proper fractions are located in the interval from 0 to 1. Positive proper fractions are always less than one. The closed circle at 0 indicates that 0 is included, while the open circle at 1 indicates that 1 is not included. Some examples of positive proper fractions are , , , and Note that 1 < 2, 3 < 5, 20 < 27, and 106 < 225.  || 
book4_ch04_3_3	Positive Improper Fractions Positive Improper Fractions Fractions in which the whole number in the numerator is greater than or equal to the whole number in the denominator are called positive improper fractions. On the number line, improper fractions lie to the right of (and including) 1. Positive improper fractions are always greater than or equal to 1. Some examples of positive improper fractions are , , , and Note that 3 ≥ 2, 8 ≥ 5, 4 ≥ 4, and 105 ≥ 16. Positive Improper Fractions Positive Improper Fractions Fractions in which the whole number in the numerator is greater than or equal to the whole number in the denominator are called positive improper fractions. On the number line, improper fractions lie to the right of (and including) 1. Positive improper fractions are always greater than or equal to 1. Some examples of positive improper fractions are , , , and Note that 3 ≥ 2, 8 ≥ 5, 4 ≥ 4, and 105 ≥ 16.  || 
book4_ch04_3_4	Positive Mixed Numbers Positive Mixed Numbers A number of the form nonzero whole number + proper fraction is called a positive mixed number. For example, is a mixed number. On the number line, mixed numbers are located in the interval to the right of (and includ­ing) 1. Mixed numbers are always greater than or equal to 1. Positive Mixed Numbers Positive Mixed Numbers A number of the form nonzero whole number + proper fraction is called a positive mixed number. For example, is a mixed number. On the number line, mixed numbers are located in the interval to the right of (and includ­ing) 1. Mixed numbers are always greater than or equal to 1.  || 
book4_ch04_3_5	Relating Positive Improper Fractions and Positive Mixed Numbers A relationship between improper fractions and mixed numbers is suggested by two facts. The first is that improper fractions and mixed numbers are located in the same interval on the number line. The second fact, that mixed numbers are the sum of a natural number and a fraction, can be seen by making the following observa­tions. Divide a whole quantity into 3 equal parts. Now, consider the following examples by observing the respective shaded areas. In the shaded region, there are 2 one thirds, or . There are 3 one thirds, or , or 1. Thus, Improper fraction = whole number. There are 4 one thirds, or , or 1 and . or The terms 1 and can be represented as or Thus, . Improper fraction = mixed number. There are 5 one thirds, or , or 1 and . The terms 1 and can be represented as or . Thus, . Improper fraction = mixed number. There are 6 one thirds, or , or 2. Thus, Improper fraction = whole number. The following important fact is illustrated in the preceding examples. Mixed Number = Natural Number + Proper Fraction Mixed numbers are the sum of a natural number and a proper fraction. Mixed number = (natural number) + (proper fraction) For example can be expressed as The fraction can be expressed as . It is important to note that a number such as does not indicate multiplication. To indicate multiplication, we would need to use a multiplication symbol (such as ⋅) Note means and not , which means 5 times or 5 multiplied by . Thus, mixed numbers may be represented by improper fractions, and improper fractions may be represented by mixed numbers. Relating Positive Improper Fractions and Positive Mixed Numbers A relationship between improper fractions and mixed numbers is suggested by two facts. The first is that improper fractions and mixed numbers are located in the same interval on the number line. The second fact, that mixed numbers are the sum of a natural number and a fraction, can be seen by making the following observa­tions. Divide a whole quantity into 3 equal parts. Now, consider the following examples by observing the respective shaded areas. In the shaded region, there are 2 one thirds, or . There are 3 one thirds, or , or 1. Thus, Improper fraction = whole number. There are 4 one thirds, or , or 1 and . or The terms 1 and can be represented as or Thus, . Improper fraction = mixed number. There are 5 one thirds, or , or 1 and . The terms 1 and can be represented as or . Thus, . Improper fraction = mixed number. There are 6 one thirds, or , or 2. Thus, Improper fraction = whole number. The following important fact is illustrated in the preceding examples. Mixed Number = Natural Number + Proper Fraction Mixed numbers are the sum of a natural number and a proper fraction. Mixed number = (natural number) + (proper fraction) For example can be expressed as The fraction can be expressed as . It is important to note that a number such as does not indicate multiplication. To indicate multiplication, we would need to use a multiplication symbol (such as ⋅) Note means and not , which means 5 times or 5 multiplied by . Thus, mixed numbers may be represented by improper fractions, and improper fractions may be represented by mixed numbers.  || 
book4_ch04_3_6	Converting Improper Fractions to Mixed Numbers To understand how we might convert an improper fraction to a mixed number, let's consider the fraction, . Thus, . We can illustrate a procedure for converting an improper fraction to a mixed number using this example. However, the conversion is more easily accomplished by dividing the numerator by the denominator and using the result to write the mixed number. Converting an Improper Fraction to a Mixed Number To convert an improper fraction to a mixed number, divide the numerator by the denominator. The whole number part of the mixed number is the quotient. The fractional part of the mixed number is the remainder written over the divisor (the denominator of the improper fraction). Sample Set A Convert each improper fraction to its corresponding mixed number. Example 4.12.  Divide 5 by 3. The improper fraction . Example 4.13.  . Divide 46 by 9. The improper fraction . Example 4.14.  . Divide 83 by 11. The improper fraction . Example 4.15.  Divide 104 by 4. The improper fraction . Practice Set A Convert each improper fraction to its corresponding mixed number. Exercise 4.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.6. (Go to Solution) Converting Improper Fractions to Mixed Numbers To understand how we might convert an improper fraction to a mixed number, let's consider the fraction, . Thus, . We can illustrate a procedure for converting an improper fraction to a mixed number using this example. However, the conversion is more easily accomplished by dividing the numerator by the denominator and using the result to write the mixed number. Converting an Improper Fraction to a Mixed Number To convert an improper fraction to a mixed number, divide the numerator by the denominator. The whole number part of the mixed number is the quotient. The fractional part of the mixed number is the remainder written over the divisor (the denominator of the improper fraction). Sample Set A Convert each improper fraction to its corresponding mixed number. Example 4.12.  Divide 5 by 3. The improper fraction . Example 4.13.  . Divide 46 by 9. The improper fraction . Example 4.14.  . Divide 83 by 11. The improper fraction . Example 4.15.  Divide 104 by 4. The improper fraction . Practice Set A Convert each improper fraction to its corresponding mixed number. Exercise 4.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.6. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch04_3_9	Converting Mixed Numbers to Improper Fractions To understand how to convert a mixed number to an improper fraction, we'll recall mixed number = (natural number) + (proper fraction) and consider the following diagram. Recall that multiplication describes repeated addition. Notice that can be obtained from using multiplication in the following way. Multiply: 3⋅1 = 3 Add: 3 + 2 = 5. Place the 5 over the 3: The procedure for converting a mixed number to an improper fraction is illustrated in this example. Converting a Mixed Number to an Improper Fraction To convert a mixed number to an improper fraction, Multiply the denominator of the fractional part of the mixed number by the whole number part. To this product, add the numerator of the fractional part. Place this result over the denominator of the fractional part. Sample Set B Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. Example 4.16.  Multiply: 8⋅5 = 40. Add: 40 + 7 = 47. Place 47 over 8: . Thus, . Example 4.17.  Multiply: 3 ⋅ 16 = 48. Add: 48 + 2 = 50. Place 50 over 3: Thus, Practice Set B Convert each mixed number to its corresponding improper fraction. Exercise 4.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.10. (Go to Solution) Converting Mixed Numbers to Improper Fractions To understand how to convert a mixed number to an improper fraction, we'll recall mixed number = (natural number) + (proper fraction) and consider the following diagram. Recall that multiplication describes repeated addition. Notice that can be obtained from using multiplication in the following way. Multiply: 3⋅1 = 3 Add: 3 + 2 = 5. Place the 5 over the 3: The procedure for converting a mixed number to an improper fraction is illustrated in this example. Converting a Mixed Number to an Improper Fraction To convert a mixed number to an improper fraction, Multiply the denominator of the fractional part of the mixed number by the whole number part. To this product, add the numerator of the fractional part. Place this result over the denominator of the fractional part. Sample Set B Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. Example 4.16.  Multiply: 8⋅5 = 40. Add: 40 + 7 = 47. Place 47 over 8: . Thus, . Example 4.17.  Multiply: 3 ⋅ 16 = 48. Add: 48 + 2 = 50. Place 50 over 3: Thus, Practice Set B Convert each mixed number to its corresponding improper fraction. Exercise 4.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.3.10. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch04_4	 || Equivalent Fractions Let's examine the following two diagrams. Notice that both and represent the same part of the whole, that is, they represent the same number. Equivalent Fractions Fractions that have the same value are called equivalent fractions. Equiva­lent fractions may look different, but they are still the same point on the number line. There is an interesting property that equivalent fractions satisfy. A Test for Equivalent Fractions Using the Cross Product These pairs of products are called cross products. If the cross products are equal, the fractions are equivalent. If the cross products are not equal, the fractions are not equivalent. Thus, and are equivalent, that is, . Sample Set A Determine if the following pairs of fractions are equivalent. Example 4.18.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are equals. The fractions and are equivalent, so . Example 4.19.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are not equal. The fractions and are not equivalent. Practice Set A Determine if the pairs of fractions are equivalent. Exercise 4.4.1. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.2. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.3. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.4. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.5. (Go to Solution) ,  || Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms It is often very useful to convert one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. We can suggest a method for doing so by considering the equivalent fractions and . First, divide both the numerator and denominator of by 3. The fractions and are equivalent. (Can you prove this?) So, . We wish to convert to . Now divide the numerator and denominator of by 3, and see what happens. The fraction is converted to . A natural question is "Why did we choose to divide by 3?" Notice that We can see that the factor 3 is common to both the numerator and denominator. Reducing a Fraction From these observations we can suggest the following method for converting one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. The method is called reducing a fraction. A fraction can be reduced by dividing both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero whole number. Consider the collection of equivalent fractions , , , , Reduced to Lowest Terms Notice that each of the first four fractions can be reduced to the last fraction, , by dividing both the numerator and denominator by, respectively, 5, 4, 3, and 2. When a fraction is converted to the fraction that has the smallest numerator and denomi­nator in its collection of equivalent fractions, it is said to be reduced to lowest terms. The fractions , , , and are all reduced to lowest terms. Observe a very important property of a fraction that has been reduced to lowest terms. The only whole number that divides both the numerator and denominator without a remainder is the number 1. When 1 is the only whole number that divides two whole numbers, the two whole numbers are said to be relatively prime. Relatively Prime A fraction is reduced to lowest terms if its numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Methods of Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms Method 1: Dividing Out Common Primes Write the numerator and denominator as a product of primes. Divide the numerator and denominator by each of the common prime factors. We often indicate this division by drawing a slanted line through each divided out factor. This process is also called cancelling common factors. The product of the remaining factors in the numerator and the product of remaining factors of the denominator are relatively prime, and this fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Sample Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.20.  1 and 3 are relatively prime. Example 4.21.  4 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.22.  7 and 13 are relatively prime (and also truly prime) Example 4.23.  15 and 16 are relatively prime. Example 4.24.  No common prime factors, so 8 and 15 are relatively prime. The fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Practice Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.11. (Go to Solution) Method 2: Dividing Out Common Factors Mentally divide the numerator and the denominator by a factor that is com­mon to each. Write the quotient above the original number. Continue this process until the numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Sample Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.25.  . 5 divides into both 25 and 30. 5 and 6 are relatively prime. Example 4.26.  . Both numbers are even so we can divide by 2. Now, both 9 and 12 are divisible by 3. 3 and 4 are relatively prime. Example 4.27.  . 7 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.28.  . 3 and 8 are relatively prime. Practice Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.17. (Go to Solution)  || Methods of Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms Method 1: Dividing Out Common Primes Write the numerator and denominator as a product of primes. Divide the numerator and denominator by each of the common prime factors. We often indicate this division by drawing a slanted line through each divided out factor. This process is also called cancelling common factors. The product of the remaining factors in the numerator and the product of remaining factors of the denominator are relatively prime, and this fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Sample Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.20.  1 and 3 are relatively prime. Example 4.21.  4 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.22.  7 and 13 are relatively prime (and also truly prime) Example 4.23.  15 and 16 are relatively prime. Example 4.24.  No common prime factors, so 8 and 15 are relatively prime. The fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Practice Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.11. (Go to Solution) Method 2: Dividing Out Common Factors Mentally divide the numerator and the denominator by a factor that is com­mon to each. Write the quotient above the original number. Continue this process until the numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Sample Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.25.  . 5 divides into both 25 and 30. 5 and 6 are relatively prime. Example 4.26.  . Both numbers are even so we can divide by 2. Now, both 9 and 12 are divisible by 3. 3 and 4 are relatively prime. Example 4.27.  . 7 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.28.  . 3 and 8 are relatively prime. Practice Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.17. (Go to Solution)  || Raising Fractions to Higher Terms Equally as important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator than the original fraction. The fractions and are equivalent, that is, . Notice also, Notice that and that . We are not changing the value of . From these observations we can suggest the following method for converting one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. This method is called raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to an equivalent fraction that has higher terms in the numerator and denominator by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero whole number. The fraction can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8. Most often, we will want to convert a given fraction to an equivalent fraction with a higher specified denominator. For example, we may wish to convert to an equivalent fraction that has denominator 32, that is, This is possible to do because we know the process. We must multiply both the numerator and denominator of by the same nonzero whole number in order to 8 obtain an equivalent fraction. We have some information. The denominator 8 was raised to 32 by multiplying it by some nonzero whole number. Division will give us the proper factor. Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 32 ÷ 8 = 4 Now, multiply the numerator 5 by 4. 5 ⋅ 4 = 20 Thus, So, Sample Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Example 4.29.  . Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 35 ÷ 7 = 5 The quotient is 5. Multiply the original numerator by 5. The missing numerator is 15. Example 4.30.  . Divide the original numerator into the new numerator. 45 ÷ 5 = 9 The quotient is 9. Multiply the original denominator by 9. The missing denominator is 45. Practice Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Exercise 4.4.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.20. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.22. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch04_4_2	Equivalent Fractions Let's examine the following two diagrams. Notice that both and represent the same part of the whole, that is, they represent the same number. Equivalent Fractions Fractions that have the same value are called equivalent fractions. Equiva­lent fractions may look different, but they are still the same point on the number line. There is an interesting property that equivalent fractions satisfy. A Test for Equivalent Fractions Using the Cross Product These pairs of products are called cross products. If the cross products are equal, the fractions are equivalent. If the cross products are not equal, the fractions are not equivalent. Thus, and are equivalent, that is, . Sample Set A Determine if the following pairs of fractions are equivalent. Example 4.18.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are equals. The fractions and are equivalent, so . Example 4.19.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are not equal. The fractions and are not equivalent. Practice Set A Determine if the pairs of fractions are equivalent. Exercise 4.4.1. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.2. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.3. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.4. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.5. (Go to Solution) , Equivalent Fractions Let's examine the following two diagrams. Notice that both and represent the same part of the whole, that is, they represent the same number. Equivalent Fractions Fractions that have the same value are called equivalent fractions. Equiva­lent fractions may look different, but they are still the same point on the number line. There is an interesting property that equivalent fractions satisfy. A Test for Equivalent Fractions Using the Cross Product These pairs of products are called cross products. If the cross products are equal, the fractions are equivalent. If the cross products are not equal, the fractions are not equivalent. Thus, and are equivalent, that is, . Sample Set A Determine if the following pairs of fractions are equivalent. Example 4.18.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are equals. The fractions and are equivalent, so . Example 4.19.  . Test for equality of the cross products. The cross products are not equal. The fractions and are not equivalent. Practice Set A Determine if the pairs of fractions are equivalent. Exercise 4.4.1. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.2. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.3. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.4. (Go to Solution) , Exercise 4.4.5. (Go to Solution) ,  || 
book4_ch04_4_5	Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms It is often very useful to convert one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. We can suggest a method for doing so by considering the equivalent fractions and . First, divide both the numerator and denominator of by 3. The fractions and are equivalent. (Can you prove this?) So, . We wish to convert to . Now divide the numerator and denominator of by 3, and see what happens. The fraction is converted to . A natural question is "Why did we choose to divide by 3?" Notice that We can see that the factor 3 is common to both the numerator and denominator. Reducing a Fraction From these observations we can suggest the following method for converting one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. The method is called reducing a fraction. A fraction can be reduced by dividing both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero whole number. Consider the collection of equivalent fractions , , , , Reduced to Lowest Terms Notice that each of the first four fractions can be reduced to the last fraction, , by dividing both the numerator and denominator by, respectively, 5, 4, 3, and 2. When a fraction is converted to the fraction that has the smallest numerator and denomi­nator in its collection of equivalent fractions, it is said to be reduced to lowest terms. The fractions , , , and are all reduced to lowest terms. Observe a very important property of a fraction that has been reduced to lowest terms. The only whole number that divides both the numerator and denominator without a remainder is the number 1. When 1 is the only whole number that divides two whole numbers, the two whole numbers are said to be relatively prime. Relatively Prime A fraction is reduced to lowest terms if its numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Methods of Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms Method 1: Dividing Out Common Primes Write the numerator and denominator as a product of primes. Divide the numerator and denominator by each of the common prime factors. We often indicate this division by drawing a slanted line through each divided out factor. This process is also called cancelling common factors. The product of the remaining factors in the numerator and the product of remaining factors of the denominator are relatively prime, and this fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Sample Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.20.  1 and 3 are relatively prime. Example 4.21.  4 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.22.  7 and 13 are relatively prime (and also truly prime) Example 4.23.  15 and 16 are relatively prime. Example 4.24.  No common prime factors, so 8 and 15 are relatively prime. The fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Practice Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.11. (Go to Solution) Method 2: Dividing Out Common Factors Mentally divide the numerator and the denominator by a factor that is com­mon to each. Write the quotient above the original number. Continue this process until the numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Sample Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.25.  . 5 divides into both 25 and 30. 5 and 6 are relatively prime. Example 4.26.  . Both numbers are even so we can divide by 2. Now, both 9 and 12 are divisible by 3. 3 and 4 are relatively prime. Example 4.27.  . 7 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.28.  . 3 and 8 are relatively prime. Practice Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.17. (Go to Solution) Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms It is often very useful to convert one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. We can suggest a method for doing so by considering the equivalent fractions and . First, divide both the numerator and denominator of by 3. The fractions and are equivalent. (Can you prove this?) So, . We wish to convert to . Now divide the numerator and denominator of by 3, and see what happens. The fraction is converted to . A natural question is "Why did we choose to divide by 3?" Notice that We can see that the factor 3 is common to both the numerator and denominator. Reducing a Fraction From these observations we can suggest the following method for converting one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has reduced values in the numerator and denominator. The method is called reducing a fraction. A fraction can be reduced by dividing both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero whole number. Consider the collection of equivalent fractions , , , , Reduced to Lowest Terms Notice that each of the first four fractions can be reduced to the last fraction, , by dividing both the numerator and denominator by, respectively, 5, 4, 3, and 2. When a fraction is converted to the fraction that has the smallest numerator and denomi­nator in its collection of equivalent fractions, it is said to be reduced to lowest terms. The fractions , , , and are all reduced to lowest terms. Observe a very important property of a fraction that has been reduced to lowest terms. The only whole number that divides both the numerator and denominator without a remainder is the number 1. When 1 is the only whole number that divides two whole numbers, the two whole numbers are said to be relatively prime. Relatively Prime A fraction is reduced to lowest terms if its numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Methods of Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms Method 1: Dividing Out Common Primes Write the numerator and denominator as a product of primes. Divide the numerator and denominator by each of the common prime factors. We often indicate this division by drawing a slanted line through each divided out factor. This process is also called cancelling common factors. The product of the remaining factors in the numerator and the product of remaining factors of the denominator are relatively prime, and this fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Sample Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.20.  1 and 3 are relatively prime. Example 4.21.  4 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.22.  7 and 13 are relatively prime (and also truly prime) Example 4.23.  15 and 16 are relatively prime. Example 4.24.  No common prime factors, so 8 and 15 are relatively prime. The fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Practice Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.11. (Go to Solution) Method 2: Dividing Out Common Factors Mentally divide the numerator and the denominator by a factor that is com­mon to each. Write the quotient above the original number. Continue this process until the numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Sample Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.25.  . 5 divides into both 25 and 30. 5 and 6 are relatively prime. Example 4.26.  . Both numbers are even so we can divide by 2. Now, both 9 and 12 are divisible by 3. 3 and 4 are relatively prime. Example 4.27.  . 7 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.28.  . 3 and 8 are relatively prime. Practice Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.17. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch04_4_6	Methods of Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms Method 1: Dividing Out Common Primes Write the numerator and denominator as a product of primes. Divide the numerator and denominator by each of the common prime factors. We often indicate this division by drawing a slanted line through each divided out factor. This process is also called cancelling common factors. The product of the remaining factors in the numerator and the product of remaining factors of the denominator are relatively prime, and this fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Sample Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.20.  1 and 3 are relatively prime. Example 4.21.  4 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.22.  7 and 13 are relatively prime (and also truly prime) Example 4.23.  15 and 16 are relatively prime. Example 4.24.  No common prime factors, so 8 and 15 are relatively prime. The fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Practice Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.11. (Go to Solution) Method 2: Dividing Out Common Factors Mentally divide the numerator and the denominator by a factor that is com­mon to each. Write the quotient above the original number. Continue this process until the numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Sample Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.25.  . 5 divides into both 25 and 30. 5 and 6 are relatively prime. Example 4.26.  . Both numbers are even so we can divide by 2. Now, both 9 and 12 are divisible by 3. 3 and 4 are relatively prime. Example 4.27.  . 7 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.28.  . 3 and 8 are relatively prime. Practice Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.17. (Go to Solution) Methods of Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms Method 1: Dividing Out Common Primes Write the numerator and denominator as a product of primes. Divide the numerator and denominator by each of the common prime factors. We often indicate this division by drawing a slanted line through each divided out factor. This process is also called cancelling common factors. The product of the remaining factors in the numerator and the product of remaining factors of the denominator are relatively prime, and this fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Sample Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.20.  1 and 3 are relatively prime. Example 4.21.  4 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.22.  7 and 13 are relatively prime (and also truly prime) Example 4.23.  15 and 16 are relatively prime. Example 4.24.  No common prime factors, so 8 and 15 are relatively prime. The fraction is reduced to lowest terms. Practice Set B Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.11. (Go to Solution) Method 2: Dividing Out Common Factors Mentally divide the numerator and the denominator by a factor that is com­mon to each. Write the quotient above the original number. Continue this process until the numerator and denominator are relatively prime. Sample Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Example 4.25.  . 5 divides into both 25 and 30. 5 and 6 are relatively prime. Example 4.26.  . Both numbers are even so we can divide by 2. Now, both 9 and 12 are divisible by 3. 3 and 4 are relatively prime. Example 4.27.  . 7 and 5 are relatively prime. Example 4.28.  . 3 and 8 are relatively prime. Practice Set C Reduce each fraction to lowest terms. Exercise 4.4.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.17. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch04_4_11	Raising Fractions to Higher Terms Equally as important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator than the original fraction. The fractions and are equivalent, that is, . Notice also, Notice that and that . We are not changing the value of . From these observations we can suggest the following method for converting one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. This method is called raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to an equivalent fraction that has higher terms in the numerator and denominator by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero whole number. The fraction can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8. Most often, we will want to convert a given fraction to an equivalent fraction with a higher specified denominator. For example, we may wish to convert to an equivalent fraction that has denominator 32, that is, This is possible to do because we know the process. We must multiply both the numerator and denominator of by the same nonzero whole number in order to 8 obtain an equivalent fraction. We have some information. The denominator 8 was raised to 32 by multiplying it by some nonzero whole number. Division will give us the proper factor. Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 32 ÷ 8 = 4 Now, multiply the numerator 5 by 4. 5 ⋅ 4 = 20 Thus, So, Sample Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Example 4.29.  . Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 35 ÷ 7 = 5 The quotient is 5. Multiply the original numerator by 5. The missing numerator is 15. Example 4.30.  . Divide the original numerator into the new numerator. 45 ÷ 5 = 9 The quotient is 9. Multiply the original denominator by 9. The missing denominator is 45. Practice Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Exercise 4.4.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.20. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.22. (Go to Solution) Raising Fractions to Higher Terms Equally as important as reducing fractions is raising fractions to higher terms. Raising a fraction to higher terms is the process of constructing an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator than the original fraction. The fractions and are equivalent, that is, . Notice also, Notice that and that . We are not changing the value of . From these observations we can suggest the following method for converting one fraction to an equivalent fraction that has higher values in the numerator and denominator. This method is called raising a fraction to higher terms. Raising a Fraction to Higher Terms A fraction can be raised to an equivalent fraction that has higher terms in the numerator and denominator by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by the same nonzero whole number. The fraction can be raised to by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by 8. Most often, we will want to convert a given fraction to an equivalent fraction with a higher specified denominator. For example, we may wish to convert to an equivalent fraction that has denominator 32, that is, This is possible to do because we know the process. We must multiply both the numerator and denominator of by the same nonzero whole number in order to 8 obtain an equivalent fraction. We have some information. The denominator 8 was raised to 32 by multiplying it by some nonzero whole number. Division will give us the proper factor. Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 32 ÷ 8 = 4 Now, multiply the numerator 5 by 4. 5 ⋅ 4 = 20 Thus, So, Sample Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Example 4.29.  . Divide the original denominator into the new denominator. 35 ÷ 7 = 5 The quotient is 5. Multiply the original numerator by 5. The missing numerator is 15. Example 4.30.  . Divide the original numerator into the new numerator. 45 ÷ 5 = 9 The quotient is 9. Multiply the original denominator by 9. The missing denominator is 45. Practice Set D Determine the missing numerator or denominator. Exercise 4.4.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.20. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.4.22. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch04_5	 || Fractions of Fractions We know that a fraction represents a part of a whole quantity. For example, two fifths of one unit can be represented by of the whole is shaded. A natural question is, what is a fractional part of a fractional quantity, or, what is a fraction of a fraction? For example, what of ? We can suggest an answer to this question by using a picture to examine of . First, let’s represent . of the whole is shaded. Then divide each of the parts into 3 equal parts. Each part is of the whole. Now we’ll take of the unit. of is , which reduces to .  || Multiplication of Fractions Now we ask, what arithmetic operation (+, –, ×, ÷) will produce from of ? Notice that, if in the fractions and , we multiply the numerators together and the denominators together, we get precisely . This reduces to as before. Using this observation, we can suggest the following: The Word "OF" Indicates Multiplication: The word "of" translates to the arithmetic operation "times." The Method of Multiplying Fractions: To multiply two or more fractions, multiply the numerators together and then multiply the denominators together. Reduce if necessary. Sample Set A Perform the following multiplications. Example 4.31.  Thus This means that of is , that is, of of a unit is of the original unit. Example 4.32.  . Write 4 as a fraction by writing This means that of 4 whole units is of one whole unit. Example 4.33.  This means that of of of a whole unit is of the original unit. Practice Set A Perform the following multiplications. Exercise 4.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.9. (Go to Solution)  || Multiplying Fractions by Dividing Out Common Factors We have seen that to multiply two fractions together, we multiply numerators together, then denominators together, then reduce to lowest terms, if necessary. The reduction can be tedious if the numbers in the fractions are large. For example, We avoid the process of reducing if we divide out common factors before we multi­ply. Divide 3 into 9 and 21, and divide 2 into 10 and 16. The product is a fraction that is reduced to lowest terms. The Process of Multiplication by Dividing Out Common Factors To multiply fractions by dividing out common factors, divide out factors that are common to both a numerator and a denominator. The factor being divided out can appear in any numerator and any denominator. Sample Set B Perform the following multiplications. Example 4.34.  Divide 4 and 6 by 2 Divide 5 and 5 by 5 Example 4.35.  Divide 8 and 10 by 2. Divide 8 and 12 by 4. Example 4.36.  Example 4.37.  Example 4.38.  Practice Set B Perform the following multiplications. Exercise 4.5.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.16. (Go to Solution)  || Multiplication of Mixed Numbers Multiplying Mixed Numbers To perform a multiplication in which there are mixed numbers, it is convenient to first convert each mixed number to an improper fraction, then multiply. Sample Set C Perform the following multiplications. Convert improper fractions to mixed numbers. Example 4.39.  Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. Example 4.40.  Convert to an improper fraction. . There are no common factors to divide out. Example 4.41.  Convert to improper fractions. Example 4.42.  Practice Set C Perform the following multiplications. Convert improper fractions to mixed numbers. Exercise 4.5.17. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.20. (Go to Solution)  || Powers and Roots of Fractions Sample Set D Find the value of each of the following. Example 4.43.  Example 4.44.  . We’re looking for a number, call it ?, such that when it is squared, is produced. We know that 32 = 9 and 102 = 100 We’ll try . Since Example 4.45.  Practice Set D Find the value of each of the following. Exercise 4.5.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.22. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.23. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.24. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.25. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.26. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.27. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch04_5_2	Fractions of Fractions We know that a fraction represents a part of a whole quantity. For example, two fifths of one unit can be represented by of the whole is shaded. A natural question is, what is a fractional part of a fractional quantity, or, what is a fraction of a fraction? For example, what of ? We can suggest an answer to this question by using a picture to examine of . First, let’s represent . of the whole is shaded. Then divide each of the parts into 3 equal parts. Each part is of the whole. Now we’ll take of the unit. of is , which reduces to . Fractions of Fractions We know that a fraction represents a part of a whole quantity. For example, two fifths of one unit can be represented by of the whole is shaded. A natural question is, what is a fractional part of a fractional quantity, or, what is a fraction of a fraction? For example, what of ? We can suggest an answer to this question by using a picture to examine of . First, let’s represent . of the whole is shaded. Then divide each of the parts into 3 equal parts. Each part is of the whole. Now we’ll take of the unit. of is , which reduces to .  || 
book4_ch04_5_3	Multiplication of Fractions Now we ask, what arithmetic operation (+, –, ×, ÷) will produce from of ? Notice that, if in the fractions and , we multiply the numerators together and the denominators together, we get precisely . This reduces to as before. Using this observation, we can suggest the following: The Word "OF" Indicates Multiplication: The word "of" translates to the arithmetic operation "times." The Method of Multiplying Fractions: To multiply two or more fractions, multiply the numerators together and then multiply the denominators together. Reduce if necessary. Sample Set A Perform the following multiplications. Example 4.31.  Thus This means that of is , that is, of of a unit is of the original unit. Example 4.32.  . Write 4 as a fraction by writing This means that of 4 whole units is of one whole unit. Example 4.33.  This means that of of of a whole unit is of the original unit. Practice Set A Perform the following multiplications. Exercise 4.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.9. (Go to Solution) Multiplication of Fractions Now we ask, what arithmetic operation (+, –, ×, ÷) will produce from of ? Notice that, if in the fractions and , we multiply the numerators together and the denominators together, we get precisely . This reduces to as before. Using this observation, we can suggest the following: The Word "OF" Indicates Multiplication: The word "of" translates to the arithmetic operation "times." The Method of Multiplying Fractions: To multiply two or more fractions, multiply the numerators together and then multiply the denominators together. Reduce if necessary. Sample Set A Perform the following multiplications. Example 4.31.  Thus This means that of is , that is, of of a unit is of the original unit. Example 4.32.  . Write 4 as a fraction by writing This means that of 4 whole units is of one whole unit. Example 4.33.  This means that of of of a whole unit is of the original unit. Practice Set A Perform the following multiplications. Exercise 4.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.9. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch04_5_6	Multiplying Fractions by Dividing Out Common Factors We have seen that to multiply two fractions together, we multiply numerators together, then denominators together, then reduce to lowest terms, if necessary. The reduction can be tedious if the numbers in the fractions are large. For example, We avoid the process of reducing if we divide out common factors before we multi­ply. Divide 3 into 9 and 21, and divide 2 into 10 and 16. The product is a fraction that is reduced to lowest terms. The Process of Multiplication by Dividing Out Common Factors To multiply fractions by dividing out common factors, divide out factors that are common to both a numerator and a denominator. The factor being divided out can appear in any numerator and any denominator. Sample Set B Perform the following multiplications. Example 4.34.  Divide 4 and 6 by 2 Divide 5 and 5 by 5 Example 4.35.  Divide 8 and 10 by 2. Divide 8 and 12 by 4. Example 4.36.  Example 4.37.  Example 4.38.  Practice Set B Perform the following multiplications. Exercise 4.5.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.16. (Go to Solution) Multiplying Fractions by Dividing Out Common Factors We have seen that to multiply two fractions together, we multiply numerators together, then denominators together, then reduce to lowest terms, if necessary. The reduction can be tedious if the numbers in the fractions are large. For example, We avoid the process of reducing if we divide out common factors before we multi­ply. Divide 3 into 9 and 21, and divide 2 into 10 and 16. The product is a fraction that is reduced to lowest terms. The Process of Multiplication by Dividing Out Common Factors To multiply fractions by dividing out common factors, divide out factors that are common to both a numerator and a denominator. The factor being divided out can appear in any numerator and any denominator. Sample Set B Perform the following multiplications. Example 4.34.  Divide 4 and 6 by 2 Divide 5 and 5 by 5 Example 4.35.  Divide 8 and 10 by 2. Divide 8 and 12 by 4. Example 4.36.  Example 4.37.  Example 4.38.  Practice Set B Perform the following multiplications. Exercise 4.5.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.16. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch04_5_9	Multiplication of Mixed Numbers Multiplying Mixed Numbers To perform a multiplication in which there are mixed numbers, it is convenient to first convert each mixed number to an improper fraction, then multiply. Sample Set C Perform the following multiplications. Convert improper fractions to mixed numbers. Example 4.39.  Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. Example 4.40.  Convert to an improper fraction. . There are no common factors to divide out. Example 4.41.  Convert to improper fractions. Example 4.42.  Practice Set C Perform the following multiplications. Convert improper fractions to mixed numbers. Exercise 4.5.17. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.20. (Go to Solution) Multiplication of Mixed Numbers Multiplying Mixed Numbers To perform a multiplication in which there are mixed numbers, it is convenient to first convert each mixed number to an improper fraction, then multiply. Sample Set C Perform the following multiplications. Convert improper fractions to mixed numbers. Example 4.39.  Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. Example 4.40.  Convert to an improper fraction. . There are no common factors to divide out. Example 4.41.  Convert to improper fractions. Example 4.42.  Practice Set C Perform the following multiplications. Convert improper fractions to mixed numbers. Exercise 4.5.17. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.20. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch04_5_12	Powers and Roots of Fractions Sample Set D Find the value of each of the following. Example 4.43.  Example 4.44.  . We’re looking for a number, call it ?, such that when it is squared, is produced. We know that 32 = 9 and 102 = 100 We’ll try . Since Example 4.45.  Practice Set D Find the value of each of the following. Exercise 4.5.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.22. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.23. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.24. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.25. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.26. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.27. (Go to Solution) Powers and Roots of Fractions Sample Set D Find the value of each of the following. Example 4.43.  Example 4.44.  . We’re looking for a number, call it ?, such that when it is squared, is produced. We know that 32 = 9 and 102 = 100 We’ll try . Since Example 4.45.  Practice Set D Find the value of each of the following. Exercise 4.5.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.22. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.23. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.24. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.25. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.26. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.5.27. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch04_6	 || Reciprocals Reciprocals Two numbers whose product is 1 are called reciprocals of each other. Sample Set A The following pairs of numbers are reciprocals. Example 4.46.  Example 4.47.  Example 4.48.  Notice that we can find the reciprocal of a nonzero number in fractional form by inverting it (exchanging positions of the numerator and denominator). Practice Set A Find the reciprocal of each number. Exercise 4.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.5. (Go to Solution) Hint Write this number as an improper fraction first. Exercise 4.6.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.7. (Go to Solution)  || Dividing Fractions Our concept of division is that it indicates how many times one quantity is con­tained in another quantity. For example, using the diagram we can see that there are 6 one-thirds in 2. There are 6 one-thirds in 2. Since 2 contains six 's we express this as Using these observations, we can suggest the following method for dividing a number by a fraction. Dividing One Fraction by Another Fraction To divide a first fraction by a second, nonzero fraction, multiply the first traction by the reciprocal of the second fraction. Invert and Multiply This method is commonly referred to as "invert the divisor and multiply." Sample Set B Perform the following divisions. Example 4.49.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.50.  The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.51.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.52.  . Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. . . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.53.  . First conveniently write 8 as . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.54.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Example 4.55.  How many -inch-wide packages can be placed in a box 19 inches wide? The problem is to determine how many two and three eighths are contained in 19, that is, what is ? Convert the divisor to an improper fraction. Write the dividend 19 as . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Thus, 8 packages will fit into the box. Practice Set B Perform the following divisions. Exercise 4.6.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.15. (Go to Solution) A container will hold 106 ounces of grape juice. How many -ounce glasses of grape juice can be served from this container? Determine each of the following quotients and then write a rule for this type of division. Exercise 4.6.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.17. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.20. (Go to Solution) When dividing 1 by a fraction, the quotient is the ________________________________________.  || 
book4_ch04_6_2	Reciprocals Reciprocals Two numbers whose product is 1 are called reciprocals of each other. Sample Set A The following pairs of numbers are reciprocals. Example 4.46.  Example 4.47.  Example 4.48.  Notice that we can find the reciprocal of a nonzero number in fractional form by inverting it (exchanging positions of the numerator and denominator). Practice Set A Find the reciprocal of each number. Exercise 4.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.5. (Go to Solution) Hint Write this number as an improper fraction first. Exercise 4.6.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.7. (Go to Solution) Reciprocals Reciprocals Two numbers whose product is 1 are called reciprocals of each other. Sample Set A The following pairs of numbers are reciprocals. Example 4.46.  Example 4.47.  Example 4.48.  Notice that we can find the reciprocal of a nonzero number in fractional form by inverting it (exchanging positions of the numerator and denominator). Practice Set A Find the reciprocal of each number. Exercise 4.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.5. (Go to Solution) Hint Write this number as an improper fraction first. Exercise 4.6.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.7. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch04_6_5	Dividing Fractions Our concept of division is that it indicates how many times one quantity is con­tained in another quantity. For example, using the diagram we can see that there are 6 one-thirds in 2. There are 6 one-thirds in 2. Since 2 contains six 's we express this as Using these observations, we can suggest the following method for dividing a number by a fraction. Dividing One Fraction by Another Fraction To divide a first fraction by a second, nonzero fraction, multiply the first traction by the reciprocal of the second fraction. Invert and Multiply This method is commonly referred to as "invert the divisor and multiply." Sample Set B Perform the following divisions. Example 4.49.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.50.  The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.51.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.52.  . Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. . . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.53.  . First conveniently write 8 as . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.54.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Example 4.55.  How many -inch-wide packages can be placed in a box 19 inches wide? The problem is to determine how many two and three eighths are contained in 19, that is, what is ? Convert the divisor to an improper fraction. Write the dividend 19 as . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Thus, 8 packages will fit into the box. Practice Set B Perform the following divisions. Exercise 4.6.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.15. (Go to Solution) A container will hold 106 ounces of grape juice. How many -ounce glasses of grape juice can be served from this container? Determine each of the following quotients and then write a rule for this type of division. Exercise 4.6.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.17. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.20. (Go to Solution) When dividing 1 by a fraction, the quotient is the ________________________________________. Dividing Fractions Our concept of division is that it indicates how many times one quantity is con­tained in another quantity. For example, using the diagram we can see that there are 6 one-thirds in 2. There are 6 one-thirds in 2. Since 2 contains six 's we express this as Using these observations, we can suggest the following method for dividing a number by a fraction. Dividing One Fraction by Another Fraction To divide a first fraction by a second, nonzero fraction, multiply the first traction by the reciprocal of the second fraction. Invert and Multiply This method is commonly referred to as "invert the divisor and multiply." Sample Set B Perform the following divisions. Example 4.49.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.50.  The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.51.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.52.  . Convert each mixed number to an improper fraction. . . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.53.  . First conveniently write 8 as . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Multiply by . Example 4.54.  . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Example 4.55.  How many -inch-wide packages can be placed in a box 19 inches wide? The problem is to determine how many two and three eighths are contained in 19, that is, what is ? Convert the divisor to an improper fraction. Write the dividend 19 as . The divisor is . Its reciprocal is . Thus, 8 packages will fit into the box. Practice Set B Perform the following divisions. Exercise 4.6.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.15. (Go to Solution) A container will hold 106 ounces of grape juice. How many -ounce glasses of grape juice can be served from this container? Determine each of the following quotients and then write a rule for this type of division. Exercise 4.6.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.17. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 4.6.20. (Go to Solution) When dividing 1 by a fraction, the quotient is the ________________________________________.  || 
book4_ch04_7	 || Multiplication Statements Statement, Multiplication Statement A statement is a sentence that is either true or false. A mathematical statement of the form product = (factor 1) ⋅ (factor 2) is a multiplication statement. Depending on the numbers that are used, it can be either true or false. Omitting exactly one of the three numbers in the statement will produce exactly one of the following three problems. For convenience, we'll represent the omitted (or missing) number with the letter M (M for Missing). M = (factor 1) ⋅ (factor 2) Missing product statement. M ⋅ (factor 2) = product Missing factor statement. (factor 1) ⋅ M = product Missing factor statement. We are interested in developing and working with methods to determine the missing number that makes the statement true. Fundamental to these methods is the ability to translate two words to mathematical symbols. The word of translates to times is translates to equals  || Missing Products Statements The equation M = 8 ⋅ 4 is a missing product statement. We can find the value of M that makes this statement true by multiplying the known factors. Missing product statements can be used to determine the answer to a question such as, "What number is fraction 1 of fraction 2? Sample Set A Find of . We are being asked the question, "What number is of ?" We must translate from words to mathematical symbols. Thus, of is . Thus, 18 is of 24. Practice Set A Exercise 4.7.1. (Go to Solution) Find of . Exercise 4.7.2. (Go to Solution) What number is of ? Exercise 4.7.3. (Go to Solution) of is what number?  || Missing Factor Statements The equation 8 ⋅ M = 32 is a missing factor statement. We can find the value of M that makes this statement true by dividing (since we know that 32 ÷ 8 = 4). Finding the Missing Factor To find the missing factor in a missing factor statement, divide the product by the known factor. missing factor = (product) ÷ (known factor) Missing factor statements can be used to answer such questions as of what number is ? What part of is ? Sample Set B Now, using missing factor = (product) ÷ (known factor) We get Thus, of 6 is . For convenience, let's convert the mixed numbers to improper fractions. Now, using missing factor = (product)÷(known factor) we get Thus, of is . Practice Set B Exercise 4.7.4. (Go to Solution) of what number is ? Exercise 4.7.5. (Go to Solution) of what number is ? Exercise 4.7.6. (Go to Solution) What part of is ? Exercise 4.7.7. (Go to Solution) What part of is ?  || 
book4_ch04_7_2	Multiplication Statements Statement, Multiplication Statement A statement is a sentence that is either true or false. A mathematical statement of the form product = (factor 1) ⋅ (factor 2) is a multiplication statement. Depending on the numbers that are used, it can be either true or false. Omitting exactly one of the three numbers in the statement will produce exactly one of the following three problems. For convenience, we'll represent the omitted (or missing) number with the letter M (M for Missing). M = (factor 1) ⋅ (factor 2) Missing product statement. M ⋅ (factor 2) = product Missing factor statement. (factor 1) ⋅ M = product Missing factor statement. We are interested in developing and working with methods to determine the missing number that makes the statement true. Fundamental to these methods is the ability to translate two words to mathematical symbols. The word of translates to times is translates to equals Multiplication Statements Statement, Multiplication Statement A statement is a sentence that is either true or false. A mathematical statement of the form product = (factor 1) ⋅ (factor 2) is a multiplication statement. Depending on the numbers that are used, it can be either true or false. Omitting exactly one of the three numbers in the statement will produce exactly one of the following three problems. For convenience, we'll represent the omitted (or missing) number with the letter M (M for Missing). M = (factor 1) ⋅ (factor 2) Missing product statement. M ⋅ (factor 2) = product Missing factor statement. (factor 1) ⋅ M = product Missing factor statement. We are interested in developing and working with methods to determine the missing number that makes the statement true. Fundamental to these methods is the ability to translate two words to mathematical symbols. The word of translates to times is translates to equals  || 
book4_ch04_7_3	Missing Products Statements The equation M = 8 ⋅ 4 is a missing product statement. We can find the value of M that makes this statement true by multiplying the known factors. Missing product statements can be used to determine the answer to a question such as, "What number is fraction 1 of fraction 2? Sample Set A Find of . We are being asked the question, "What number is of ?" We must translate from words to mathematical symbols. Thus, of is . Thus, 18 is of 24. Practice Set A Exercise 4.7.1. (Go to Solution) Find of . Exercise 4.7.2. (Go to Solution) What number is of ? Exercise 4.7.3. (Go to Solution) of is what number? Missing Products Statements The equation M = 8 ⋅ 4 is a missing product statement. We can find the value of M that makes this statement true by multiplying the known factors. Missing product statements can be used to determine the answer to a question such as, "What number is fraction 1 of fraction 2? Sample Set A Find of . We are being asked the question, "What number is of ?" We must translate from words to mathematical symbols. Thus, of is . Thus, 18 is of 24. Practice Set A Exercise 4.7.1. (Go to Solution) Find of . Exercise 4.7.2. (Go to Solution) What number is of ? Exercise 4.7.3. (Go to Solution) of is what number?  || 
book4_ch04_7_6	Missing Factor Statements The equation 8 ⋅ M = 32 is a missing factor statement. We can find the value of M that makes this statement true by dividing (since we know that 32 ÷ 8 = 4). Finding the Missing Factor To find the missing factor in a missing factor statement, divide the product by the known factor. missing factor = (product) ÷ (known factor) Missing factor statements can be used to answer such questions as of what number is ? What part of is ? Sample Set B Now, using missing factor = (product) ÷ (known factor) We get Thus, of 6 is . For convenience, let's convert the mixed numbers to improper fractions. Now, using missing factor = (product)÷(known factor) we get Thus, of is . Practice Set B Exercise 4.7.4. (Go to Solution) of what number is ? Exercise 4.7.5. (Go to Solution) of what number is ? Exercise 4.7.6. (Go to Solution) What part of is ? Exercise 4.7.7. (Go to Solution) What part of is ? Missing Factor Statements The equation 8 ⋅ M = 32 is a missing factor statement. We can find the value of M that makes this statement true by dividing (since we know that 32 ÷ 8 = 4). Finding the Missing Factor To find the missing factor in a missing factor statement, divide the product by the known factor. missing factor = (product) ÷ (known factor) Missing factor statements can be used to answer such questions as of what number is ? What part of is ? Sample Set B Now, using missing factor = (product) ÷ (known factor) We get Thus, of 6 is . For convenience, let's convert the mixed numbers to improper fractions. Now, using missing factor = (product)÷(known factor) we get Thus, of is . Practice Set B Exercise 4.7.4. (Go to Solution) of what number is ? Exercise 4.7.5. (Go to Solution) of what number is ? Exercise 4.7.6. (Go to Solution) What part of is ? Exercise 4.7.7. (Go to Solution) What part of is ?  || 
book4_ch07	 ||  || Denominate Numbers and Pure Numbers Denominate Numbers, Like and Unlike Denominate Numbers It is often necessary or convenient to compare two quantities. Denominate num­bers are numbers together with some specified unit. If the units being compared are alike, the denominate numbers are called like denominate numbers. If units are not alike, the numbers are called unlike denominate numbers. Examples of denominate numbers are shown in the diagram: Pure Numbers Numbers that exist purely as numbers and do not represent amounts of quantities are called pure numbers. Examples of pure numbers are 8, 254, 0, , , and 0.07. Numbers can be compared in two ways: subtraction and division. Comparing Numbers by Subtraction and Division Comparison of two numbers by subtraction indicates how much more one number is than another. Comparison by division indicates how many times larger or smaller one number is than another. Comparing Pure or Like Denominate Numbers by Subtraction Numbers can be compared by subtraction if and only if they both are like denominate numbers or both pure numbers. Sample Set A Example 7.1.  Compare 8 miles and 3 miles by subtraction. 8 mile – 3 miles = 5 miles This means that 8 miles is 5 miles more than 3 miles. Examples of use: I can now jog 8 miles whereas I used to jog only 3 miles. So, I can now jog 5 miles more than I used to. Example 7.2.  Compare 12 and 5 by subtraction. 12 − 5 = 7 This means that 12 is 7 more than 5. Example 7.3.  Comparing 8 miles and 5 gallons by subtraction makes no sense. 8 miles – 5 gallons = ? Example 7.4.  Compare 36 and 4 by division. 36 ÷ 4 = 9 This means that 36 is 9 times as large as 4. Recall that 36÷4 = 9 can be expressed as . Example 7.5.  Compare 8 miles and 2 miles by division. This means that 8 miles is 4 times as large as 2 miles. Example of use: I can jog 8 miles to your 2 miles. Or, for every 2 miles that you jog, I jog 8. So, I jog 4 times as many miles as you jog. Notice that when like quantities are being compared by division, we drop the units. Another way of looking at this is that the units divide out (cancel). Example 7.6.  Compare 30 miles and 2 gallons by division. Example of use: A particular car goes 30 miles on 2 gallons of gasoline. This is the same as getting 15 miles to 1 gallon of gasoline. Notice that when the quantities being compared by division are unlike quantities, we do not drop the units. Practice Set A Make the following comparisons and interpret each one. Exercise 7.2.1. (Go to Solution) Compare 10 diskettes to 2 diskettes by subtraction: division: Exercise 7.2.2. (Go to Solution) Compare, if possible, 16 bananas and 2 bags by subtraction: division:  || Ratios and Rates Ratio A comparison, by division, of two pure numbers or two like denominate numbers is a ratio. The comparison by division of the pure numbers and the like denominate numbers are examples of ratios. Rate A comparison, by division, of two unlike denominate numbers is a rate. The comparison by division of two unlike denominate numbers, such as are examples of rates. Let's agree to represent two numbers (pure or denominate) with the letters a and b . This means that we're letting a represent some number and b represent some, perhaps different, number. With this agreement, we can write the ratio of the two numbers a and b as or The ratio is read as " a to b ." The ratio is read as " b to a ." Since a ratio or a rate can be expressed as a fraction, it may be reducible. Sample Set B Example 7.7.  The ratio 30 to 2 can be expressed as . Reducing, we get . The ratio 30 to 2 is equivalent to the ratio 15 to 1. Example 7.8.  The rate "4 televisions to 12 people" can be expressed as . The meaning of this rate is that "for every 4 televisions, there are 12 people." Reducing, we get . The meaning of this rate is that "for every 1 television, there are 3 people.” Thus, the rate of "4 televisions to 12 people" is the same as the rate of "1 television to 3 people." Practice Set B Write the following ratios and rates as fractions. Exercise 7.2.3. (Go to Solution) 3 to 2 Exercise 7.2.4. (Go to Solution) 1 to 9 Exercise 7.2.5. (Go to Solution) 5 books to 4 people Exercise 7.2.6. (Go to Solution) 120 miles to 2 hours Exercise 7.2.7. (Go to Solution) 8 liters to 3 liters Write the following ratios and rates in the form " a to b ." Reduce when necessary. Exercise 7.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.12. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Ratios, Rates, and Proportions Ratio, Rate We have defined a ratio as a comparison, by division, of two pure numbers or two like denominate numbers. We have defined a rate as a comparison, by division, of two unlike denominate numbers. Proportion A proportion is a statement that two ratios or rates are equal. The following two examples show how to read proportions. Sample Set A Write or read each proportion. Example 7.9.  3 is to 5 as 12 is to 20 Example 7.10.  10 items is to 5 dollars as 2 items is to 1 dollar Example 7.11.  8 is to 12 as 16 is to 24. Example 7.12.  50 milligrams of vitamin C is to 1 tablet as 300 milligrams of vitamin C is to 6 tablets. Practice Set A Write or read each proportion. Exercise 7.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.3. (Go to Solution) 15 is to 4 as 75 is to 20. Exercise 7.3.4. (Go to Solution) 2 plates are to 1 tray as 20 plates are to 10 trays.  || Finding the Missing Factor in a Proportion Many practical problems can be solved by writing the given information as propor­tions. Such proportions will be composed of three specified numbers and one unknown number. It is customary to let a letter, such as x , represent the unknown number. An example of such a proportion is This proportion is read as " x is to 4 as 20 is to 16." There is a method of solving these proportions that is based on the equality of fractions. Recall that two fractions are equivalent if and only if their cross products are equal. For example, Notice that in a proportion that contains three specified numbers and a letter representing an unknown quantity, that regardless of where the letter appears, the following situation always occurs. We recognize this as a multiplication statement. Specifically, it is a missing factor statement. (See Section 4.7 for a discussion of multiplication statements.) For example, Each of these statements is a multiplication statement. Specifically, each is a missing factor statement. (The letter used here is x , whereas M was used in Section 4.7.) Finding the Missing Factor in a Proportion The missing factor in a missing factor statement can be determined by dividing the product by the known factor, that is, if x represents the missing factor, then x = ( product ) ÷ ( known factor ) Sample Set B Find the unknown number in each proportion. Example 7.13.  . Find the cross product. This mean that , or 5 is to 4 as 20 is to 16. Example 7.14.  . Find the cross product. This means that , or, 5 is to 4 as 20 is to 6. Example 7.15.  Find the cross product. The means that , or, 16 is to 3 as 64 is to 12. Example 7.16.  Find the cross products. Practice Set B Find the unknown number in each proportion. Exercise 7.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.8. (Go to Solution)  || Proportions Involving Rates Recall that a rate is a comparison, by division, of unlike denominate numbers. We must be careful when setting up proportions that involve rates. The form is impor­tant. For example, if a rate involves two types of units, say unit type 1 and unit type 2, we can write or Both cross products produce a statement of the type (unit type 1) ⋅ (unit type 2) = (unit type 1) ⋅ (unit type 2) which we take to mean the comparison Examples of correctly expressed proportions are the following: However, if we write the same type of units on different sides, such as, the cross product produces a statement of the form We can see that this is an incorrect comparison by observing the following example: It is incorrect to write for two reason. The cross product is numerically wrong: (2⋅4 ≠ 3⋅6). The cross product produces the statement “hooks are to hooks as poles are to poles,” which makes no sense.  ||  || The Five-Step Method In Section 7.3 we noted that many practical problems can be solved by writing the given information as proportions. Such proportions will be composed of three specified numbers and one unknown number represented by a letter. The first and most important part of solving a proportion problem is to deter­mine, by careful reading, what the unknown quantity is and to represent it with some letter. The Five-Step Method The five-step method for solving proportion problems: By careful reading, determine what the unknown quantity is and represent it with some letter. There will be only one unknown in a problem. Identify the three specified numbers. Determine which comparisons are to be made and set up the proportion. Solve the proportion (using the methods of Section 7.3). Interpret and write a conclusion in a sentence with the appropriate units of measure. Step 1 is extremely important. Many problems go unsolved because time is not taken to establish what quantity is to be found. When solving an applied problem, always begin by determining the unknown quantity and representing it with a letter.  || Problem Solving Sample Set A Example 7.17.  On a map, 2 inches represents 25 miles. How many miles are represented by 8 inches? Step 1: The unknown quantity is miles. Let x = number of miles represented by 8 inches Step 2: The three specified numbers are 2 inches 25 miles 8 inches Step 3: The comparisons are 2 inches to 25 miles → 8 inches to x miles → Proportions involving ratios and rates are more readily solved by suspending the units while doing the computations. Step 4: In step 1, we let x represent the number of miles. So, x represents 100 miles. Step 5: If 2 inches represents 25 miles, then 8 inches represents 100 miles. Try Exercise 7.4.1. in the section called “Practice Set A”. Example 7.18.  An acid solution is composed of 7 parts water to 2 parts acid. How many parts of water are there in a solution composed of 20 parts acid? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the number of parts of water. Let n = number of parts of water. Step 2: The three specified numbers are 7 parts water 2 parts acid 20 parts acid Step 3: The comparisons are 7 parts water to 2 parts acid → n parts water to 20 parts acid → Step 4: In step 1 we let n represent the number of parts of water. So, n represents 70 parts of water. Step 5: 7 parts water to 2 parts acid indicates 70 parts water to 20 parts acid. Try in the section called “Practice Set A”. Example 7.19.  A 5-foot girl casts a -foot shadow at a particular time of the day. How tall is a person who casts a 3-foot shadow at the same time of the day? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the height of the person. Let h = height of the person. Step 2: The three specified numbers are 5 feet ( height of girl) feet (length of shadow) 3 feet (length of shadow) Step 3: The comparisons are 5-foot girl is to foot shadow → h-foot person is to 3-foot shadow → Step 4: Step 5: A person who casts a 3-foot shadow at this particular time of the day is feet tall. Try Exercise 7.4.3. in the section called “Practice Set A”. Example 7.20.  The ratio of men to women in a particular town is 3 to 5. How many women are there in the town if there are 19,200 men in town? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the number of women in town. Let x = number of women in town. Step 2: The three specified numbers are 3 5 19,200 Step 3: The comparisons are 3 men to 5 women → 19,200 men to x women → Step 4: Step 5: There are 32,000 women in town. Example 7.21.  The rate of wins to losses of a particular baseball team is . How many games did this team lose if they won 63 games? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the number of games lost. Let n = number of games lost. Step 2: Since → means 9 wins to 2 losses, the three specified numbers are 9 (wins) 2 (losses) 63 (wins) Step 3: The comparisons are 9 wins to 2 losses→ 63 wins to n losses → Step 4: Step 5: This team had 14 losses. Try Exercise 7.4.4. in the section called “Practice Set A”. Practice Set A Solve each problem. Exercise 7.4.1. (Go to Solution) On a map, 3 inches represents 100 miles. How many miles are represented by 15 inches? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.2. (Go to Solution) An alcohol solution is composed of 14 parts water to 3 parts alcohol. How many parts of alcohol are in a solution that is composed of 112 parts water? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.3. (Go to Solution) A -foot woman casts a 7-foot shadow at a particular time of the day. How long of a shadow does a 3-foot boy cast at that same time of day? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.4. (Go to Solution) The rate of houseplants to outside plants at a nursery is 4 to 9. If there are 384 houseplants in the nursery, how many outside plants are there? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.5. (Go to Solution) The odds for a particular event occurring are 11 to 2. (For every 11 times the event does occur, it will not occur 2 times.) How many times does the event occur if it does not occur 18 times? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.6. (Go to Solution) The rate of passing grades to failing grades in a particular chemistry class is . If there are 21 passing grades, how many failing grades are there? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5:  ||  || Ratios and Percents Ratio, Percent We defined a ratio as a comparison, by division, of two pure numbers or two like denominate numbers. A most convenient number to compare numbers to is 100. Ratios in which one number is compared to 100 are called percents. The word percent comes from the Latin word "per centum." The word "per" means "for each" or "for every," and the word "centum" means "hundred." Thus, we have the following definition. Percent means “for each hundred," or "for every hundred." The symbol % is used to represent the word percent. Sample Set A Example 7.22.  The ratio 26 to 100 can be written as 26%. We read 26% as "twenty-six percent." Example 7.23.  The ratio can be written as 165%. We read 165% as "one hundred sixty-five percent." Example 7.24.  The percent 38% can be written as the fraction . Example 7.25.  The percent 210% can be written as the fraction or the mixed number or 2.1. Example 7.26.  Since one dollar is 100 cents, 25 cents is of a dollar. This implies that 25 cents is 25% of one dollar. Practice Set A Exercise 7.5.1. (Go to Solution) Write the ratio 16 to 100 as a percent. Exercise 7.5.2. (Go to Solution) Write the ratio 195 to 100 as a percent. Exercise 7.5.3. (Go to Solution) Write the percent 83% as a ratio in fractional form. Exercise 7.5.4. (Go to Solution) Write the percent 362% as a ratio in fractional form.  || The Relationship Between Fractions, Decimals, and Percents – Making Conversions Since a percent is a ratio, and a ratio can be written as a fraction, and a fraction can be written as a decimal, any of these forms can be converted to any other. Before we proceed to the problems in the section called “Sample Set B” and the section called “Practice Set B”, let's summarize the conversion techniques. Table 7.1. Conversion Techniques – Fractions, Decimals, Percents To Convert a Fraction To Convert a Decimal To Convert a Percent To a decimal: Divide the numerator by the denominator To a fraction: Read the decimal and reduce the resulting fraction To a decimal: Move the decimal point 2 places to the left and drop the % symbol To a percent: Convert the fraction first to a decimal, then move the decimal point 2 places to the right and affix the % symbol. To a percent: Move the decimal point 2 places to the right and affix the % symbol To a fraction: Drop the % sign and write the number “over” 100. Reduce, if possible. Sample Set B Example 7.27.  Convert 12% to a decimal. Note that The % symbol is dropped, and the decimal point moves 2 places to the left. Example 7.28.  Convert 0.75 to a percent. Note that The % symbol is affixed, and the decimal point moves 2 units to the right. Example 7.29.  Convert to a percent. We see in Example 7.28 that we can convert a decimal to a percent. We also know that we can convert a fraction to a decimal. Thus, we can see that if we first convert the fraction to a decimal, we can then convert the decimal to a percent. or Example 7.30.  Convert 42% to a fraction. or Practice Set B Exercise 7.5.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 21% to a decimal. Exercise 7.5.6. (Go to Solution) Convert 461% to a decimal. Exercise 7.5.7. (Go to Solution) Convert 0.55 to a percent. Exercise 7.5.8. (Go to Solution) Convert 5.64 to a percent. Exercise 7.5.9. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent. Exercise 7.5.10. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent Exercise 7.5.11. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent.  ||  || Conversions Involving Fractions of One Percent Percents such as %, %, %, and %, where 1% has not been attained, are fractions of 1%. This implies that Since "percent" means "for each hundred," and "of" means "times," we have Sample Set A Example 7.31.  Convert % to a fraction. Example 7.32.  Convert % to a decimal. Practice Set A Exercise 7.6.1. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a fraction. Exercise 7.6.2. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a fraction. Exercise 7.6.3. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a fraction.  || Conversions Involving Nonterminating Fractions We must be careful when changing a fraction of 1% to a decimal. The number , as we know, has a nonterminating decimal representation. Therefore, it cannot be expressed exactly as a decimal. When converting nonterminating fractions of 1% to decimals, it is customary to express the fraction as a rounded decimal with at least three decimal places. Converting a Nonterminating Fraction to a Decimal To convert a nonterminating fraction of 1% to a decimal: Convert the fraction as a rounded decimal. Move the decimal point two digits to the left and remove the percent sign. Sample Set B Example 7.33.  Convert % to a three-place decimal. Convert to a decimal. Since we wish the resulting decimal to have three decimal digits, and removing the percent sign will account for two of them, we need to round to one place (2 + 1 = 3). % to one decimal place. Move the decimal point two digits to the left and remove the % sign. We'll need to add zeros to locate the decimal point in the correct location. to 3 decimal places Example 7.34.  Convert % to a four-place decimal. Since we wish the resulting decimal to have four decimal places, and removing the percent sign will account for two, we to round to two places. to two decimal places. Move the decimal point two places to the left and drop the percent sign. to four decimal places. Example 7.35.  Convert % to a decimal rounded to ten thousandths. Since we wish the resulting decimal to be rounded to ten thousandths (four decimal places), and removing the percent sign will account for two, we need to round to two places. to two decimal places. Move the decimal point to the left two places and drop the percent sign. correct to ten thousandths. Practice Set B Exercise 7.6.4. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a three-place decimal. Exercise 7.6.5. (Go to Solution) Convert to a decimal rounded to ten thousandths.  ||  || Base, Percent, and Percentage There are three basic types of percent problems. Each type involves a base, a percent, and a percentage, and when they are translated from words to mathemati­cal symbols each becomes a multiplication statement. Examples of these types of problems are the following: What number is 30% of 50? (Missing product statement.) 15 is what percent of 50? (Missing factor statement.) 15 is 30% of what number? (Missing factor statement.) In problem 1, the product is missing. To solve the problem, we represent the missing product with P . P = 30% ⋅ 50 Percentage The missing product P is called the percentage. Percentage means part, or por­tion. In P = 30% ⋅50, P represents a particular part of 50. In problem 2, one of the factors is missing. Here we represent the missing factor with Q . 15 = Q ⋅ 50 Percent The missing factor is the percent. Percent, we know, means per 100, or part of 100. In 15 = Q ⋅50, Q indicates what part of 50 is being taken or considered. Specifi­cally, 15 = Q ⋅50 means that if 50 was to be divided into 100 equal parts, then Q indicates 15 are being considered. In problem 3, one of the factors is missing. Represent the missing factor with B . 15 = 30% ⋅ B Base The missing factor is the base. Some meanings of base are a source of supply, or a starting place. In 15 = 30% ⋅B , B indicates the amount of supply. Specifically, 15 = 30% ⋅B indicates that 15 represents 30% of the total supply. Each of these three types of problems is of the form ( percentage ) = ( percent ) ⋅ ( base ) We can determine any one of the three values given the other two using the methods discussed in Section 4.7.  || Finding the Percentage Sample Set A Example 7.36.  Thus, 15 is 30% of 50. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.1.. Example 7.37.  Thus, 34.2 is 36% of 95. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.1.. Example 7.38.  A salesperson, who gets a commission of 12% of each sale she makes, makes a sale of $8,400.00. How much is her commission? We need to determine what part of $8,400.00 is to be taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, the salesperson's commission is $1,008.00. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.2.. Example 7.39.  A girl, by practicing typing on her home computer, has been able to increase her typing speed by 110%. If she originally typed 16 words per minute, by how many words per minute was she able to increase her speed? We need to determine what part of 16 has been taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, the girl has increased her typing speed by 17.6 words per minute. Her new speed is 16 + 17.6 = 33.6 words per minute. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.3.. Example 7.40.  A student who makes $125 a month working part-time receives a 4% salary raise. What is the student's new monthly salary? With a 4% raise, this student will make 100% of the original salary + 4% of the original salary. This means the new salary will be 104% of the original salary. We need to determine what part of $125 is to be taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, this student's new monthly salary is $130. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.4.. Example 7.41.  An article of clothing is on sale at 15% off the marked price. If the marked price is $24.95, what is the sale price? Since the item is discounted 15%, the new price will be 100% – 15% = 85% of the marked price. We need to determine what part of 24.95 is to be taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, the sale price of the item is $21.21. Practice Set A Exercise 7.7.1. (Go to Solution) What number is 42% of 85? Exercise 7.7.2. (Go to Solution) A sales person makes a commission of 16% on each sale he makes. How much is his commission if he makes a sale of $8,500? Exercise 7.7.3. (Go to Solution) An assembly line worker can assemble 14 parts of a product in one hour. If he can increase his assembly speed by 35%, by how many parts per hour would he increase his assembly of products? Exercise 7.7.4. (Go to Solution) A computer scientist in the Silicon Valley makes $42,000 annually. What would this scientist's new annual salary be if she were to receive an 8% raise?  || Finding the Percent Sample Set B Example 7.42.  Recall that (missing factor) = (product) ÷ (known factor). Thus, 15 is 30% of 50. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.5.. Example 7.43.  Thus, 4.32 is 6% of 72. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.5.. Example 7.44.  On a 160 question exam, a student got 125 correct answers. What percent is this? Round the result to two decimal places. We need to determine the percent. Thus, this student received a 78% on the exam. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.6.. Example 7.45.  A bottle contains 80 milliliters of hydrochloric acid (HCl) and 30 milliliters of water. What percent of HCl does the bottle contain? Round the result to two decimal places. We need to determine the percent. The total amount of liquid in the bottle is 80 milliliters + 30 milliliters = 110 milliliters . Thus, this bottle contains approximately 73% HCl. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.7.. Example 7.46.  Five years ago a woman had an annual income of $19,200. She presently earns $42,000 annually. By what percent has her salary increased? Round the result to two decimal places. We need to determine the percent. Thus, this woman's annual salary has increased 219%. Practice Set B Exercise 7.7.5. (Go to Solution) 99.13 is what percent of 431? Exercise 7.7.6. (Go to Solution) On an 80 question exam, a student got 72 correct answers. What percent did the student get on the exam? Exercise 7.7.7. (Go to Solution) A bottle contains 45 milliliters of sugar and 67 milliliters of water. What fraction of sugar does the bottle contain? Round the result to two decimal places (then express as a percent).  || Finding the Base Sample Set C Example 7.47.  Thus, 15 is 30% of 50. Try Exercise 7.7.8. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.48.  Thus, 56.43 is 33% of 171. Try Exercise 7.7.8. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.49.  Fifteen milliliters of water represents 2% of a hydrochloric acid (HCl) solution. How many milliliters of solution are there? We need to determine the total supply. The word supply indicates base. Thus, there are 750 milliliters of solution in the bottle. Try Exercise 7.7.9. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.50.  In a particular city, a sales tax of % is charged on items purchased in local stores. If the tax on an item is $2.99, what is the price of the item? We need to determine the price of the item. We can think of price as the starting place. Starting place indicates base. We need to determine the base. Thus, the price of the item is $46.00. Try Exercise 7.7.10. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.51.  A clothing item is priced at $20.40. This marked price includes a 15% discount. What is the original price? We need to determine the original price. We can think of the original price as the starting place. Starting place indicates base. We need to determine the base. The new price, $20.40, represents 100% – 15% = 85% of the original price. Thus, the original price of the item is $24.00. Try Exercise 7.7.11. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Practice Set C Exercise 7.7.8. (Go to Solution) 1.98 is 2% of what number? Exercise 7.7.9. (Go to Solution) 3.3 milliliters of HCl represents 25% of an HCl solution. How many milliliters of solution are there? Exercise 7.7.10. (Go to Solution) A salesman, who makes a commission of % on each sale, makes a commission of $152.39 on a particular sale. Rounded to the nearest dollar, what is the amount of the sale? Exercise 7.7.11. (Go to Solution) At "super-long play," hours of play of a video cassette recorder represents 31.25% of the total playing time. What is the total playing time?  || 
book4_ch07_2	 || Denominate Numbers and Pure Numbers Denominate Numbers, Like and Unlike Denominate Numbers It is often necessary or convenient to compare two quantities. Denominate num­bers are numbers together with some specified unit. If the units being compared are alike, the denominate numbers are called like denominate numbers. If units are not alike, the numbers are called unlike denominate numbers. Examples of denominate numbers are shown in the diagram: Pure Numbers Numbers that exist purely as numbers and do not represent amounts of quantities are called pure numbers. Examples of pure numbers are 8, 254, 0, , , and 0.07. Numbers can be compared in two ways: subtraction and division. Comparing Numbers by Subtraction and Division Comparison of two numbers by subtraction indicates how much more one number is than another. Comparison by division indicates how many times larger or smaller one number is than another. Comparing Pure or Like Denominate Numbers by Subtraction Numbers can be compared by subtraction if and only if they both are like denominate numbers or both pure numbers. Sample Set A Example 7.1.  Compare 8 miles and 3 miles by subtraction. 8 mile – 3 miles = 5 miles This means that 8 miles is 5 miles more than 3 miles. Examples of use: I can now jog 8 miles whereas I used to jog only 3 miles. So, I can now jog 5 miles more than I used to. Example 7.2.  Compare 12 and 5 by subtraction. 12 − 5 = 7 This means that 12 is 7 more than 5. Example 7.3.  Comparing 8 miles and 5 gallons by subtraction makes no sense. 8 miles – 5 gallons = ? Example 7.4.  Compare 36 and 4 by division. 36 ÷ 4 = 9 This means that 36 is 9 times as large as 4. Recall that 36÷4 = 9 can be expressed as . Example 7.5.  Compare 8 miles and 2 miles by division. This means that 8 miles is 4 times as large as 2 miles. Example of use: I can jog 8 miles to your 2 miles. Or, for every 2 miles that you jog, I jog 8. So, I jog 4 times as many miles as you jog. Notice that when like quantities are being compared by division, we drop the units. Another way of looking at this is that the units divide out (cancel). Example 7.6.  Compare 30 miles and 2 gallons by division. Example of use: A particular car goes 30 miles on 2 gallons of gasoline. This is the same as getting 15 miles to 1 gallon of gasoline. Notice that when the quantities being compared by division are unlike quantities, we do not drop the units. Practice Set A Make the following comparisons and interpret each one. Exercise 7.2.1. (Go to Solution) Compare 10 diskettes to 2 diskettes by subtraction: division: Exercise 7.2.2. (Go to Solution) Compare, if possible, 16 bananas and 2 bags by subtraction: division:  || Ratios and Rates Ratio A comparison, by division, of two pure numbers or two like denominate numbers is a ratio. The comparison by division of the pure numbers and the like denominate numbers are examples of ratios. Rate A comparison, by division, of two unlike denominate numbers is a rate. The comparison by division of two unlike denominate numbers, such as are examples of rates. Let's agree to represent two numbers (pure or denominate) with the letters a and b . This means that we're letting a represent some number and b represent some, perhaps different, number. With this agreement, we can write the ratio of the two numbers a and b as or The ratio is read as " a to b ." The ratio is read as " b to a ." Since a ratio or a rate can be expressed as a fraction, it may be reducible. Sample Set B Example 7.7.  The ratio 30 to 2 can be expressed as . Reducing, we get . The ratio 30 to 2 is equivalent to the ratio 15 to 1. Example 7.8.  The rate "4 televisions to 12 people" can be expressed as . The meaning of this rate is that "for every 4 televisions, there are 12 people." Reducing, we get . The meaning of this rate is that "for every 1 television, there are 3 people.” Thus, the rate of "4 televisions to 12 people" is the same as the rate of "1 television to 3 people." Practice Set B Write the following ratios and rates as fractions. Exercise 7.2.3. (Go to Solution) 3 to 2 Exercise 7.2.4. (Go to Solution) 1 to 9 Exercise 7.2.5. (Go to Solution) 5 books to 4 people Exercise 7.2.6. (Go to Solution) 120 miles to 2 hours Exercise 7.2.7. (Go to Solution) 8 liters to 3 liters Write the following ratios and rates in the form " a to b ." Reduce when necessary. Exercise 7.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.12. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch07_2_2	Denominate Numbers and Pure Numbers Denominate Numbers, Like and Unlike Denominate Numbers It is often necessary or convenient to compare two quantities. Denominate num­bers are numbers together with some specified unit. If the units being compared are alike, the denominate numbers are called like denominate numbers. If units are not alike, the numbers are called unlike denominate numbers. Examples of denominate numbers are shown in the diagram: Pure Numbers Numbers that exist purely as numbers and do not represent amounts of quantities are called pure numbers. Examples of pure numbers are 8, 254, 0, , , and 0.07. Numbers can be compared in two ways: subtraction and division. Comparing Numbers by Subtraction and Division Comparison of two numbers by subtraction indicates how much more one number is than another. Comparison by division indicates how many times larger or smaller one number is than another. Comparing Pure or Like Denominate Numbers by Subtraction Numbers can be compared by subtraction if and only if they both are like denominate numbers or both pure numbers. Sample Set A Example 7.1.  Compare 8 miles and 3 miles by subtraction. 8 mile – 3 miles = 5 miles This means that 8 miles is 5 miles more than 3 miles. Examples of use: I can now jog 8 miles whereas I used to jog only 3 miles. So, I can now jog 5 miles more than I used to. Example 7.2.  Compare 12 and 5 by subtraction. 12 − 5 = 7 This means that 12 is 7 more than 5. Example 7.3.  Comparing 8 miles and 5 gallons by subtraction makes no sense. 8 miles – 5 gallons = ? Example 7.4.  Compare 36 and 4 by division. 36 ÷ 4 = 9 This means that 36 is 9 times as large as 4. Recall that 36÷4 = 9 can be expressed as . Example 7.5.  Compare 8 miles and 2 miles by division. This means that 8 miles is 4 times as large as 2 miles. Example of use: I can jog 8 miles to your 2 miles. Or, for every 2 miles that you jog, I jog 8. So, I jog 4 times as many miles as you jog. Notice that when like quantities are being compared by division, we drop the units. Another way of looking at this is that the units divide out (cancel). Example 7.6.  Compare 30 miles and 2 gallons by division. Example of use: A particular car goes 30 miles on 2 gallons of gasoline. This is the same as getting 15 miles to 1 gallon of gasoline. Notice that when the quantities being compared by division are unlike quantities, we do not drop the units. Practice Set A Make the following comparisons and interpret each one. Exercise 7.2.1. (Go to Solution) Compare 10 diskettes to 2 diskettes by subtraction: division: Exercise 7.2.2. (Go to Solution) Compare, if possible, 16 bananas and 2 bags by subtraction: division: Denominate Numbers and Pure Numbers Denominate Numbers, Like and Unlike Denominate Numbers It is often necessary or convenient to compare two quantities. Denominate num­bers are numbers together with some specified unit. If the units being compared are alike, the denominate numbers are called like denominate numbers. If units are not alike, the numbers are called unlike denominate numbers. Examples of denominate numbers are shown in the diagram: Pure Numbers Numbers that exist purely as numbers and do not represent amounts of quantities are called pure numbers. Examples of pure numbers are 8, 254, 0, , , and 0.07. Numbers can be compared in two ways: subtraction and division. Comparing Numbers by Subtraction and Division Comparison of two numbers by subtraction indicates how much more one number is than another. Comparison by division indicates how many times larger or smaller one number is than another. Comparing Pure or Like Denominate Numbers by Subtraction Numbers can be compared by subtraction if and only if they both are like denominate numbers or both pure numbers. Sample Set A Example 7.1.  Compare 8 miles and 3 miles by subtraction. 8 mile – 3 miles = 5 miles This means that 8 miles is 5 miles more than 3 miles. Examples of use: I can now jog 8 miles whereas I used to jog only 3 miles. So, I can now jog 5 miles more than I used to. Example 7.2.  Compare 12 and 5 by subtraction. 12 − 5 = 7 This means that 12 is 7 more than 5. Example 7.3.  Comparing 8 miles and 5 gallons by subtraction makes no sense. 8 miles – 5 gallons = ? Example 7.4.  Compare 36 and 4 by division. 36 ÷ 4 = 9 This means that 36 is 9 times as large as 4. Recall that 36÷4 = 9 can be expressed as . Example 7.5.  Compare 8 miles and 2 miles by division. This means that 8 miles is 4 times as large as 2 miles. Example of use: I can jog 8 miles to your 2 miles. Or, for every 2 miles that you jog, I jog 8. So, I jog 4 times as many miles as you jog. Notice that when like quantities are being compared by division, we drop the units. Another way of looking at this is that the units divide out (cancel). Example 7.6.  Compare 30 miles and 2 gallons by division. Example of use: A particular car goes 30 miles on 2 gallons of gasoline. This is the same as getting 15 miles to 1 gallon of gasoline. Notice that when the quantities being compared by division are unlike quantities, we do not drop the units. Practice Set A Make the following comparisons and interpret each one. Exercise 7.2.1. (Go to Solution) Compare 10 diskettes to 2 diskettes by subtraction: division: Exercise 7.2.2. (Go to Solution) Compare, if possible, 16 bananas and 2 bags by subtraction: division:  || 
book4_ch07_2_5	Ratios and Rates Ratio A comparison, by division, of two pure numbers or two like denominate numbers is a ratio. The comparison by division of the pure numbers and the like denominate numbers are examples of ratios. Rate A comparison, by division, of two unlike denominate numbers is a rate. The comparison by division of two unlike denominate numbers, such as are examples of rates. Let's agree to represent two numbers (pure or denominate) with the letters a and b . This means that we're letting a represent some number and b represent some, perhaps different, number. With this agreement, we can write the ratio of the two numbers a and b as or The ratio is read as " a to b ." The ratio is read as " b to a ." Since a ratio or a rate can be expressed as a fraction, it may be reducible. Sample Set B Example 7.7.  The ratio 30 to 2 can be expressed as . Reducing, we get . The ratio 30 to 2 is equivalent to the ratio 15 to 1. Example 7.8.  The rate "4 televisions to 12 people" can be expressed as . The meaning of this rate is that "for every 4 televisions, there are 12 people." Reducing, we get . The meaning of this rate is that "for every 1 television, there are 3 people.” Thus, the rate of "4 televisions to 12 people" is the same as the rate of "1 television to 3 people." Practice Set B Write the following ratios and rates as fractions. Exercise 7.2.3. (Go to Solution) 3 to 2 Exercise 7.2.4. (Go to Solution) 1 to 9 Exercise 7.2.5. (Go to Solution) 5 books to 4 people Exercise 7.2.6. (Go to Solution) 120 miles to 2 hours Exercise 7.2.7. (Go to Solution) 8 liters to 3 liters Write the following ratios and rates in the form " a to b ." Reduce when necessary. Exercise 7.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.12. (Go to Solution) Ratios and Rates Ratio A comparison, by division, of two pure numbers or two like denominate numbers is a ratio. The comparison by division of the pure numbers and the like denominate numbers are examples of ratios. Rate A comparison, by division, of two unlike denominate numbers is a rate. The comparison by division of two unlike denominate numbers, such as are examples of rates. Let's agree to represent two numbers (pure or denominate) with the letters a and b . This means that we're letting a represent some number and b represent some, perhaps different, number. With this agreement, we can write the ratio of the two numbers a and b as or The ratio is read as " a to b ." The ratio is read as " b to a ." Since a ratio or a rate can be expressed as a fraction, it may be reducible. Sample Set B Example 7.7.  The ratio 30 to 2 can be expressed as . Reducing, we get . The ratio 30 to 2 is equivalent to the ratio 15 to 1. Example 7.8.  The rate "4 televisions to 12 people" can be expressed as . The meaning of this rate is that "for every 4 televisions, there are 12 people." Reducing, we get . The meaning of this rate is that "for every 1 television, there are 3 people.” Thus, the rate of "4 televisions to 12 people" is the same as the rate of "1 television to 3 people." Practice Set B Write the following ratios and rates as fractions. Exercise 7.2.3. (Go to Solution) 3 to 2 Exercise 7.2.4. (Go to Solution) 1 to 9 Exercise 7.2.5. (Go to Solution) 5 books to 4 people Exercise 7.2.6. (Go to Solution) 120 miles to 2 hours Exercise 7.2.7. (Go to Solution) 8 liters to 3 liters Write the following ratios and rates in the form " a to b ." Reduce when necessary. Exercise 7.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.2.12. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch07_3	 || Ratios, Rates, and Proportions Ratio, Rate We have defined a ratio as a comparison, by division, of two pure numbers or two like denominate numbers. We have defined a rate as a comparison, by division, of two unlike denominate numbers. Proportion A proportion is a statement that two ratios or rates are equal. The following two examples show how to read proportions. Sample Set A Write or read each proportion. Example 7.9.  3 is to 5 as 12 is to 20 Example 7.10.  10 items is to 5 dollars as 2 items is to 1 dollar Example 7.11.  8 is to 12 as 16 is to 24. Example 7.12.  50 milligrams of vitamin C is to 1 tablet as 300 milligrams of vitamin C is to 6 tablets. Practice Set A Write or read each proportion. Exercise 7.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.3. (Go to Solution) 15 is to 4 as 75 is to 20. Exercise 7.3.4. (Go to Solution) 2 plates are to 1 tray as 20 plates are to 10 trays.  || Finding the Missing Factor in a Proportion Many practical problems can be solved by writing the given information as propor­tions. Such proportions will be composed of three specified numbers and one unknown number. It is customary to let a letter, such as x , represent the unknown number. An example of such a proportion is This proportion is read as " x is to 4 as 20 is to 16." There is a method of solving these proportions that is based on the equality of fractions. Recall that two fractions are equivalent if and only if their cross products are equal. For example, Notice that in a proportion that contains three specified numbers and a letter representing an unknown quantity, that regardless of where the letter appears, the following situation always occurs. We recognize this as a multiplication statement. Specifically, it is a missing factor statement. (See Section 4.7 for a discussion of multiplication statements.) For example, Each of these statements is a multiplication statement. Specifically, each is a missing factor statement. (The letter used here is x , whereas M was used in Section 4.7.) Finding the Missing Factor in a Proportion The missing factor in a missing factor statement can be determined by dividing the product by the known factor, that is, if x represents the missing factor, then x = ( product ) ÷ ( known factor ) Sample Set B Find the unknown number in each proportion. Example 7.13.  . Find the cross product. This mean that , or 5 is to 4 as 20 is to 16. Example 7.14.  . Find the cross product. This means that , or, 5 is to 4 as 20 is to 6. Example 7.15.  Find the cross product. The means that , or, 16 is to 3 as 64 is to 12. Example 7.16.  Find the cross products. Practice Set B Find the unknown number in each proportion. Exercise 7.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.8. (Go to Solution)  || Proportions Involving Rates Recall that a rate is a comparison, by division, of unlike denominate numbers. We must be careful when setting up proportions that involve rates. The form is impor­tant. For example, if a rate involves two types of units, say unit type 1 and unit type 2, we can write or Both cross products produce a statement of the type (unit type 1) ⋅ (unit type 2) = (unit type 1) ⋅ (unit type 2) which we take to mean the comparison Examples of correctly expressed proportions are the following: However, if we write the same type of units on different sides, such as, the cross product produces a statement of the form We can see that this is an incorrect comparison by observing the following example: It is incorrect to write for two reason. The cross product is numerically wrong: (2⋅4 ≠ 3⋅6). The cross product produces the statement “hooks are to hooks as poles are to poles,” which makes no sense.  || 
book4_ch07_3_2	Ratios, Rates, and Proportions Ratio, Rate We have defined a ratio as a comparison, by division, of two pure numbers or two like denominate numbers. We have defined a rate as a comparison, by division, of two unlike denominate numbers. Proportion A proportion is a statement that two ratios or rates are equal. The following two examples show how to read proportions. Sample Set A Write or read each proportion. Example 7.9.  3 is to 5 as 12 is to 20 Example 7.10.  10 items is to 5 dollars as 2 items is to 1 dollar Example 7.11.  8 is to 12 as 16 is to 24. Example 7.12.  50 milligrams of vitamin C is to 1 tablet as 300 milligrams of vitamin C is to 6 tablets. Practice Set A Write or read each proportion. Exercise 7.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.3. (Go to Solution) 15 is to 4 as 75 is to 20. Exercise 7.3.4. (Go to Solution) 2 plates are to 1 tray as 20 plates are to 10 trays. Ratios, Rates, and Proportions Ratio, Rate We have defined a ratio as a comparison, by division, of two pure numbers or two like denominate numbers. We have defined a rate as a comparison, by division, of two unlike denominate numbers. Proportion A proportion is a statement that two ratios or rates are equal. The following two examples show how to read proportions. Sample Set A Write or read each proportion. Example 7.9.  3 is to 5 as 12 is to 20 Example 7.10.  10 items is to 5 dollars as 2 items is to 1 dollar Example 7.11.  8 is to 12 as 16 is to 24. Example 7.12.  50 milligrams of vitamin C is to 1 tablet as 300 milligrams of vitamin C is to 6 tablets. Practice Set A Write or read each proportion. Exercise 7.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.3. (Go to Solution) 15 is to 4 as 75 is to 20. Exercise 7.3.4. (Go to Solution) 2 plates are to 1 tray as 20 plates are to 10 trays.  || 
book4_ch07_3_5	Finding the Missing Factor in a Proportion Many practical problems can be solved by writing the given information as propor­tions. Such proportions will be composed of three specified numbers and one unknown number. It is customary to let a letter, such as x , represent the unknown number. An example of such a proportion is This proportion is read as " x is to 4 as 20 is to 16." There is a method of solving these proportions that is based on the equality of fractions. Recall that two fractions are equivalent if and only if their cross products are equal. For example, Notice that in a proportion that contains three specified numbers and a letter representing an unknown quantity, that regardless of where the letter appears, the following situation always occurs. We recognize this as a multiplication statement. Specifically, it is a missing factor statement. (See Section 4.7 for a discussion of multiplication statements.) For example, Each of these statements is a multiplication statement. Specifically, each is a missing factor statement. (The letter used here is x , whereas M was used in Section 4.7.) Finding the Missing Factor in a Proportion The missing factor in a missing factor statement can be determined by dividing the product by the known factor, that is, if x represents the missing factor, then x = ( product ) ÷ ( known factor ) Sample Set B Find the unknown number in each proportion. Example 7.13.  . Find the cross product. This mean that , or 5 is to 4 as 20 is to 16. Example 7.14.  . Find the cross product. This means that , or, 5 is to 4 as 20 is to 6. Example 7.15.  Find the cross product. The means that , or, 16 is to 3 as 64 is to 12. Example 7.16.  Find the cross products. Practice Set B Find the unknown number in each proportion. Exercise 7.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.8. (Go to Solution) Finding the Missing Factor in a Proportion Many practical problems can be solved by writing the given information as propor­tions. Such proportions will be composed of three specified numbers and one unknown number. It is customary to let a letter, such as x , represent the unknown number. An example of such a proportion is This proportion is read as " x is to 4 as 20 is to 16." There is a method of solving these proportions that is based on the equality of fractions. Recall that two fractions are equivalent if and only if their cross products are equal. For example, Notice that in a proportion that contains three specified numbers and a letter representing an unknown quantity, that regardless of where the letter appears, the following situation always occurs. We recognize this as a multiplication statement. Specifically, it is a missing factor statement. (See Section 4.7 for a discussion of multiplication statements.) For example, Each of these statements is a multiplication statement. Specifically, each is a missing factor statement. (The letter used here is x , whereas M was used in Section 4.7.) Finding the Missing Factor in a Proportion The missing factor in a missing factor statement can be determined by dividing the product by the known factor, that is, if x represents the missing factor, then x = ( product ) ÷ ( known factor ) Sample Set B Find the unknown number in each proportion. Example 7.13.  . Find the cross product. This mean that , or 5 is to 4 as 20 is to 16. Example 7.14.  . Find the cross product. This means that , or, 5 is to 4 as 20 is to 6. Example 7.15.  Find the cross product. The means that , or, 16 is to 3 as 64 is to 12. Example 7.16.  Find the cross products. Practice Set B Find the unknown number in each proportion. Exercise 7.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 7.3.8. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch07_3_8	Proportions Involving Rates Recall that a rate is a comparison, by division, of unlike denominate numbers. We must be careful when setting up proportions that involve rates. The form is impor­tant. For example, if a rate involves two types of units, say unit type 1 and unit type 2, we can write or Both cross products produce a statement of the type (unit type 1) ⋅ (unit type 2) = (unit type 1) ⋅ (unit type 2) which we take to mean the comparison Examples of correctly expressed proportions are the following: However, if we write the same type of units on different sides, such as, the cross product produces a statement of the form We can see that this is an incorrect comparison by observing the following example: It is incorrect to write for two reason. The cross product is numerically wrong: (2⋅4 ≠ 3⋅6). The cross product produces the statement “hooks are to hooks as poles are to poles,” which makes no sense. Proportions Involving Rates Recall that a rate is a comparison, by division, of unlike denominate numbers. We must be careful when setting up proportions that involve rates. The form is impor­tant. For example, if a rate involves two types of units, say unit type 1 and unit type 2, we can write or Both cross products produce a statement of the type (unit type 1) ⋅ (unit type 2) = (unit type 1) ⋅ (unit type 2) which we take to mean the comparison Examples of correctly expressed proportions are the following: However, if we write the same type of units on different sides, such as, the cross product produces a statement of the form We can see that this is an incorrect comparison by observing the following example: It is incorrect to write for two reason. The cross product is numerically wrong: (2⋅4 ≠ 3⋅6). The cross product produces the statement “hooks are to hooks as poles are to poles,” which makes no sense.  || 
book4_ch07_4	 || The Five-Step Method In Section 7.3 we noted that many practical problems can be solved by writing the given information as proportions. Such proportions will be composed of three specified numbers and one unknown number represented by a letter. The first and most important part of solving a proportion problem is to deter­mine, by careful reading, what the unknown quantity is and to represent it with some letter. The Five-Step Method The five-step method for solving proportion problems: By careful reading, determine what the unknown quantity is and represent it with some letter. There will be only one unknown in a problem. Identify the three specified numbers. Determine which comparisons are to be made and set up the proportion. Solve the proportion (using the methods of Section 7.3). Interpret and write a conclusion in a sentence with the appropriate units of measure. Step 1 is extremely important. Many problems go unsolved because time is not taken to establish what quantity is to be found. When solving an applied problem, always begin by determining the unknown quantity and representing it with a letter.  || Problem Solving Sample Set A Example 7.17.  On a map, 2 inches represents 25 miles. How many miles are represented by 8 inches? Step 1: The unknown quantity is miles. Let x = number of miles represented by 8 inches Step 2: The three specified numbers are 2 inches 25 miles 8 inches Step 3: The comparisons are 2 inches to 25 miles → 8 inches to x miles → Proportions involving ratios and rates are more readily solved by suspending the units while doing the computations. Step 4: In step 1, we let x represent the number of miles. So, x represents 100 miles. Step 5: If 2 inches represents 25 miles, then 8 inches represents 100 miles. Try Exercise 7.4.1. in the section called “Practice Set A”. Example 7.18.  An acid solution is composed of 7 parts water to 2 parts acid. How many parts of water are there in a solution composed of 20 parts acid? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the number of parts of water. Let n = number of parts of water. Step 2: The three specified numbers are 7 parts water 2 parts acid 20 parts acid Step 3: The comparisons are 7 parts water to 2 parts acid → n parts water to 20 parts acid → Step 4: In step 1 we let n represent the number of parts of water. So, n represents 70 parts of water. Step 5: 7 parts water to 2 parts acid indicates 70 parts water to 20 parts acid. Try in the section called “Practice Set A”. Example 7.19.  A 5-foot girl casts a -foot shadow at a particular time of the day. How tall is a person who casts a 3-foot shadow at the same time of the day? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the height of the person. Let h = height of the person. Step 2: The three specified numbers are 5 feet ( height of girl) feet (length of shadow) 3 feet (length of shadow) Step 3: The comparisons are 5-foot girl is to foot shadow → h-foot person is to 3-foot shadow → Step 4: Step 5: A person who casts a 3-foot shadow at this particular time of the day is feet tall. Try Exercise 7.4.3. in the section called “Practice Set A”. Example 7.20.  The ratio of men to women in a particular town is 3 to 5. How many women are there in the town if there are 19,200 men in town? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the number of women in town. Let x = number of women in town. Step 2: The three specified numbers are 3 5 19,200 Step 3: The comparisons are 3 men to 5 women → 19,200 men to x women → Step 4: Step 5: There are 32,000 women in town. Example 7.21.  The rate of wins to losses of a particular baseball team is . How many games did this team lose if they won 63 games? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the number of games lost. Let n = number of games lost. Step 2: Since → means 9 wins to 2 losses, the three specified numbers are 9 (wins) 2 (losses) 63 (wins) Step 3: The comparisons are 9 wins to 2 losses→ 63 wins to n losses → Step 4: Step 5: This team had 14 losses. Try Exercise 7.4.4. in the section called “Practice Set A”. Practice Set A Solve each problem. Exercise 7.4.1. (Go to Solution) On a map, 3 inches represents 100 miles. How many miles are represented by 15 inches? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.2. (Go to Solution) An alcohol solution is composed of 14 parts water to 3 parts alcohol. How many parts of alcohol are in a solution that is composed of 112 parts water? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.3. (Go to Solution) A -foot woman casts a 7-foot shadow at a particular time of the day. How long of a shadow does a 3-foot boy cast at that same time of day? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.4. (Go to Solution) The rate of houseplants to outside plants at a nursery is 4 to 9. If there are 384 houseplants in the nursery, how many outside plants are there? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.5. (Go to Solution) The odds for a particular event occurring are 11 to 2. (For every 11 times the event does occur, it will not occur 2 times.) How many times does the event occur if it does not occur 18 times? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.6. (Go to Solution) The rate of passing grades to failing grades in a particular chemistry class is . If there are 21 passing grades, how many failing grades are there? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5:  || 
book4_ch07_4_2	The Five-Step Method In Section 7.3 we noted that many practical problems can be solved by writing the given information as proportions. Such proportions will be composed of three specified numbers and one unknown number represented by a letter. The first and most important part of solving a proportion problem is to deter­mine, by careful reading, what the unknown quantity is and to represent it with some letter. The Five-Step Method The five-step method for solving proportion problems: By careful reading, determine what the unknown quantity is and represent it with some letter. There will be only one unknown in a problem. Identify the three specified numbers. Determine which comparisons are to be made and set up the proportion. Solve the proportion (using the methods of Section 7.3). Interpret and write a conclusion in a sentence with the appropriate units of measure. Step 1 is extremely important. Many problems go unsolved because time is not taken to establish what quantity is to be found. When solving an applied problem, always begin by determining the unknown quantity and representing it with a letter. The Five-Step Method In Section 7.3 we noted that many practical problems can be solved by writing the given information as proportions. Such proportions will be composed of three specified numbers and one unknown number represented by a letter. The first and most important part of solving a proportion problem is to deter­mine, by careful reading, what the unknown quantity is and to represent it with some letter. The Five-Step Method The five-step method for solving proportion problems: By careful reading, determine what the unknown quantity is and represent it with some letter. There will be only one unknown in a problem. Identify the three specified numbers. Determine which comparisons are to be made and set up the proportion. Solve the proportion (using the methods of Section 7.3). Interpret and write a conclusion in a sentence with the appropriate units of measure. Step 1 is extremely important. Many problems go unsolved because time is not taken to establish what quantity is to be found. When solving an applied problem, always begin by determining the unknown quantity and representing it with a letter.  || 
book4_ch07_4_3	Problem Solving Sample Set A Example 7.17.  On a map, 2 inches represents 25 miles. How many miles are represented by 8 inches? Step 1: The unknown quantity is miles. Let x = number of miles represented by 8 inches Step 2: The three specified numbers are 2 inches 25 miles 8 inches Step 3: The comparisons are 2 inches to 25 miles → 8 inches to x miles → Proportions involving ratios and rates are more readily solved by suspending the units while doing the computations. Step 4: In step 1, we let x represent the number of miles. So, x represents 100 miles. Step 5: If 2 inches represents 25 miles, then 8 inches represents 100 miles. Try Exercise 7.4.1. in the section called “Practice Set A”. Example 7.18.  An acid solution is composed of 7 parts water to 2 parts acid. How many parts of water are there in a solution composed of 20 parts acid? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the number of parts of water. Let n = number of parts of water. Step 2: The three specified numbers are 7 parts water 2 parts acid 20 parts acid Step 3: The comparisons are 7 parts water to 2 parts acid → n parts water to 20 parts acid → Step 4: In step 1 we let n represent the number of parts of water. So, n represents 70 parts of water. Step 5: 7 parts water to 2 parts acid indicates 70 parts water to 20 parts acid. Try in the section called “Practice Set A”. Example 7.19.  A 5-foot girl casts a -foot shadow at a particular time of the day. How tall is a person who casts a 3-foot shadow at the same time of the day? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the height of the person. Let h = height of the person. Step 2: The three specified numbers are 5 feet ( height of girl) feet (length of shadow) 3 feet (length of shadow) Step 3: The comparisons are 5-foot girl is to foot shadow → h-foot person is to 3-foot shadow → Step 4: Step 5: A person who casts a 3-foot shadow at this particular time of the day is feet tall. Try Exercise 7.4.3. in the section called “Practice Set A”. Example 7.20.  The ratio of men to women in a particular town is 3 to 5. How many women are there in the town if there are 19,200 men in town? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the number of women in town. Let x = number of women in town. Step 2: The three specified numbers are 3 5 19,200 Step 3: The comparisons are 3 men to 5 women → 19,200 men to x women → Step 4: Step 5: There are 32,000 women in town. Example 7.21.  The rate of wins to losses of a particular baseball team is . How many games did this team lose if they won 63 games? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the number of games lost. Let n = number of games lost. Step 2: Since → means 9 wins to 2 losses, the three specified numbers are 9 (wins) 2 (losses) 63 (wins) Step 3: The comparisons are 9 wins to 2 losses→ 63 wins to n losses → Step 4: Step 5: This team had 14 losses. Try Exercise 7.4.4. in the section called “Practice Set A”. Practice Set A Solve each problem. Exercise 7.4.1. (Go to Solution) On a map, 3 inches represents 100 miles. How many miles are represented by 15 inches? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.2. (Go to Solution) An alcohol solution is composed of 14 parts water to 3 parts alcohol. How many parts of alcohol are in a solution that is composed of 112 parts water? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.3. (Go to Solution) A -foot woman casts a 7-foot shadow at a particular time of the day. How long of a shadow does a 3-foot boy cast at that same time of day? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.4. (Go to Solution) The rate of houseplants to outside plants at a nursery is 4 to 9. If there are 384 houseplants in the nursery, how many outside plants are there? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.5. (Go to Solution) The odds for a particular event occurring are 11 to 2. (For every 11 times the event does occur, it will not occur 2 times.) How many times does the event occur if it does not occur 18 times? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.6. (Go to Solution) The rate of passing grades to failing grades in a particular chemistry class is . If there are 21 passing grades, how many failing grades are there? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Problem Solving Sample Set A Example 7.17.  On a map, 2 inches represents 25 miles. How many miles are represented by 8 inches? Step 1: The unknown quantity is miles. Let x = number of miles represented by 8 inches Step 2: The three specified numbers are 2 inches 25 miles 8 inches Step 3: The comparisons are 2 inches to 25 miles → 8 inches to x miles → Proportions involving ratios and rates are more readily solved by suspending the units while doing the computations. Step 4: In step 1, we let x represent the number of miles. So, x represents 100 miles. Step 5: If 2 inches represents 25 miles, then 8 inches represents 100 miles. Try Exercise 7.4.1. in the section called “Practice Set A”. Example 7.18.  An acid solution is composed of 7 parts water to 2 parts acid. How many parts of water are there in a solution composed of 20 parts acid? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the number of parts of water. Let n = number of parts of water. Step 2: The three specified numbers are 7 parts water 2 parts acid 20 parts acid Step 3: The comparisons are 7 parts water to 2 parts acid → n parts water to 20 parts acid → Step 4: In step 1 we let n represent the number of parts of water. So, n represents 70 parts of water. Step 5: 7 parts water to 2 parts acid indicates 70 parts water to 20 parts acid. Try in the section called “Practice Set A”. Example 7.19.  A 5-foot girl casts a -foot shadow at a particular time of the day. How tall is a person who casts a 3-foot shadow at the same time of the day? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the height of the person. Let h = height of the person. Step 2: The three specified numbers are 5 feet ( height of girl) feet (length of shadow) 3 feet (length of shadow) Step 3: The comparisons are 5-foot girl is to foot shadow → h-foot person is to 3-foot shadow → Step 4: Step 5: A person who casts a 3-foot shadow at this particular time of the day is feet tall. Try Exercise 7.4.3. in the section called “Practice Set A”. Example 7.20.  The ratio of men to women in a particular town is 3 to 5. How many women are there in the town if there are 19,200 men in town? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the number of women in town. Let x = number of women in town. Step 2: The three specified numbers are 3 5 19,200 Step 3: The comparisons are 3 men to 5 women → 19,200 men to x women → Step 4: Step 5: There are 32,000 women in town. Example 7.21.  The rate of wins to losses of a particular baseball team is . How many games did this team lose if they won 63 games? Step 1: The unknown quantity is the number of games lost. Let n = number of games lost. Step 2: Since → means 9 wins to 2 losses, the three specified numbers are 9 (wins) 2 (losses) 63 (wins) Step 3: The comparisons are 9 wins to 2 losses→ 63 wins to n losses → Step 4: Step 5: This team had 14 losses. Try Exercise 7.4.4. in the section called “Practice Set A”. Practice Set A Solve each problem. Exercise 7.4.1. (Go to Solution) On a map, 3 inches represents 100 miles. How many miles are represented by 15 inches? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.2. (Go to Solution) An alcohol solution is composed of 14 parts water to 3 parts alcohol. How many parts of alcohol are in a solution that is composed of 112 parts water? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.3. (Go to Solution) A -foot woman casts a 7-foot shadow at a particular time of the day. How long of a shadow does a 3-foot boy cast at that same time of day? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.4. (Go to Solution) The rate of houseplants to outside plants at a nursery is 4 to 9. If there are 384 houseplants in the nursery, how many outside plants are there? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.5. (Go to Solution) The odds for a particular event occurring are 11 to 2. (For every 11 times the event does occur, it will not occur 2 times.) How many times does the event occur if it does not occur 18 times? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5: Exercise 7.4.6. (Go to Solution) The rate of passing grades to failing grades in a particular chemistry class is . If there are 21 passing grades, how many failing grades are there? Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: Step 4: Step 5:  || 
book4_ch07_5	 || Ratios and Percents Ratio, Percent We defined a ratio as a comparison, by division, of two pure numbers or two like denominate numbers. A most convenient number to compare numbers to is 100. Ratios in which one number is compared to 100 are called percents. The word percent comes from the Latin word "per centum." The word "per" means "for each" or "for every," and the word "centum" means "hundred." Thus, we have the following definition. Percent means “for each hundred," or "for every hundred." The symbol % is used to represent the word percent. Sample Set A Example 7.22.  The ratio 26 to 100 can be written as 26%. We read 26% as "twenty-six percent." Example 7.23.  The ratio can be written as 165%. We read 165% as "one hundred sixty-five percent." Example 7.24.  The percent 38% can be written as the fraction . Example 7.25.  The percent 210% can be written as the fraction or the mixed number or 2.1. Example 7.26.  Since one dollar is 100 cents, 25 cents is of a dollar. This implies that 25 cents is 25% of one dollar. Practice Set A Exercise 7.5.1. (Go to Solution) Write the ratio 16 to 100 as a percent. Exercise 7.5.2. (Go to Solution) Write the ratio 195 to 100 as a percent. Exercise 7.5.3. (Go to Solution) Write the percent 83% as a ratio in fractional form. Exercise 7.5.4. (Go to Solution) Write the percent 362% as a ratio in fractional form.  || The Relationship Between Fractions, Decimals, and Percents – Making Conversions Since a percent is a ratio, and a ratio can be written as a fraction, and a fraction can be written as a decimal, any of these forms can be converted to any other. Before we proceed to the problems in the section called “Sample Set B” and the section called “Practice Set B”, let's summarize the conversion techniques. Table 7.1. Conversion Techniques – Fractions, Decimals, Percents To Convert a Fraction To Convert a Decimal To Convert a Percent To a decimal: Divide the numerator by the denominator To a fraction: Read the decimal and reduce the resulting fraction To a decimal: Move the decimal point 2 places to the left and drop the % symbol To a percent: Convert the fraction first to a decimal, then move the decimal point 2 places to the right and affix the % symbol. To a percent: Move the decimal point 2 places to the right and affix the % symbol To a fraction: Drop the % sign and write the number “over” 100. Reduce, if possible. Sample Set B Example 7.27.  Convert 12% to a decimal. Note that The % symbol is dropped, and the decimal point moves 2 places to the left. Example 7.28.  Convert 0.75 to a percent. Note that The % symbol is affixed, and the decimal point moves 2 units to the right. Example 7.29.  Convert to a percent. We see in Example 7.28 that we can convert a decimal to a percent. We also know that we can convert a fraction to a decimal. Thus, we can see that if we first convert the fraction to a decimal, we can then convert the decimal to a percent. or Example 7.30.  Convert 42% to a fraction. or Practice Set B Exercise 7.5.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 21% to a decimal. Exercise 7.5.6. (Go to Solution) Convert 461% to a decimal. Exercise 7.5.7. (Go to Solution) Convert 0.55 to a percent. Exercise 7.5.8. (Go to Solution) Convert 5.64 to a percent. Exercise 7.5.9. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent. Exercise 7.5.10. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent Exercise 7.5.11. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent.  || 
book4_ch07_5_2	Ratios and Percents Ratio, Percent We defined a ratio as a comparison, by division, of two pure numbers or two like denominate numbers. A most convenient number to compare numbers to is 100. Ratios in which one number is compared to 100 are called percents. The word percent comes from the Latin word "per centum." The word "per" means "for each" or "for every," and the word "centum" means "hundred." Thus, we have the following definition. Percent means “for each hundred," or "for every hundred." The symbol % is used to represent the word percent. Sample Set A Example 7.22.  The ratio 26 to 100 can be written as 26%. We read 26% as "twenty-six percent." Example 7.23.  The ratio can be written as 165%. We read 165% as "one hundred sixty-five percent." Example 7.24.  The percent 38% can be written as the fraction . Example 7.25.  The percent 210% can be written as the fraction or the mixed number or 2.1. Example 7.26.  Since one dollar is 100 cents, 25 cents is of a dollar. This implies that 25 cents is 25% of one dollar. Practice Set A Exercise 7.5.1. (Go to Solution) Write the ratio 16 to 100 as a percent. Exercise 7.5.2. (Go to Solution) Write the ratio 195 to 100 as a percent. Exercise 7.5.3. (Go to Solution) Write the percent 83% as a ratio in fractional form. Exercise 7.5.4. (Go to Solution) Write the percent 362% as a ratio in fractional form. Ratios and Percents Ratio, Percent We defined a ratio as a comparison, by division, of two pure numbers or two like denominate numbers. A most convenient number to compare numbers to is 100. Ratios in which one number is compared to 100 are called percents. The word percent comes from the Latin word "per centum." The word "per" means "for each" or "for every," and the word "centum" means "hundred." Thus, we have the following definition. Percent means “for each hundred," or "for every hundred." The symbol % is used to represent the word percent. Sample Set A Example 7.22.  The ratio 26 to 100 can be written as 26%. We read 26% as "twenty-six percent." Example 7.23.  The ratio can be written as 165%. We read 165% as "one hundred sixty-five percent." Example 7.24.  The percent 38% can be written as the fraction . Example 7.25.  The percent 210% can be written as the fraction or the mixed number or 2.1. Example 7.26.  Since one dollar is 100 cents, 25 cents is of a dollar. This implies that 25 cents is 25% of one dollar. Practice Set A Exercise 7.5.1. (Go to Solution) Write the ratio 16 to 100 as a percent. Exercise 7.5.2. (Go to Solution) Write the ratio 195 to 100 as a percent. Exercise 7.5.3. (Go to Solution) Write the percent 83% as a ratio in fractional form. Exercise 7.5.4. (Go to Solution) Write the percent 362% as a ratio in fractional form.  || 
book4_ch07_5_5	The Relationship Between Fractions, Decimals, and Percents – Making Conversions Since a percent is a ratio, and a ratio can be written as a fraction, and a fraction can be written as a decimal, any of these forms can be converted to any other. Before we proceed to the problems in the section called “Sample Set B” and the section called “Practice Set B”, let's summarize the conversion techniques. Table 7.1. Conversion Techniques – Fractions, Decimals, Percents To Convert a Fraction To Convert a Decimal To Convert a Percent To a decimal: Divide the numerator by the denominator To a fraction: Read the decimal and reduce the resulting fraction To a decimal: Move the decimal point 2 places to the left and drop the % symbol To a percent: Convert the fraction first to a decimal, then move the decimal point 2 places to the right and affix the % symbol. To a percent: Move the decimal point 2 places to the right and affix the % symbol To a fraction: Drop the % sign and write the number “over” 100. Reduce, if possible. Sample Set B Example 7.27.  Convert 12% to a decimal. Note that The % symbol is dropped, and the decimal point moves 2 places to the left. Example 7.28.  Convert 0.75 to a percent. Note that The % symbol is affixed, and the decimal point moves 2 units to the right. Example 7.29.  Convert to a percent. We see in Example 7.28 that we can convert a decimal to a percent. We also know that we can convert a fraction to a decimal. Thus, we can see that if we first convert the fraction to a decimal, we can then convert the decimal to a percent. or Example 7.30.  Convert 42% to a fraction. or Practice Set B Exercise 7.5.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 21% to a decimal. Exercise 7.5.6. (Go to Solution) Convert 461% to a decimal. Exercise 7.5.7. (Go to Solution) Convert 0.55 to a percent. Exercise 7.5.8. (Go to Solution) Convert 5.64 to a percent. Exercise 7.5.9. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent. Exercise 7.5.10. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent Exercise 7.5.11. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent. The Relationship Between Fractions, Decimals, and Percents – Making Conversions Since a percent is a ratio, and a ratio can be written as a fraction, and a fraction can be written as a decimal, any of these forms can be converted to any other. Before we proceed to the problems in the section called “Sample Set B” and the section called “Practice Set B”, let's summarize the conversion techniques. Table 7.1. Conversion Techniques – Fractions, Decimals, Percents To Convert a Fraction To Convert a Decimal To Convert a Percent To a decimal: Divide the numerator by the denominator To a fraction: Read the decimal and reduce the resulting fraction To a decimal: Move the decimal point 2 places to the left and drop the % symbol To a percent: Convert the fraction first to a decimal, then move the decimal point 2 places to the right and affix the % symbol. To a percent: Move the decimal point 2 places to the right and affix the % symbol To a fraction: Drop the % sign and write the number “over” 100. Reduce, if possible. Sample Set B Example 7.27.  Convert 12% to a decimal. Note that The % symbol is dropped, and the decimal point moves 2 places to the left. Example 7.28.  Convert 0.75 to a percent. Note that The % symbol is affixed, and the decimal point moves 2 units to the right. Example 7.29.  Convert to a percent. We see in Example 7.28 that we can convert a decimal to a percent. We also know that we can convert a fraction to a decimal. Thus, we can see that if we first convert the fraction to a decimal, we can then convert the decimal to a percent. or Example 7.30.  Convert 42% to a fraction. or Practice Set B Exercise 7.5.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 21% to a decimal. Exercise 7.5.6. (Go to Solution) Convert 461% to a decimal. Exercise 7.5.7. (Go to Solution) Convert 0.55 to a percent. Exercise 7.5.8. (Go to Solution) Convert 5.64 to a percent. Exercise 7.5.9. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent. Exercise 7.5.10. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent Exercise 7.5.11. (Go to Solution) Convert to a percent.  || 
book4_ch07_6	 || Conversions Involving Fractions of One Percent Percents such as %, %, %, and %, where 1% has not been attained, are fractions of 1%. This implies that Since "percent" means "for each hundred," and "of" means "times," we have Sample Set A Example 7.31.  Convert % to a fraction. Example 7.32.  Convert % to a decimal. Practice Set A Exercise 7.6.1. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a fraction. Exercise 7.6.2. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a fraction. Exercise 7.6.3. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a fraction.  || Conversions Involving Nonterminating Fractions We must be careful when changing a fraction of 1% to a decimal. The number , as we know, has a nonterminating decimal representation. Therefore, it cannot be expressed exactly as a decimal. When converting nonterminating fractions of 1% to decimals, it is customary to express the fraction as a rounded decimal with at least three decimal places. Converting a Nonterminating Fraction to a Decimal To convert a nonterminating fraction of 1% to a decimal: Convert the fraction as a rounded decimal. Move the decimal point two digits to the left and remove the percent sign. Sample Set B Example 7.33.  Convert % to a three-place decimal. Convert to a decimal. Since we wish the resulting decimal to have three decimal digits, and removing the percent sign will account for two of them, we need to round to one place (2 + 1 = 3). % to one decimal place. Move the decimal point two digits to the left and remove the % sign. We'll need to add zeros to locate the decimal point in the correct location. to 3 decimal places Example 7.34.  Convert % to a four-place decimal. Since we wish the resulting decimal to have four decimal places, and removing the percent sign will account for two, we to round to two places. to two decimal places. Move the decimal point two places to the left and drop the percent sign. to four decimal places. Example 7.35.  Convert % to a decimal rounded to ten thousandths. Since we wish the resulting decimal to be rounded to ten thousandths (four decimal places), and removing the percent sign will account for two, we need to round to two places. to two decimal places. Move the decimal point to the left two places and drop the percent sign. correct to ten thousandths. Practice Set B Exercise 7.6.4. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a three-place decimal. Exercise 7.6.5. (Go to Solution) Convert to a decimal rounded to ten thousandths.  || 
book4_ch07_6_2	Conversions Involving Fractions of One Percent Percents such as %, %, %, and %, where 1% has not been attained, are fractions of 1%. This implies that Since "percent" means "for each hundred," and "of" means "times," we have Sample Set A Example 7.31.  Convert % to a fraction. Example 7.32.  Convert % to a decimal. Practice Set A Exercise 7.6.1. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a fraction. Exercise 7.6.2. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a fraction. Exercise 7.6.3. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a fraction. Conversions Involving Fractions of One Percent Percents such as %, %, %, and %, where 1% has not been attained, are fractions of 1%. This implies that Since "percent" means "for each hundred," and "of" means "times," we have Sample Set A Example 7.31.  Convert % to a fraction. Example 7.32.  Convert % to a decimal. Practice Set A Exercise 7.6.1. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a fraction. Exercise 7.6.2. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a fraction. Exercise 7.6.3. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a fraction.  || 
book4_ch07_6_5	Conversions Involving Nonterminating Fractions We must be careful when changing a fraction of 1% to a decimal. The number , as we know, has a nonterminating decimal representation. Therefore, it cannot be expressed exactly as a decimal. When converting nonterminating fractions of 1% to decimals, it is customary to express the fraction as a rounded decimal with at least three decimal places. Converting a Nonterminating Fraction to a Decimal To convert a nonterminating fraction of 1% to a decimal: Convert the fraction as a rounded decimal. Move the decimal point two digits to the left and remove the percent sign. Sample Set B Example 7.33.  Convert % to a three-place decimal. Convert to a decimal. Since we wish the resulting decimal to have three decimal digits, and removing the percent sign will account for two of them, we need to round to one place (2 + 1 = 3). % to one decimal place. Move the decimal point two digits to the left and remove the % sign. We'll need to add zeros to locate the decimal point in the correct location. to 3 decimal places Example 7.34.  Convert % to a four-place decimal. Since we wish the resulting decimal to have four decimal places, and removing the percent sign will account for two, we to round to two places. to two decimal places. Move the decimal point two places to the left and drop the percent sign. to four decimal places. Example 7.35.  Convert % to a decimal rounded to ten thousandths. Since we wish the resulting decimal to be rounded to ten thousandths (four decimal places), and removing the percent sign will account for two, we need to round to two places. to two decimal places. Move the decimal point to the left two places and drop the percent sign. correct to ten thousandths. Practice Set B Exercise 7.6.4. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a three-place decimal. Exercise 7.6.5. (Go to Solution) Convert to a decimal rounded to ten thousandths. Conversions Involving Nonterminating Fractions We must be careful when changing a fraction of 1% to a decimal. The number , as we know, has a nonterminating decimal representation. Therefore, it cannot be expressed exactly as a decimal. When converting nonterminating fractions of 1% to decimals, it is customary to express the fraction as a rounded decimal with at least three decimal places. Converting a Nonterminating Fraction to a Decimal To convert a nonterminating fraction of 1% to a decimal: Convert the fraction as a rounded decimal. Move the decimal point two digits to the left and remove the percent sign. Sample Set B Example 7.33.  Convert % to a three-place decimal. Convert to a decimal. Since we wish the resulting decimal to have three decimal digits, and removing the percent sign will account for two of them, we need to round to one place (2 + 1 = 3). % to one decimal place. Move the decimal point two digits to the left and remove the % sign. We'll need to add zeros to locate the decimal point in the correct location. to 3 decimal places Example 7.34.  Convert % to a four-place decimal. Since we wish the resulting decimal to have four decimal places, and removing the percent sign will account for two, we to round to two places. to two decimal places. Move the decimal point two places to the left and drop the percent sign. to four decimal places. Example 7.35.  Convert % to a decimal rounded to ten thousandths. Since we wish the resulting decimal to be rounded to ten thousandths (four decimal places), and removing the percent sign will account for two, we need to round to two places. to two decimal places. Move the decimal point to the left two places and drop the percent sign. correct to ten thousandths. Practice Set B Exercise 7.6.4. (Go to Solution) Convert % to a three-place decimal. Exercise 7.6.5. (Go to Solution) Convert to a decimal rounded to ten thousandths.  || 
book4_ch07_7	 || Base, Percent, and Percentage There are three basic types of percent problems. Each type involves a base, a percent, and a percentage, and when they are translated from words to mathemati­cal symbols each becomes a multiplication statement. Examples of these types of problems are the following: What number is 30% of 50? (Missing product statement.) 15 is what percent of 50? (Missing factor statement.) 15 is 30% of what number? (Missing factor statement.) In problem 1, the product is missing. To solve the problem, we represent the missing product with P . P = 30% ⋅ 50 Percentage The missing product P is called the percentage. Percentage means part, or por­tion. In P = 30% ⋅50, P represents a particular part of 50. In problem 2, one of the factors is missing. Here we represent the missing factor with Q . 15 = Q ⋅ 50 Percent The missing factor is the percent. Percent, we know, means per 100, or part of 100. In 15 = Q ⋅50, Q indicates what part of 50 is being taken or considered. Specifi­cally, 15 = Q ⋅50 means that if 50 was to be divided into 100 equal parts, then Q indicates 15 are being considered. In problem 3, one of the factors is missing. Represent the missing factor with B . 15 = 30% ⋅ B Base The missing factor is the base. Some meanings of base are a source of supply, or a starting place. In 15 = 30% ⋅B , B indicates the amount of supply. Specifically, 15 = 30% ⋅B indicates that 15 represents 30% of the total supply. Each of these three types of problems is of the form ( percentage ) = ( percent ) ⋅ ( base ) We can determine any one of the three values given the other two using the methods discussed in Section 4.7.  || Finding the Percentage Sample Set A Example 7.36.  Thus, 15 is 30% of 50. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.1.. Example 7.37.  Thus, 34.2 is 36% of 95. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.1.. Example 7.38.  A salesperson, who gets a commission of 12% of each sale she makes, makes a sale of $8,400.00. How much is her commission? We need to determine what part of $8,400.00 is to be taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, the salesperson's commission is $1,008.00. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.2.. Example 7.39.  A girl, by practicing typing on her home computer, has been able to increase her typing speed by 110%. If she originally typed 16 words per minute, by how many words per minute was she able to increase her speed? We need to determine what part of 16 has been taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, the girl has increased her typing speed by 17.6 words per minute. Her new speed is 16 + 17.6 = 33.6 words per minute. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.3.. Example 7.40.  A student who makes $125 a month working part-time receives a 4% salary raise. What is the student's new monthly salary? With a 4% raise, this student will make 100% of the original salary + 4% of the original salary. This means the new salary will be 104% of the original salary. We need to determine what part of $125 is to be taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, this student's new monthly salary is $130. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.4.. Example 7.41.  An article of clothing is on sale at 15% off the marked price. If the marked price is $24.95, what is the sale price? Since the item is discounted 15%, the new price will be 100% – 15% = 85% of the marked price. We need to determine what part of 24.95 is to be taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, the sale price of the item is $21.21. Practice Set A Exercise 7.7.1. (Go to Solution) What number is 42% of 85? Exercise 7.7.2. (Go to Solution) A sales person makes a commission of 16% on each sale he makes. How much is his commission if he makes a sale of $8,500? Exercise 7.7.3. (Go to Solution) An assembly line worker can assemble 14 parts of a product in one hour. If he can increase his assembly speed by 35%, by how many parts per hour would he increase his assembly of products? Exercise 7.7.4. (Go to Solution) A computer scientist in the Silicon Valley makes $42,000 annually. What would this scientist's new annual salary be if she were to receive an 8% raise?  || Finding the Percent Sample Set B Example 7.42.  Recall that (missing factor) = (product) ÷ (known factor). Thus, 15 is 30% of 50. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.5.. Example 7.43.  Thus, 4.32 is 6% of 72. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.5.. Example 7.44.  On a 160 question exam, a student got 125 correct answers. What percent is this? Round the result to two decimal places. We need to determine the percent. Thus, this student received a 78% on the exam. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.6.. Example 7.45.  A bottle contains 80 milliliters of hydrochloric acid (HCl) and 30 milliliters of water. What percent of HCl does the bottle contain? Round the result to two decimal places. We need to determine the percent. The total amount of liquid in the bottle is 80 milliliters + 30 milliliters = 110 milliliters . Thus, this bottle contains approximately 73% HCl. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.7.. Example 7.46.  Five years ago a woman had an annual income of $19,200. She presently earns $42,000 annually. By what percent has her salary increased? Round the result to two decimal places. We need to determine the percent. Thus, this woman's annual salary has increased 219%. Practice Set B Exercise 7.7.5. (Go to Solution) 99.13 is what percent of 431? Exercise 7.7.6. (Go to Solution) On an 80 question exam, a student got 72 correct answers. What percent did the student get on the exam? Exercise 7.7.7. (Go to Solution) A bottle contains 45 milliliters of sugar and 67 milliliters of water. What fraction of sugar does the bottle contain? Round the result to two decimal places (then express as a percent).  || Finding the Base Sample Set C Example 7.47.  Thus, 15 is 30% of 50. Try Exercise 7.7.8. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.48.  Thus, 56.43 is 33% of 171. Try Exercise 7.7.8. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.49.  Fifteen milliliters of water represents 2% of a hydrochloric acid (HCl) solution. How many milliliters of solution are there? We need to determine the total supply. The word supply indicates base. Thus, there are 750 milliliters of solution in the bottle. Try Exercise 7.7.9. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.50.  In a particular city, a sales tax of % is charged on items purchased in local stores. If the tax on an item is $2.99, what is the price of the item? We need to determine the price of the item. We can think of price as the starting place. Starting place indicates base. We need to determine the base. Thus, the price of the item is $46.00. Try Exercise 7.7.10. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.51.  A clothing item is priced at $20.40. This marked price includes a 15% discount. What is the original price? We need to determine the original price. We can think of the original price as the starting place. Starting place indicates base. We need to determine the base. The new price, $20.40, represents 100% – 15% = 85% of the original price. Thus, the original price of the item is $24.00. Try Exercise 7.7.11. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Practice Set C Exercise 7.7.8. (Go to Solution) 1.98 is 2% of what number? Exercise 7.7.9. (Go to Solution) 3.3 milliliters of HCl represents 25% of an HCl solution. How many milliliters of solution are there? Exercise 7.7.10. (Go to Solution) A salesman, who makes a commission of % on each sale, makes a commission of $152.39 on a particular sale. Rounded to the nearest dollar, what is the amount of the sale? Exercise 7.7.11. (Go to Solution) At "super-long play," hours of play of a video cassette recorder represents 31.25% of the total playing time. What is the total playing time?  || 
book4_ch07_7_2	Base, Percent, and Percentage There are three basic types of percent problems. Each type involves a base, a percent, and a percentage, and when they are translated from words to mathemati­cal symbols each becomes a multiplication statement. Examples of these types of problems are the following: What number is 30% of 50? (Missing product statement.) 15 is what percent of 50? (Missing factor statement.) 15 is 30% of what number? (Missing factor statement.) In problem 1, the product is missing. To solve the problem, we represent the missing product with P . P = 30% ⋅ 50 Percentage The missing product P is called the percentage. Percentage means part, or por­tion. In P = 30% ⋅50, P represents a particular part of 50. In problem 2, one of the factors is missing. Here we represent the missing factor with Q . 15 = Q ⋅ 50 Percent The missing factor is the percent. Percent, we know, means per 100, or part of 100. In 15 = Q ⋅50, Q indicates what part of 50 is being taken or considered. Specifi­cally, 15 = Q ⋅50 means that if 50 was to be divided into 100 equal parts, then Q indicates 15 are being considered. In problem 3, one of the factors is missing. Represent the missing factor with B . 15 = 30% ⋅ B Base The missing factor is the base. Some meanings of base are a source of supply, or a starting place. In 15 = 30% ⋅B , B indicates the amount of supply. Specifically, 15 = 30% ⋅B indicates that 15 represents 30% of the total supply. Each of these three types of problems is of the form ( percentage ) = ( percent ) ⋅ ( base ) We can determine any one of the three values given the other two using the methods discussed in Section 4.7. Base, Percent, and Percentage There are three basic types of percent problems. Each type involves a base, a percent, and a percentage, and when they are translated from words to mathemati­cal symbols each becomes a multiplication statement. Examples of these types of problems are the following: What number is 30% of 50? (Missing product statement.) 15 is what percent of 50? (Missing factor statement.) 15 is 30% of what number? (Missing factor statement.) In problem 1, the product is missing. To solve the problem, we represent the missing product with P . P = 30% ⋅ 50 Percentage The missing product P is called the percentage. Percentage means part, or por­tion. In P = 30% ⋅50, P represents a particular part of 50. In problem 2, one of the factors is missing. Here we represent the missing factor with Q . 15 = Q ⋅ 50 Percent The missing factor is the percent. Percent, we know, means per 100, or part of 100. In 15 = Q ⋅50, Q indicates what part of 50 is being taken or considered. Specifi­cally, 15 = Q ⋅50 means that if 50 was to be divided into 100 equal parts, then Q indicates 15 are being considered. In problem 3, one of the factors is missing. Represent the missing factor with B . 15 = 30% ⋅ B Base The missing factor is the base. Some meanings of base are a source of supply, or a starting place. In 15 = 30% ⋅B , B indicates the amount of supply. Specifically, 15 = 30% ⋅B indicates that 15 represents 30% of the total supply. Each of these three types of problems is of the form ( percentage ) = ( percent ) ⋅ ( base ) We can determine any one of the three values given the other two using the methods discussed in Section 4.7.  || 
book4_ch07_7_3	Finding the Percentage Sample Set A Example 7.36.  Thus, 15 is 30% of 50. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.1.. Example 7.37.  Thus, 34.2 is 36% of 95. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.1.. Example 7.38.  A salesperson, who gets a commission of 12% of each sale she makes, makes a sale of $8,400.00. How much is her commission? We need to determine what part of $8,400.00 is to be taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, the salesperson's commission is $1,008.00. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.2.. Example 7.39.  A girl, by practicing typing on her home computer, has been able to increase her typing speed by 110%. If she originally typed 16 words per minute, by how many words per minute was she able to increase her speed? We need to determine what part of 16 has been taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, the girl has increased her typing speed by 17.6 words per minute. Her new speed is 16 + 17.6 = 33.6 words per minute. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.3.. Example 7.40.  A student who makes $125 a month working part-time receives a 4% salary raise. What is the student's new monthly salary? With a 4% raise, this student will make 100% of the original salary + 4% of the original salary. This means the new salary will be 104% of the original salary. We need to determine what part of $125 is to be taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, this student's new monthly salary is $130. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.4.. Example 7.41.  An article of clothing is on sale at 15% off the marked price. If the marked price is $24.95, what is the sale price? Since the item is discounted 15%, the new price will be 100% – 15% = 85% of the marked price. We need to determine what part of 24.95 is to be taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, the sale price of the item is $21.21. Practice Set A Exercise 7.7.1. (Go to Solution) What number is 42% of 85? Exercise 7.7.2. (Go to Solution) A sales person makes a commission of 16% on each sale he makes. How much is his commission if he makes a sale of $8,500? Exercise 7.7.3. (Go to Solution) An assembly line worker can assemble 14 parts of a product in one hour. If he can increase his assembly speed by 35%, by how many parts per hour would he increase his assembly of products? Exercise 7.7.4. (Go to Solution) A computer scientist in the Silicon Valley makes $42,000 annually. What would this scientist's new annual salary be if she were to receive an 8% raise? Finding the Percentage Sample Set A Example 7.36.  Thus, 15 is 30% of 50. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.1.. Example 7.37.  Thus, 34.2 is 36% of 95. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.1.. Example 7.38.  A salesperson, who gets a commission of 12% of each sale she makes, makes a sale of $8,400.00. How much is her commission? We need to determine what part of $8,400.00 is to be taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, the salesperson's commission is $1,008.00. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.2.. Example 7.39.  A girl, by practicing typing on her home computer, has been able to increase her typing speed by 110%. If she originally typed 16 words per minute, by how many words per minute was she able to increase her speed? We need to determine what part of 16 has been taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, the girl has increased her typing speed by 17.6 words per minute. Her new speed is 16 + 17.6 = 33.6 words per minute. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.3.. Example 7.40.  A student who makes $125 a month working part-time receives a 4% salary raise. What is the student's new monthly salary? With a 4% raise, this student will make 100% of the original salary + 4% of the original salary. This means the new salary will be 104% of the original salary. We need to determine what part of $125 is to be taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, this student's new monthly salary is $130. Do the section called “Practice Set A”, Exercise 7.7.4.. Example 7.41.  An article of clothing is on sale at 15% off the marked price. If the marked price is $24.95, what is the sale price? Since the item is discounted 15%, the new price will be 100% – 15% = 85% of the marked price. We need to determine what part of 24.95 is to be taken. What part indicates percentage. Thus, the sale price of the item is $21.21. Practice Set A Exercise 7.7.1. (Go to Solution) What number is 42% of 85? Exercise 7.7.2. (Go to Solution) A sales person makes a commission of 16% on each sale he makes. How much is his commission if he makes a sale of $8,500? Exercise 7.7.3. (Go to Solution) An assembly line worker can assemble 14 parts of a product in one hour. If he can increase his assembly speed by 35%, by how many parts per hour would he increase his assembly of products? Exercise 7.7.4. (Go to Solution) A computer scientist in the Silicon Valley makes $42,000 annually. What would this scientist's new annual salary be if she were to receive an 8% raise?  || 
book4_ch07_7_6	Finding the Percent Sample Set B Example 7.42.  Recall that (missing factor) = (product) ÷ (known factor). Thus, 15 is 30% of 50. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.5.. Example 7.43.  Thus, 4.32 is 6% of 72. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.5.. Example 7.44.  On a 160 question exam, a student got 125 correct answers. What percent is this? Round the result to two decimal places. We need to determine the percent. Thus, this student received a 78% on the exam. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.6.. Example 7.45.  A bottle contains 80 milliliters of hydrochloric acid (HCl) and 30 milliliters of water. What percent of HCl does the bottle contain? Round the result to two decimal places. We need to determine the percent. The total amount of liquid in the bottle is 80 milliliters + 30 milliliters = 110 milliliters . Thus, this bottle contains approximately 73% HCl. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.7.. Example 7.46.  Five years ago a woman had an annual income of $19,200. She presently earns $42,000 annually. By what percent has her salary increased? Round the result to two decimal places. We need to determine the percent. Thus, this woman's annual salary has increased 219%. Practice Set B Exercise 7.7.5. (Go to Solution) 99.13 is what percent of 431? Exercise 7.7.6. (Go to Solution) On an 80 question exam, a student got 72 correct answers. What percent did the student get on the exam? Exercise 7.7.7. (Go to Solution) A bottle contains 45 milliliters of sugar and 67 milliliters of water. What fraction of sugar does the bottle contain? Round the result to two decimal places (then express as a percent). Finding the Percent Sample Set B Example 7.42.  Recall that (missing factor) = (product) ÷ (known factor). Thus, 15 is 30% of 50. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.5.. Example 7.43.  Thus, 4.32 is 6% of 72. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.5.. Example 7.44.  On a 160 question exam, a student got 125 correct answers. What percent is this? Round the result to two decimal places. We need to determine the percent. Thus, this student received a 78% on the exam. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.6.. Example 7.45.  A bottle contains 80 milliliters of hydrochloric acid (HCl) and 30 milliliters of water. What percent of HCl does the bottle contain? Round the result to two decimal places. We need to determine the percent. The total amount of liquid in the bottle is 80 milliliters + 30 milliliters = 110 milliliters . Thus, this bottle contains approximately 73% HCl. Do the section called “Practice Set B”, Exercise 7.7.7.. Example 7.46.  Five years ago a woman had an annual income of $19,200. She presently earns $42,000 annually. By what percent has her salary increased? Round the result to two decimal places. We need to determine the percent. Thus, this woman's annual salary has increased 219%. Practice Set B Exercise 7.7.5. (Go to Solution) 99.13 is what percent of 431? Exercise 7.7.6. (Go to Solution) On an 80 question exam, a student got 72 correct answers. What percent did the student get on the exam? Exercise 7.7.7. (Go to Solution) A bottle contains 45 milliliters of sugar and 67 milliliters of water. What fraction of sugar does the bottle contain? Round the result to two decimal places (then express as a percent).  || 
book4_ch07_7_9	Finding the Base Sample Set C Example 7.47.  Thus, 15 is 30% of 50. Try Exercise 7.7.8. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.48.  Thus, 56.43 is 33% of 171. Try Exercise 7.7.8. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.49.  Fifteen milliliters of water represents 2% of a hydrochloric acid (HCl) solution. How many milliliters of solution are there? We need to determine the total supply. The word supply indicates base. Thus, there are 750 milliliters of solution in the bottle. Try Exercise 7.7.9. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.50.  In a particular city, a sales tax of % is charged on items purchased in local stores. If the tax on an item is $2.99, what is the price of the item? We need to determine the price of the item. We can think of price as the starting place. Starting place indicates base. We need to determine the base. Thus, the price of the item is $46.00. Try Exercise 7.7.10. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.51.  A clothing item is priced at $20.40. This marked price includes a 15% discount. What is the original price? We need to determine the original price. We can think of the original price as the starting place. Starting place indicates base. We need to determine the base. The new price, $20.40, represents 100% – 15% = 85% of the original price. Thus, the original price of the item is $24.00. Try Exercise 7.7.11. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Practice Set C Exercise 7.7.8. (Go to Solution) 1.98 is 2% of what number? Exercise 7.7.9. (Go to Solution) 3.3 milliliters of HCl represents 25% of an HCl solution. How many milliliters of solution are there? Exercise 7.7.10. (Go to Solution) A salesman, who makes a commission of % on each sale, makes a commission of $152.39 on a particular sale. Rounded to the nearest dollar, what is the amount of the sale? Exercise 7.7.11. (Go to Solution) At "super-long play," hours of play of a video cassette recorder represents 31.25% of the total playing time. What is the total playing time? Finding the Base Sample Set C Example 7.47.  Thus, 15 is 30% of 50. Try Exercise 7.7.8. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.48.  Thus, 56.43 is 33% of 171. Try Exercise 7.7.8. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.49.  Fifteen milliliters of water represents 2% of a hydrochloric acid (HCl) solution. How many milliliters of solution are there? We need to determine the total supply. The word supply indicates base. Thus, there are 750 milliliters of solution in the bottle. Try Exercise 7.7.9. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.50.  In a particular city, a sales tax of % is charged on items purchased in local stores. If the tax on an item is $2.99, what is the price of the item? We need to determine the price of the item. We can think of price as the starting place. Starting place indicates base. We need to determine the base. Thus, the price of the item is $46.00. Try Exercise 7.7.10. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Example 7.51.  A clothing item is priced at $20.40. This marked price includes a 15% discount. What is the original price? We need to determine the original price. We can think of the original price as the starting place. Starting place indicates base. We need to determine the base. The new price, $20.40, represents 100% – 15% = 85% of the original price. Thus, the original price of the item is $24.00. Try Exercise 7.7.11. in the section called “Practice Set C”. Practice Set C Exercise 7.7.8. (Go to Solution) 1.98 is 2% of what number? Exercise 7.7.9. (Go to Solution) 3.3 milliliters of HCl represents 25% of an HCl solution. How many milliliters of solution are there? Exercise 7.7.10. (Go to Solution) A salesman, who makes a commission of % on each sale, makes a commission of $152.39 on a particular sale. Rounded to the nearest dollar, what is the amount of the sale? Exercise 7.7.11. (Go to Solution) At "super-long play," hours of play of a video cassette recorder represents 31.25% of the total playing time. What is the total playing time?  || 
book4_ch01	 ||  || Numbers and Numerals We begin our study of introductory mathematics by examining its most basic building block, the number. Number A number is a concept. It exists only in the mind. The earliest concept of a number was a thought that allowed people to mentally picture the size of some collection of objects. To write down the number being conceptualized, a numeral is used. Numeral A numeral is a symbol that represents a number. In common usage today we do not distinguish between a number and a numeral. In our study of introductory mathematics, we will follow this common usage. Sample Set A The following are numerals. In each case, the first represents the number four, the second repre­sents the number one hundred twenty-three, and the third, the number one thousand five. These numbers are represented in different ways. Hindu-Arabic numerals 4, 123, 1005 Roman numerals IV, CXXIII, MV Egyptian numerals Practice Set A Exercise 1.2.1. (Go to Solution) Do the phrases "four," "one hundred twenty-three," and "one thousand five" qualify as numerals? Yes or no?  || The Hindu-Arabic Numeration System Hindu-Arabic Numeration System Our society uses the Hindu-Arabic numeration system. This system of numer­ation began shortly before the third century when the Hindus invented the nu­merals 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Leonardo Fibonacci About a thousand years later, in the thirteenth century, a mathematician named Leonardo Fibonacci of Pisa introduced the system into Europe. It was then popu­larized by the Arabs. Thus, the name, Hindu-Arabic numeration system.  || The Base Ten Positional Number System Digits The Hindu-Arabic numerals 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 are called digits. We can form any number in the number system by selecting one or more digits and placing them in certain positions. Each position has a particular value. The Hindu mathematician who devised the system about A.D. 500 stated that "from place to place each is ten times the preceding." Base Ten Positional Systems It is for this reason that our number system is called a positional number system with base ten. Commas When numbers are composed of more than three digits, commas are sometimes used to separate the digits into groups of three. Periods These groups of three are called periods and they greatly simplify reading numbers. In the Hindu-Arabic numeration system, a period has a value assigned to each or its three positions, and the values are the same for each period. The position values are Thus, each period contains a position for the values of one, ten, and hundred. Notice that, in looking from right to left, the value of each position is ten times the preceding. Each period has a particular name. As we continue from right to left, there are more periods. The five periods listed above are the most common, and in our study of introductory mathematics, they are sufficient. The following diagram illustrates our positional number system to trillions. (There are, to be sure, other periods.) In our positional number system, the value of a digit is determined by its position in the number. Sample Set B Example 1.1.  Find the value of 6 in the number 7,261. Since 6 is in the tens position of the units period, its value is 6 tens. 6 tens = 60 Example 1.2.  Find the value of 9 in the number 86,932,106,005. Since 9 is in the hundreds position of the millions period, its value is 9 hundred millions. 9 hundred millions = 9 hundred million Example 1.3.  Find the value of 2 in the number 102,001. Since 2 is in the ones position of the thousands period, its value is 2 one thousands. 2 one thousands = 2 thousand Practice Set B Exercise 1.2.2. (Go to Solution) Find the value of 5 in the number 65,000. Exercise 1.2.3. (Go to Solution) Find the value of 4 in the number 439,997,007,010. Exercise 1.2.4. (Go to Solution) Find the value of 0 in the number 108.  || Whole Numbers Whole Numbers Numbers that are formed using only the digits 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 are called whole numbers. They are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, … The three dots at the end mean "and so on in this same pattern."  || Graphing Whole Numbers Number Line Whole numbers may be visualized by constructing a number line. To construct a number line, we simply draw a straight line and choose any point on the line and label it 0. Origin This point is called the origin. We then choose some convenient length, and moving to the right, mark off consecutive intervals (parts) along the line starting at 0. We label each new interval endpoint with the next whole number. Graphing We can visually display a whole number by drawing a closed circle at the point labeled with that whole number. Another phrase for visually displaying a whole number is graphing the whole number. The word graph means to "visually display." Sample Set C Example 1.4.  Graph the following whole numbers: 3, 5, 9. Example 1.5.  Specify the whole numbers that are graphed on the following number line. The break in the number line indicates that we are aware of the whole numbers between 0 and 106, and 107 and 872, but we are not listing them due to space limitations. The numbers that have been graphed are 0, 106, 873, 874 Practice Set C Exercise 1.2.5. (Go to Solution) Graph the following whole numbers: 46, 47, 48, 325, 327. Exercise 1.2.6. (Go to Solution) Specify the whole numbers that are graphed on the following number line. A line is composed of an endless number of points. Notice that we have labeled only some of them. As we proceed, we will discover new types of numbers and determine their location on the number line.  ||  || Reading Whole Numbers To convert a number that is formed by digits into a verbal phrase, use the following method: Beginning at the right and working right to left, separate the number into distinct periods by inserting commas every three digits. Beginning at the left, read each period individually, saying the period name. Sample Set A Write the following numbers as words. Example 1.6.  Read 42958. Beginning at the right, we can separate this number into distinct periods by inserting a comma between the 2 and 9. 42,958 Beginning at the left, we read each period individually: Forty-two thousand, nine hundred fifty-eight. Example 1.7.  Read 307991343. Beginning at the right, we can separate this number into distinct periods by placing commas between the 1 and 3 and the 7 and 9. 307,991,343 Beginning at the left, we read each period individually. Three hundred seven million, nine hundred ninety-one thousand, three hundred forty-three. Example 1.8.  Read 36000000000001. Beginning at the right, we can separate this number into distinct periods by placing commas. 36,000,000,001 Beginning at the left, we read each period individually. Thirty-six trillion, one. Practice Set A Write each number in words. Exercise 1.3.1. (Go to Solution) 12,542 Exercise 1.3.2. (Go to Solution) 101,074,003 Exercise 1.3.3. (Go to Solution) 1,000,008  || Writing Whole Numbers To express a number in digits that is expressed in words, use the following method: Notice first that a number expressed as a verbal phrase will have its periods set off by commas. Starting at the beginning of the phrase, write each period of numbers individu­ally. Using commas to separate periods, combine the periods to form one number. Sample Set B Write each number using digits. Example 1.9.  Seven thousand, ninety-two. Using the comma as a period separator, we have 7,092 Example 1.10.  Fifty billion, one million, two hundred thousand, fourteen. Using the commas as period separators, we have 50,001,200,014 Example 1.11.  Ten million, five hundred twelve. The comma sets off the periods. We notice that there is no thousands period. We'll have to insert this ourselves. 10,000,512 Practice Set B Express each number using digits. Exercise 1.3.4. (Go to Solution) One hundred three thousand, twenty-five. Exercise 1.3.5. (Go to Solution) Six million, forty thousand, seven. Exercise 1.3.6. (Go to Solution) Twenty trillion, three billion, eighty million, one hundred nine thousand, four hundred two. Exercise 1.3.7. (Go to Solution) Eighty billion, thirty-five.  ||  || Rounding as an Approximation A primary use of whole numbers is to keep count of how many objects there are in a collection. Sometimes we're only interested in the approximate number of objects in the collection rather than the precise number. For example, there are approxi­mately 20 symbols in the collection below. The precise number of symbols in the above collection is 18. Rounding We often approximate the number of objects in a collection by mentally seeing the collection as occurring in groups of tens, hundreds, thousands, etc. This process of approximation is called rounding. Rounding is very useful in estimation. We will study estimation in Chapter 8. When we think of a collection as occurring in groups of tens, we say we're rounding to the nearest ten. When we think of a collection as occurring in groups of hundreds, we say we're rounding to the nearest hundred. This idea of rounding continues through thousands, ten thousands, hundred thousands, millions, etc. The process of rounding whole numbers is illustrated in the following examples. Example 1.12.  Round 67 to the nearest ten. On the number line, 67 is more than halfway from 60 to 70. The digit immedi­ately to the right of the tens digit, the round-off digit, is the indicator for this. Thus, 67, rounded to the nearest ten, is 70. Example 1.13.  Round 4,329 to the nearest hundred. On the number line, 4,329 is less than halfway from 4,300 to 4,400. The digit to the immediate right of the hundreds digit, the round-off digit, is the indicator. Thus, 4,329, rounded to the nearest hundred is 4,300. Example 1.14.  Round 16,500 to the nearest thousand. On the number line, 16,500 is exactly halfway from 16,000 to 17,000. By convention, when the number to be rounded is exactly halfway between two numbers, it is rounded to the higher number. Thus, 16,500, rounded to the nearest thousand, is 17,000. Example 1.15.  A person whose salary is $41,450 per year might tell a friend that she makes $41,000 per year. She has rounded 41,450 to the nearest thousand. The number 41,450 is closer to 41,000 than it is to 42,000.  || The Method of Rounding Whole Numbers From the observations made in the preceding examples, we can use the following method to round a whole number to a particular position. Mark the position of the round-off digit. Note the digit to the immediate right of the round-off digit. If it is less than 5, replace it and all the digits to its right with zeros. Leave the round-off digit unchanged. If it is 5 or larger, replace it and all the digits to its right with zeros. Increase the round-off digit by 1. Sample Set A Use the method of rounding whole numbers to solve the following problems. Example 1.16.  Round 3,426 to the nearest ten. We are rounding to the tens position. Mark the digit in the tens position Observe the digit immediately to the right of the tens position. It is 6. Since 6 is greater than 5, we round up by replacing 6 with 0 and adding 1 to the digit in the tens position (the round-off position): 2 + 1 = 3 . 3,430 Thus, 3,426 rounded to the nearest ten is 3,430. Example 1.17.  Round 9,614,018,007 to the nearest ten million. We are rounding to the nearest ten million. Observe the digit immediately to the right of the ten millions position. It is 4. Since 4 is less than 5, we round down by replacing 4 and all the digits to its right with zeros. 9,610,000,000 Thus, 9,614,018,007 rounded to the nearest ten million is 9,610,000,000. Example 1.18.  Round 148,422 to the nearest million. Since we are rounding to the nearest million, we'll have to imagine a digit in the millions position. We'll write 148,422 as 0,148,422. The digit immediately to the right is 1. Since 1 is less than 5, we'll round down by replacing it and all the digits to its right with zeros. 0,000,000 This number is 0. Thus, 148,422 rounded to the nearest million is 0. Example 1.19.  Round 397,000 to the nearest ten thousand. We are rounding to the nearest ten thousand. The digit immediately to the right of the ten thousand position is 7. Since 7 is greater than 5, we round up by replacing 7 and all the digits to its right with zeros and adding 1 to the digit in the ten thousands position. But 9 + 1 = 10 and we must carry the 1 to the next (the hundred thousands) position. 400,000 Thus, 397,000 rounded to the nearest ten thousand is 400,000. Practice Set A Use the method of rounding whole numbers to solve each problem. Exercise 1.4.1. (Go to Solution) Round 3387 to the nearest hundred. Exercise 1.4.2. (Go to Solution) Round 26,515 to the nearest thousand. Exercise 1.4.3. (Go to Solution) Round 30,852,900 to the nearest million. Exercise 1.4.4. (Go to Solution) Round 39 to the nearest hundred. Exercise 1.4.5. (Go to Solution) Round 59,600 to the nearest thousand.  ||  || Addition Suppose we have two collections of objects that we combine together to form a third collection. For example, We are combining a collection of four objects with a collection of three objects to obtain a collection of seven objects. Addition The process of combining two or more objects (real or intuitive) to form a third, the total, is called addition. In addition, the numbers being added are called addends or terms, and the total is called the sum. The plus symbol (+) is used to indicate addition, and the equal symbol (=) is used to represent the word "equal." For example, 4 + 3 = 7 means "four added to three equals seven."  || Addition Visualized on the Number Line Addition is easily visualized on the number line. Let's visualize the addition of 4 and 3 using the number line. To find 4 + 3, Start at 0. Move to the right 4 units. We are now located at 4. From 4, move to the right 3 units. We are now located at 7. Thus, 4 + 3 = 7.  || The Addition Process We'll study the process of addition by considering the sum of 25 and 43. We write this as 68. We can suggest the following procedure for adding whole numbers using this example. Example 1.20. The Process of Adding Whole Numbers To add whole numbers, The process: Write the numbers vertically, placing corresponding positions in the same column. Add the digits in each column. Start at the right (in the ones position) and move to the left, placing the sum at the bottom. Caution Confusion and incorrect sums can occur when the numbers are not aligned in columns properly. Avoid writing such additions as Sample Set A Example 1.21.  Add 276 and 103. Example 1.22.  Add 1459 and 130 In each of these examples, each individual sum does not exceed 9. We will examine individual sums that exceed 9 in the next section. Practice Set A Perform each addition. Show the expanded form in problems 1 and 2. Exercise 1.5.1. (Go to Solution) Add 63 and 25. Exercise 1.5.2. (Go to Solution) Add 4,026 and 1,501. Exercise 1.5.3. (Go to Solution) Add 231,045 and 36,121.  || Addition Involving Carrying It often happens in addition that the sum of the digits in a column will exceed 9. This happens when we add 18 and 34. We show this in expanded form as follows. Notice that when we add the 8 ones to the 4 ones we get 12 ones. We then convert the 12 ones to 1 ten and 2 ones. In vertical addition, we show this conversion by carrying the ten to the tens column. We write a 1 at the top of the tens column to indicate the carry. This same example is shown in a shorter form as follows: 8 + 4 = 12 Write 2, carry 1 ten to the top of the next column to the left. Sample Set B Perform the following additions. Use the process of carrying when needed. Example 1.23.  Add 1875 and 358. The sum is 2233. Example 1.24.  Add 89,208 and 4,946. The sum is 94,154. Example 1.25.  Add 38 and 95. As you proceed with the addition, it is a good idea to keep in mind what is actually happening. The sum is 133. Example 1.26.  Find the sum 2648, 1359, and 861. The sum is 4,868. Numbers other than 1 can be carried as illustrated in Example 1.27. Example 1.27.  Find the sum of the following numbers. The sum is 983,689. Example 1.28.  The number of students enrolled at Riemann College in the years 1984, 1985, 1986, and 1987 was 10,406, 9,289, 10,108, and 11,412, respectively. What was the total number of students en­rolled at Riemann College in the years 1985, 1986, and 1987? We can determine the total number of students enrolled by adding 9,289, 10,108, and 11,412, the number of students enrolled in the years 1985, 1986, and 1987. The total number of students enrolled at Riemann College in the years 1985, 1986, and 1987 was 30,809. Practice Set B Perform each addition. For the next three problems, show the expanded form. Exercise 1.5.4. (Go to Solution) Add 58 and 29. Exercise 1.5.5. (Go to Solution) Add 476 and 85. Exercise 1.5.6. (Go to Solution) Add 27 and 88. Exercise 1.5.7. (Go to Solution) Add 67,898 and 85,627. For the next three problems, find the sums. Exercise 1.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.5.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.5.10. (Go to Solution)  || Calculators Calculators provide a very simple and quick way to find sums of whole numbers. For the two problems in Sample Set C, assume the use of a calculator that does not require the use of an ENTER key (such as many Hewlett-Packard calculators). Sample Set C Use a calculator to find each sum. Example 1.29.  Table 1.36. 34 + 21 Display Reads Type 34 34 Press + 34 Type 21 21 Press = 55 The sum is 55. Example 1.30.  Table 1.37. 106 + 85 + 322 + 406 Display Reads   Type 106 106 The calculator keeps a running subtotal Press + 106   Type 85 85   Press = 191 ← 106 + 85 Type 322 322   Press + 513 ← 191 + 322 Type 406 406   Press = 919 ← 513 + 406 The sum is 919. Practice Set C Use a calculator to find the following sums. Exercise 1.5.11. (Go to Solution) 62 + 81 + 12 Exercise 1.5.12. (Go to Solution) 9,261 + 8,543 + 884 + 1,062 Exercise 1.5.13. (Go to Solution) 10,221 + 9,016 + 11,445  ||  || Subtraction Subtraction Subtraction is the process of determining the remainder when part of the total is removed. Suppose the sum of two whole numbers is 11, and from 11 we remove 4. Using the number line to help our visualization, we see that if we are located at 11 and move 4 units to the left, and thus remove 4 units, we will be located at 7. Thus, 7 units remain when we remove 4 units from 11 units. The Minus Symbol The minus symbol (-) is used to indicate subtraction. For example, 11 − 4 indicates that 4 is to be subtracted from 11. Minuend The number immediately in front of or the minus symbol is called the minuend, and it represents the original number of units. Subtrahend The number immediately following or below the minus symbol is called the subtrahend, and it represents the number of units to be removed. Difference The result of the subtraction is called the difference of the two numbers. For example, in 11 − 4 = 7, 11 is the minuend, 4 is the subtrahend, and 7 is the difference.  || Subtraction as the Opposite of Addition Subtraction can be thought of as the opposite of addition. We show this in the problems in Sample Set A. Sample Set A Example 1.31.  8 − 5 = 3 since 3 + 5 = 8. Example 1.32.  9 − 3 = 6 since 6 + 3 = 9. Practice Set A Complete the following statements. Exercise 1.6.1. (Go to Solution) 7 − 5 = __________ since __________ + 5 = 7. Exercise 1.6.2. (Go to Solution) 9 − 1 = __________ since __________ + 1 = 9. Exercise 1.6.3. (Go to Solution) 17 − 8 = __________ since __________ + 8 = 17.  || The Subtraction Process We'll study the process of the subtraction of two whole numbers by considering the difference between 48 and 35. which we write as 13. Example 1.33. The Process of Subtracting Whole Numbers To subtract two whole numbers, The process Write the numbers vertically, placing corresponding positions in the same column. Subtract the digits in each column. Start at the right, in the ones position, and move to the left, placing the difference at the bottom. Sample Set B Perform the following subtractions. Example 1.34.  Example 1.35.  Example 1.36.  Find the difference between 977 and 235. Write the numbers vertically, placing the larger number on top. Line up the columns properly. The difference between 977 and 235 is 742. Example 1.37.  In Keys County in 1987, there were 809 cable television installations. In Flags County in 1987, there were 1,159 cable television installations. How many more cable television installations were there in Flags County than in Keys County in 1987? We need to determine the difference between 1,159 and 809. There were 350 more cable television installations in Flags County than in Keys County in 1987. Practice Set B Perform the following subtractions. Exercise 1.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.8. (Go to Solution) Find the difference between 88,526 and 26,412. In each of these problems, each bottom digit is less than the corresponding top digit. This may not always be the case. We will examine the case where the bottom digit is greater than the corresponding top digit in the next section.  || Subtraction Involving Borrowing Minuend and Subtrahend It often happens in the subtraction of two whole numbers that a digit in the minuend (top number) will be less than the digit in the same position in the subtrahend (bottom number). This happens when we subtract 27 from 84. We do not have a name for 4 − 7. We need to rename 84 in order to continue. We'll do so as follows: Our new name for 84 is 7 tens + 14 ones. Notice that we converted 8 tens to 7 tens + 1 ten, and then we converted the 1 ten to 10 ones. We then had 14 ones and were able to perform the subtraction. Borrowing The process of borrowing (converting) is illustrated in the problems of Sample Set C. Sample Set C Example 1.38.  Borrow 1 ten from the 8 tens. This leaves 7 tens. Convert the 1 ten to 10 ones. Add 10 ones to 4 ones to get 14 ones. Example 1.39.  Borrow 1 hundred from the 6 hundreds. This leaves 5 hundreds. Convert the 1 hundred to 10 tens. Add 10 tens to 7 tens to get 17 tens. Practice Set C Perform the following subtractions. Show the expanded form for the first three problems. Exercise 1.6.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.14. (Go to Solution) Borrowing More Than Once Sometimes it is necessary to borrow more than once. This is shown in the problems in the section called “Sample Set D”. Sample Set D Perform the Subtractions. Borrowing more than once if necessary Example 1.40.  Borrow 1 ten from the 4 tens. This leaves 3 tens. Convert the 1 ten to 10 ones. Add 10 ones to 1 one to get 11 ones. We can now perform 11 − 8. Borrow 1 hundred from the 6 hundreds. This leaves 5 hundreds. Convert the 1 hundred to 10 tens. Add 10 tens to 3 tens to get 13 tens. Now 13 − 5 = 8. 5 − 3 = 2. Example 1.41.  Borrow 1 ten from the 3 tens. This leaves 2 tens. Convert the 1 ten to 10 ones. Add 10 ones to 4 ones to get 14 ones. We can now perform 14 − 5. Borrow 1 hundred from the 5 hundreds. This leaves 4 hundreds. Convert the 1 hundred to 10 tens. Add 10 tens to 2 tens to get 12 tens. We can now perform 12 − 8 = 4. Finally, 4 − 0 = 4. Example 1.42.  After borrowing, we have Practice Set D Perform the following subtractions. Exercise 1.6.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.17. (Go to Solution)  || Borrowing from Zero It often happens in a subtraction problem that we have to borrow from one or more zeros. This occurs in problems such as and We'll examine each case. Example 1.43. Borrowing from a single zero. Consider the problem Since we do not have a name for 3 − 7, we must borrow from 0. Since there are no tens to borrow, we must borrow 1 hundred. One hundred = 10 tens. We can now borrow 1 ten from 10 tens (leaving 9 tens). One ten = 10 ones and 10 ones + 3 ones = 13 ones. Now we can suggest the following method for borrowing from a single zero. Borrowing from a Single Zero To borrow from a single zero, Decrease the digit to the immediate left of zero by one. Draw a line through the zero and make it a 10. Proceed to subtract as usual. Sample Set E Example 1.44.  Perform this subtraction. The number 503 contains a single zero The number to the immediate left of 0 is 5. Decrease 5 by 1. 5 − 1 = 4 Draw a line through the zero and make it a 10. Borrow from the 10 and proceed. 1 ten + 10 ones 10 ones + 3 ones = 13 ones Practice Set E Perform each subtraction. Exercise 1.6.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.20. (Go to Solution) Example 1.45. Borrowing from a group of zeros Consider the problem In this case, we have a group of zeros. Since we cannot borrow any tens or hundreds, we must borrow 1 thousand. One thousand = 10 hundreds. We can now borrow 1 hundred from 10 hundreds. One hundred = 10 tens. We can now borrow 1 ten from 10 tens. One ten = 10 ones. From observations made in this procedure we can suggest the following method for borrowing from a group of zeros. Borrowing from a Group of zeros To borrow from a group of zeros, Decrease the digit to the immediate left of the group of zeros by one. Draw a line through each zero in the group and make it a 9, except the rightmost zero, make it 10. Proceed to subtract as usual. Sample Set F Perform each subtraction. Example 1.46.  The number 40,000 contains a group of zeros. The number to the immediate left of the group is 4. Decrease 4 by 1. 4 − 1 = 3 Make each 0, except the rightmost one, 9. Make the rightmost 0 a 10. Subtract as usual. Example 1.47.  The number 8,000,006 contains a group of zeros. The number to the immediate left of the group is 8. Decrease 8 by 1. 8 − 1 = 7 Make each zero, except the rightmost one, 9. Make the rightmost 0 a 10. To perform the subtraction, we’ll need to borrow from the ten. Practice Set F Perform each subtraction. Exercise 1.6.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.22. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.23. (Go to Solution)  || Calculators In practice, calculators are used to find the difference between two whole numbers. Sample Set G Find the difference between 1006 and 284. Table 1.38. Display Reads Type 1006 1006 Press 1006 Type 284 284 Press = 722 The difference between 1006 and 284 is 722. (What happens if you type 284 first and then 1006? We'll study such numbers in Section 1.6Chapter 10.) Practice Set G Exercise 1.6.24. (Go to Solution) Use a calculator to find the difference between 7338 and 2809. Exercise 1.6.25. (Go to Solution) Use a calculator to find the difference between 31,060,001 and 8,591,774.  ||  || The Commutative Property of Addition Commutative Property of Addition If two whole numbers are added in any order, the sum will not change. Sample Set A Example 1.48.  Add the whole numbers 8 + 5 = 13 5 + 8 = 13 The numbers 8 and 5 can be added in any order. Regardless of the order they are added, the sum is 13. Practice Set A Exercise 1.7.1. (Go to Solution) Use the commutative property of addition to find the sum of 12 and 41 in two different ways. Exercise 1.7.2. (Go to Solution) Add the whole numbers  || The Associative Property of Addition Associative Property of Addition If three whole numbers are to be added, the sum will be the same if the first two are added first, then that sum is added to the third, or, the second two are added first, and that sum is added to the first. Using Parentheses It is a common mathematical practice to use parentheses to show which pair of numbers we wish to combine first. Sample Set B Example 1.49.  Add the whole numbers. Practice Set B Exercise 1.7.3. (Go to Solution) Use the associative property of addition to add the following whole numbers two different ways. Exercise 1.7.4. (Go to Solution)  || The Additive Identity 0 Is the Additive Identity The whole number 0 is called the additive identity, since when it is added to any whole number, the sum is identical to that whole number. Sample Set C Example 1.50.  Add the whole numbers. 29 + 0 = 29 0 + 29 = 29 Zero added to 29 does not change the identity of 29. Practice Set C Add the following whole numbers. Exercise 1.7.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.7.6. (Go to Solution) Suppose we let the letter x represent a choice for some whole number. For the first two problems, find the sums. For the third problem, find the sum provided we now know that x represents the whole number 17. Exercise 1.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.7.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.7.9. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch01_2	 || Numbers and Numerals We begin our study of introductory mathematics by examining its most basic building block, the number. Number A number is a concept. It exists only in the mind. The earliest concept of a number was a thought that allowed people to mentally picture the size of some collection of objects. To write down the number being conceptualized, a numeral is used. Numeral A numeral is a symbol that represents a number. In common usage today we do not distinguish between a number and a numeral. In our study of introductory mathematics, we will follow this common usage. Sample Set A The following are numerals. In each case, the first represents the number four, the second repre­sents the number one hundred twenty-three, and the third, the number one thousand five. These numbers are represented in different ways. Hindu-Arabic numerals 4, 123, 1005 Roman numerals IV, CXXIII, MV Egyptian numerals Practice Set A Exercise 1.2.1. (Go to Solution) Do the phrases "four," "one hundred twenty-three," and "one thousand five" qualify as numerals? Yes or no?  || The Hindu-Arabic Numeration System Hindu-Arabic Numeration System Our society uses the Hindu-Arabic numeration system. This system of numer­ation began shortly before the third century when the Hindus invented the nu­merals 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Leonardo Fibonacci About a thousand years later, in the thirteenth century, a mathematician named Leonardo Fibonacci of Pisa introduced the system into Europe. It was then popu­larized by the Arabs. Thus, the name, Hindu-Arabic numeration system.  || The Base Ten Positional Number System Digits The Hindu-Arabic numerals 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 are called digits. We can form any number in the number system by selecting one or more digits and placing them in certain positions. Each position has a particular value. The Hindu mathematician who devised the system about A.D. 500 stated that "from place to place each is ten times the preceding." Base Ten Positional Systems It is for this reason that our number system is called a positional number system with base ten. Commas When numbers are composed of more than three digits, commas are sometimes used to separate the digits into groups of three. Periods These groups of three are called periods and they greatly simplify reading numbers. In the Hindu-Arabic numeration system, a period has a value assigned to each or its three positions, and the values are the same for each period. The position values are Thus, each period contains a position for the values of one, ten, and hundred. Notice that, in looking from right to left, the value of each position is ten times the preceding. Each period has a particular name. As we continue from right to left, there are more periods. The five periods listed above are the most common, and in our study of introductory mathematics, they are sufficient. The following diagram illustrates our positional number system to trillions. (There are, to be sure, other periods.) In our positional number system, the value of a digit is determined by its position in the number. Sample Set B Example 1.1.  Find the value of 6 in the number 7,261. Since 6 is in the tens position of the units period, its value is 6 tens. 6 tens = 60 Example 1.2.  Find the value of 9 in the number 86,932,106,005. Since 9 is in the hundreds position of the millions period, its value is 9 hundred millions. 9 hundred millions = 9 hundred million Example 1.3.  Find the value of 2 in the number 102,001. Since 2 is in the ones position of the thousands period, its value is 2 one thousands. 2 one thousands = 2 thousand Practice Set B Exercise 1.2.2. (Go to Solution) Find the value of 5 in the number 65,000. Exercise 1.2.3. (Go to Solution) Find the value of 4 in the number 439,997,007,010. Exercise 1.2.4. (Go to Solution) Find the value of 0 in the number 108.  || Whole Numbers Whole Numbers Numbers that are formed using only the digits 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 are called whole numbers. They are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, … The three dots at the end mean "and so on in this same pattern."  || Graphing Whole Numbers Number Line Whole numbers may be visualized by constructing a number line. To construct a number line, we simply draw a straight line and choose any point on the line and label it 0. Origin This point is called the origin. We then choose some convenient length, and moving to the right, mark off consecutive intervals (parts) along the line starting at 0. We label each new interval endpoint with the next whole number. Graphing We can visually display a whole number by drawing a closed circle at the point labeled with that whole number. Another phrase for visually displaying a whole number is graphing the whole number. The word graph means to "visually display." Sample Set C Example 1.4.  Graph the following whole numbers: 3, 5, 9. Example 1.5.  Specify the whole numbers that are graphed on the following number line. The break in the number line indicates that we are aware of the whole numbers between 0 and 106, and 107 and 872, but we are not listing them due to space limitations. The numbers that have been graphed are 0, 106, 873, 874 Practice Set C Exercise 1.2.5. (Go to Solution) Graph the following whole numbers: 46, 47, 48, 325, 327. Exercise 1.2.6. (Go to Solution) Specify the whole numbers that are graphed on the following number line. A line is composed of an endless number of points. Notice that we have labeled only some of them. As we proceed, we will discover new types of numbers and determine their location on the number line.  || 
book4_ch01_2_2	Numbers and Numerals We begin our study of introductory mathematics by examining its most basic building block, the number. Number A number is a concept. It exists only in the mind. The earliest concept of a number was a thought that allowed people to mentally picture the size of some collection of objects. To write down the number being conceptualized, a numeral is used. Numeral A numeral is a symbol that represents a number. In common usage today we do not distinguish between a number and a numeral. In our study of introductory mathematics, we will follow this common usage. Sample Set A The following are numerals. In each case, the first represents the number four, the second repre­sents the number one hundred twenty-three, and the third, the number one thousand five. These numbers are represented in different ways. Hindu-Arabic numerals 4, 123, 1005 Roman numerals IV, CXXIII, MV Egyptian numerals Practice Set A Exercise 1.2.1. (Go to Solution) Do the phrases "four," "one hundred twenty-three," and "one thousand five" qualify as numerals? Yes or no? Numbers and Numerals We begin our study of introductory mathematics by examining its most basic building block, the number. Number A number is a concept. It exists only in the mind. The earliest concept of a number was a thought that allowed people to mentally picture the size of some collection of objects. To write down the number being conceptualized, a numeral is used. Numeral A numeral is a symbol that represents a number. In common usage today we do not distinguish between a number and a numeral. In our study of introductory mathematics, we will follow this common usage. Sample Set A The following are numerals. In each case, the first represents the number four, the second repre­sents the number one hundred twenty-three, and the third, the number one thousand five. These numbers are represented in different ways. Hindu-Arabic numerals 4, 123, 1005 Roman numerals IV, CXXIII, MV Egyptian numerals Practice Set A Exercise 1.2.1. (Go to Solution) Do the phrases "four," "one hundred twenty-three," and "one thousand five" qualify as numerals? Yes or no?  || 
book4_ch01_2_5	The Hindu-Arabic Numeration System Hindu-Arabic Numeration System Our society uses the Hindu-Arabic numeration system. This system of numer­ation began shortly before the third century when the Hindus invented the nu­merals 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Leonardo Fibonacci About a thousand years later, in the thirteenth century, a mathematician named Leonardo Fibonacci of Pisa introduced the system into Europe. It was then popu­larized by the Arabs. Thus, the name, Hindu-Arabic numeration system. The Hindu-Arabic Numeration System Hindu-Arabic Numeration System Our society uses the Hindu-Arabic numeration system. This system of numer­ation began shortly before the third century when the Hindus invented the nu­merals 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Leonardo Fibonacci About a thousand years later, in the thirteenth century, a mathematician named Leonardo Fibonacci of Pisa introduced the system into Europe. It was then popu­larized by the Arabs. Thus, the name, Hindu-Arabic numeration system.  || 
book4_ch01_2_6	The Base Ten Positional Number System Digits The Hindu-Arabic numerals 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 are called digits. We can form any number in the number system by selecting one or more digits and placing them in certain positions. Each position has a particular value. The Hindu mathematician who devised the system about A.D. 500 stated that "from place to place each is ten times the preceding." Base Ten Positional Systems It is for this reason that our number system is called a positional number system with base ten. Commas When numbers are composed of more than three digits, commas are sometimes used to separate the digits into groups of three. Periods These groups of three are called periods and they greatly simplify reading numbers. In the Hindu-Arabic numeration system, a period has a value assigned to each or its three positions, and the values are the same for each period. The position values are Thus, each period contains a position for the values of one, ten, and hundred. Notice that, in looking from right to left, the value of each position is ten times the preceding. Each period has a particular name. As we continue from right to left, there are more periods. The five periods listed above are the most common, and in our study of introductory mathematics, they are sufficient. The following diagram illustrates our positional number system to trillions. (There are, to be sure, other periods.) In our positional number system, the value of a digit is determined by its position in the number. Sample Set B Example 1.1.  Find the value of 6 in the number 7,261. Since 6 is in the tens position of the units period, its value is 6 tens. 6 tens = 60 Example 1.2.  Find the value of 9 in the number 86,932,106,005. Since 9 is in the hundreds position of the millions period, its value is 9 hundred millions. 9 hundred millions = 9 hundred million Example 1.3.  Find the value of 2 in the number 102,001. Since 2 is in the ones position of the thousands period, its value is 2 one thousands. 2 one thousands = 2 thousand Practice Set B Exercise 1.2.2. (Go to Solution) Find the value of 5 in the number 65,000. Exercise 1.2.3. (Go to Solution) Find the value of 4 in the number 439,997,007,010. Exercise 1.2.4. (Go to Solution) Find the value of 0 in the number 108. The Base Ten Positional Number System Digits The Hindu-Arabic numerals 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 are called digits. We can form any number in the number system by selecting one or more digits and placing them in certain positions. Each position has a particular value. The Hindu mathematician who devised the system about A.D. 500 stated that "from place to place each is ten times the preceding." Base Ten Positional Systems It is for this reason that our number system is called a positional number system with base ten. Commas When numbers are composed of more than three digits, commas are sometimes used to separate the digits into groups of three. Periods These groups of three are called periods and they greatly simplify reading numbers. In the Hindu-Arabic numeration system, a period has a value assigned to each or its three positions, and the values are the same for each period. The position values are Thus, each period contains a position for the values of one, ten, and hundred. Notice that, in looking from right to left, the value of each position is ten times the preceding. Each period has a particular name. As we continue from right to left, there are more periods. The five periods listed above are the most common, and in our study of introductory mathematics, they are sufficient. The following diagram illustrates our positional number system to trillions. (There are, to be sure, other periods.) In our positional number system, the value of a digit is determined by its position in the number. Sample Set B Example 1.1.  Find the value of 6 in the number 7,261. Since 6 is in the tens position of the units period, its value is 6 tens. 6 tens = 60 Example 1.2.  Find the value of 9 in the number 86,932,106,005. Since 9 is in the hundreds position of the millions period, its value is 9 hundred millions. 9 hundred millions = 9 hundred million Example 1.3.  Find the value of 2 in the number 102,001. Since 2 is in the ones position of the thousands period, its value is 2 one thousands. 2 one thousands = 2 thousand Practice Set B Exercise 1.2.2. (Go to Solution) Find the value of 5 in the number 65,000. Exercise 1.2.3. (Go to Solution) Find the value of 4 in the number 439,997,007,010. Exercise 1.2.4. (Go to Solution) Find the value of 0 in the number 108.  || 
book4_ch01_2_9	Whole Numbers Whole Numbers Numbers that are formed using only the digits 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 are called whole numbers. They are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, … The three dots at the end mean "and so on in this same pattern." Whole Numbers Whole Numbers Numbers that are formed using only the digits 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 are called whole numbers. They are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, … The three dots at the end mean "and so on in this same pattern."  || 
book4_ch01_2_10	Graphing Whole Numbers Number Line Whole numbers may be visualized by constructing a number line. To construct a number line, we simply draw a straight line and choose any point on the line and label it 0. Origin This point is called the origin. We then choose some convenient length, and moving to the right, mark off consecutive intervals (parts) along the line starting at 0. We label each new interval endpoint with the next whole number. Graphing We can visually display a whole number by drawing a closed circle at the point labeled with that whole number. Another phrase for visually displaying a whole number is graphing the whole number. The word graph means to "visually display." Sample Set C Example 1.4.  Graph the following whole numbers: 3, 5, 9. Example 1.5.  Specify the whole numbers that are graphed on the following number line. The break in the number line indicates that we are aware of the whole numbers between 0 and 106, and 107 and 872, but we are not listing them due to space limitations. The numbers that have been graphed are 0, 106, 873, 874 Practice Set C Exercise 1.2.5. (Go to Solution) Graph the following whole numbers: 46, 47, 48, 325, 327. Exercise 1.2.6. (Go to Solution) Specify the whole numbers that are graphed on the following number line. A line is composed of an endless number of points. Notice that we have labeled only some of them. As we proceed, we will discover new types of numbers and determine their location on the number line. Graphing Whole Numbers Number Line Whole numbers may be visualized by constructing a number line. To construct a number line, we simply draw a straight line and choose any point on the line and label it 0. Origin This point is called the origin. We then choose some convenient length, and moving to the right, mark off consecutive intervals (parts) along the line starting at 0. We label each new interval endpoint with the next whole number. Graphing We can visually display a whole number by drawing a closed circle at the point labeled with that whole number. Another phrase for visually displaying a whole number is graphing the whole number. The word graph means to "visually display." Sample Set C Example 1.4.  Graph the following whole numbers: 3, 5, 9. Example 1.5.  Specify the whole numbers that are graphed on the following number line. The break in the number line indicates that we are aware of the whole numbers between 0 and 106, and 107 and 872, but we are not listing them due to space limitations. The numbers that have been graphed are 0, 106, 873, 874 Practice Set C Exercise 1.2.5. (Go to Solution) Graph the following whole numbers: 46, 47, 48, 325, 327. Exercise 1.2.6. (Go to Solution) Specify the whole numbers that are graphed on the following number line. A line is composed of an endless number of points. Notice that we have labeled only some of them. As we proceed, we will discover new types of numbers and determine their location on the number line.  || 
book4_ch01_3	 || Reading Whole Numbers To convert a number that is formed by digits into a verbal phrase, use the following method: Beginning at the right and working right to left, separate the number into distinct periods by inserting commas every three digits. Beginning at the left, read each period individually, saying the period name. Sample Set A Write the following numbers as words. Example 1.6.  Read 42958. Beginning at the right, we can separate this number into distinct periods by inserting a comma between the 2 and 9. 42,958 Beginning at the left, we read each period individually: Forty-two thousand, nine hundred fifty-eight. Example 1.7.  Read 307991343. Beginning at the right, we can separate this number into distinct periods by placing commas between the 1 and 3 and the 7 and 9. 307,991,343 Beginning at the left, we read each period individually. Three hundred seven million, nine hundred ninety-one thousand, three hundred forty-three. Example 1.8.  Read 36000000000001. Beginning at the right, we can separate this number into distinct periods by placing commas. 36,000,000,001 Beginning at the left, we read each period individually. Thirty-six trillion, one. Practice Set A Write each number in words. Exercise 1.3.1. (Go to Solution) 12,542 Exercise 1.3.2. (Go to Solution) 101,074,003 Exercise 1.3.3. (Go to Solution) 1,000,008  || Writing Whole Numbers To express a number in digits that is expressed in words, use the following method: Notice first that a number expressed as a verbal phrase will have its periods set off by commas. Starting at the beginning of the phrase, write each period of numbers individu­ally. Using commas to separate periods, combine the periods to form one number. Sample Set B Write each number using digits. Example 1.9.  Seven thousand, ninety-two. Using the comma as a period separator, we have 7,092 Example 1.10.  Fifty billion, one million, two hundred thousand, fourteen. Using the commas as period separators, we have 50,001,200,014 Example 1.11.  Ten million, five hundred twelve. The comma sets off the periods. We notice that there is no thousands period. We'll have to insert this ourselves. 10,000,512 Practice Set B Express each number using digits. Exercise 1.3.4. (Go to Solution) One hundred three thousand, twenty-five. Exercise 1.3.5. (Go to Solution) Six million, forty thousand, seven. Exercise 1.3.6. (Go to Solution) Twenty trillion, three billion, eighty million, one hundred nine thousand, four hundred two. Exercise 1.3.7. (Go to Solution) Eighty billion, thirty-five.  || 
book4_ch01_3_2	Reading Whole Numbers To convert a number that is formed by digits into a verbal phrase, use the following method: Beginning at the right and working right to left, separate the number into distinct periods by inserting commas every three digits. Beginning at the left, read each period individually, saying the period name. Sample Set A Write the following numbers as words. Example 1.6.  Read 42958. Beginning at the right, we can separate this number into distinct periods by inserting a comma between the 2 and 9. 42,958 Beginning at the left, we read each period individually: Forty-two thousand, nine hundred fifty-eight. Example 1.7.  Read 307991343. Beginning at the right, we can separate this number into distinct periods by placing commas between the 1 and 3 and the 7 and 9. 307,991,343 Beginning at the left, we read each period individually. Three hundred seven million, nine hundred ninety-one thousand, three hundred forty-three. Example 1.8.  Read 36000000000001. Beginning at the right, we can separate this number into distinct periods by placing commas. 36,000,000,001 Beginning at the left, we read each period individually. Thirty-six trillion, one. Practice Set A Write each number in words. Exercise 1.3.1. (Go to Solution) 12,542 Exercise 1.3.2. (Go to Solution) 101,074,003 Exercise 1.3.3. (Go to Solution) 1,000,008 Reading Whole Numbers To convert a number that is formed by digits into a verbal phrase, use the following method: Beginning at the right and working right to left, separate the number into distinct periods by inserting commas every three digits. Beginning at the left, read each period individually, saying the period name. Sample Set A Write the following numbers as words. Example 1.6.  Read 42958. Beginning at the right, we can separate this number into distinct periods by inserting a comma between the 2 and 9. 42,958 Beginning at the left, we read each period individually: Forty-two thousand, nine hundred fifty-eight. Example 1.7.  Read 307991343. Beginning at the right, we can separate this number into distinct periods by placing commas between the 1 and 3 and the 7 and 9. 307,991,343 Beginning at the left, we read each period individually. Three hundred seven million, nine hundred ninety-one thousand, three hundred forty-three. Example 1.8.  Read 36000000000001. Beginning at the right, we can separate this number into distinct periods by placing commas. 36,000,000,001 Beginning at the left, we read each period individually. Thirty-six trillion, one. Practice Set A Write each number in words. Exercise 1.3.1. (Go to Solution) 12,542 Exercise 1.3.2. (Go to Solution) 101,074,003 Exercise 1.3.3. (Go to Solution) 1,000,008  || 
book4_ch01_3_5	Writing Whole Numbers To express a number in digits that is expressed in words, use the following method: Notice first that a number expressed as a verbal phrase will have its periods set off by commas. Starting at the beginning of the phrase, write each period of numbers individu­ally. Using commas to separate periods, combine the periods to form one number. Sample Set B Write each number using digits. Example 1.9.  Seven thousand, ninety-two. Using the comma as a period separator, we have 7,092 Example 1.10.  Fifty billion, one million, two hundred thousand, fourteen. Using the commas as period separators, we have 50,001,200,014 Example 1.11.  Ten million, five hundred twelve. The comma sets off the periods. We notice that there is no thousands period. We'll have to insert this ourselves. 10,000,512 Practice Set B Express each number using digits. Exercise 1.3.4. (Go to Solution) One hundred three thousand, twenty-five. Exercise 1.3.5. (Go to Solution) Six million, forty thousand, seven. Exercise 1.3.6. (Go to Solution) Twenty trillion, three billion, eighty million, one hundred nine thousand, four hundred two. Exercise 1.3.7. (Go to Solution) Eighty billion, thirty-five. Writing Whole Numbers To express a number in digits that is expressed in words, use the following method: Notice first that a number expressed as a verbal phrase will have its periods set off by commas. Starting at the beginning of the phrase, write each period of numbers individu­ally. Using commas to separate periods, combine the periods to form one number. Sample Set B Write each number using digits. Example 1.9.  Seven thousand, ninety-two. Using the comma as a period separator, we have 7,092 Example 1.10.  Fifty billion, one million, two hundred thousand, fourteen. Using the commas as period separators, we have 50,001,200,014 Example 1.11.  Ten million, five hundred twelve. The comma sets off the periods. We notice that there is no thousands period. We'll have to insert this ourselves. 10,000,512 Practice Set B Express each number using digits. Exercise 1.3.4. (Go to Solution) One hundred three thousand, twenty-five. Exercise 1.3.5. (Go to Solution) Six million, forty thousand, seven. Exercise 1.3.6. (Go to Solution) Twenty trillion, three billion, eighty million, one hundred nine thousand, four hundred two. Exercise 1.3.7. (Go to Solution) Eighty billion, thirty-five.  || 
book4_ch01_4	 || Rounding as an Approximation A primary use of whole numbers is to keep count of how many objects there are in a collection. Sometimes we're only interested in the approximate number of objects in the collection rather than the precise number. For example, there are approxi­mately 20 symbols in the collection below. The precise number of symbols in the above collection is 18. Rounding We often approximate the number of objects in a collection by mentally seeing the collection as occurring in groups of tens, hundreds, thousands, etc. This process of approximation is called rounding. Rounding is very useful in estimation. We will study estimation in Chapter 8. When we think of a collection as occurring in groups of tens, we say we're rounding to the nearest ten. When we think of a collection as occurring in groups of hundreds, we say we're rounding to the nearest hundred. This idea of rounding continues through thousands, ten thousands, hundred thousands, millions, etc. The process of rounding whole numbers is illustrated in the following examples. Example 1.12.  Round 67 to the nearest ten. On the number line, 67 is more than halfway from 60 to 70. The digit immedi­ately to the right of the tens digit, the round-off digit, is the indicator for this. Thus, 67, rounded to the nearest ten, is 70. Example 1.13.  Round 4,329 to the nearest hundred. On the number line, 4,329 is less than halfway from 4,300 to 4,400. The digit to the immediate right of the hundreds digit, the round-off digit, is the indicator. Thus, 4,329, rounded to the nearest hundred is 4,300. Example 1.14.  Round 16,500 to the nearest thousand. On the number line, 16,500 is exactly halfway from 16,000 to 17,000. By convention, when the number to be rounded is exactly halfway between two numbers, it is rounded to the higher number. Thus, 16,500, rounded to the nearest thousand, is 17,000. Example 1.15.  A person whose salary is $41,450 per year might tell a friend that she makes $41,000 per year. She has rounded 41,450 to the nearest thousand. The number 41,450 is closer to 41,000 than it is to 42,000.  || The Method of Rounding Whole Numbers From the observations made in the preceding examples, we can use the following method to round a whole number to a particular position. Mark the position of the round-off digit. Note the digit to the immediate right of the round-off digit. If it is less than 5, replace it and all the digits to its right with zeros. Leave the round-off digit unchanged. If it is 5 or larger, replace it and all the digits to its right with zeros. Increase the round-off digit by 1. Sample Set A Use the method of rounding whole numbers to solve the following problems. Example 1.16.  Round 3,426 to the nearest ten. We are rounding to the tens position. Mark the digit in the tens position Observe the digit immediately to the right of the tens position. It is 6. Since 6 is greater than 5, we round up by replacing 6 with 0 and adding 1 to the digit in the tens position (the round-off position): 2 + 1 = 3 . 3,430 Thus, 3,426 rounded to the nearest ten is 3,430. Example 1.17.  Round 9,614,018,007 to the nearest ten million. We are rounding to the nearest ten million. Observe the digit immediately to the right of the ten millions position. It is 4. Since 4 is less than 5, we round down by replacing 4 and all the digits to its right with zeros. 9,610,000,000 Thus, 9,614,018,007 rounded to the nearest ten million is 9,610,000,000. Example 1.18.  Round 148,422 to the nearest million. Since we are rounding to the nearest million, we'll have to imagine a digit in the millions position. We'll write 148,422 as 0,148,422. The digit immediately to the right is 1. Since 1 is less than 5, we'll round down by replacing it and all the digits to its right with zeros. 0,000,000 This number is 0. Thus, 148,422 rounded to the nearest million is 0. Example 1.19.  Round 397,000 to the nearest ten thousand. We are rounding to the nearest ten thousand. The digit immediately to the right of the ten thousand position is 7. Since 7 is greater than 5, we round up by replacing 7 and all the digits to its right with zeros and adding 1 to the digit in the ten thousands position. But 9 + 1 = 10 and we must carry the 1 to the next (the hundred thousands) position. 400,000 Thus, 397,000 rounded to the nearest ten thousand is 400,000. Practice Set A Use the method of rounding whole numbers to solve each problem. Exercise 1.4.1. (Go to Solution) Round 3387 to the nearest hundred. Exercise 1.4.2. (Go to Solution) Round 26,515 to the nearest thousand. Exercise 1.4.3. (Go to Solution) Round 30,852,900 to the nearest million. Exercise 1.4.4. (Go to Solution) Round 39 to the nearest hundred. Exercise 1.4.5. (Go to Solution) Round 59,600 to the nearest thousand.  || 
book4_ch01_4_2	Rounding as an Approximation A primary use of whole numbers is to keep count of how many objects there are in a collection. Sometimes we're only interested in the approximate number of objects in the collection rather than the precise number. For example, there are approxi­mately 20 symbols in the collection below. The precise number of symbols in the above collection is 18. Rounding We often approximate the number of objects in a collection by mentally seeing the collection as occurring in groups of tens, hundreds, thousands, etc. This process of approximation is called rounding. Rounding is very useful in estimation. We will study estimation in Chapter 8. When we think of a collection as occurring in groups of tens, we say we're rounding to the nearest ten. When we think of a collection as occurring in groups of hundreds, we say we're rounding to the nearest hundred. This idea of rounding continues through thousands, ten thousands, hundred thousands, millions, etc. The process of rounding whole numbers is illustrated in the following examples. Example 1.12.  Round 67 to the nearest ten. On the number line, 67 is more than halfway from 60 to 70. The digit immedi­ately to the right of the tens digit, the round-off digit, is the indicator for this. Thus, 67, rounded to the nearest ten, is 70. Example 1.13.  Round 4,329 to the nearest hundred. On the number line, 4,329 is less than halfway from 4,300 to 4,400. The digit to the immediate right of the hundreds digit, the round-off digit, is the indicator. Thus, 4,329, rounded to the nearest hundred is 4,300. Example 1.14.  Round 16,500 to the nearest thousand. On the number line, 16,500 is exactly halfway from 16,000 to 17,000. By convention, when the number to be rounded is exactly halfway between two numbers, it is rounded to the higher number. Thus, 16,500, rounded to the nearest thousand, is 17,000. Example 1.15.  A person whose salary is $41,450 per year might tell a friend that she makes $41,000 per year. She has rounded 41,450 to the nearest thousand. The number 41,450 is closer to 41,000 than it is to 42,000. Rounding as an Approximation A primary use of whole numbers is to keep count of how many objects there are in a collection. Sometimes we're only interested in the approximate number of objects in the collection rather than the precise number. For example, there are approxi­mately 20 symbols in the collection below. The precise number of symbols in the above collection is 18. Rounding We often approximate the number of objects in a collection by mentally seeing the collection as occurring in groups of tens, hundreds, thousands, etc. This process of approximation is called rounding. Rounding is very useful in estimation. We will study estimation in Chapter 8. When we think of a collection as occurring in groups of tens, we say we're rounding to the nearest ten. When we think of a collection as occurring in groups of hundreds, we say we're rounding to the nearest hundred. This idea of rounding continues through thousands, ten thousands, hundred thousands, millions, etc. The process of rounding whole numbers is illustrated in the following examples. Example 1.12.  Round 67 to the nearest ten. On the number line, 67 is more than halfway from 60 to 70. The digit immedi­ately to the right of the tens digit, the round-off digit, is the indicator for this. Thus, 67, rounded to the nearest ten, is 70. Example 1.13.  Round 4,329 to the nearest hundred. On the number line, 4,329 is less than halfway from 4,300 to 4,400. The digit to the immediate right of the hundreds digit, the round-off digit, is the indicator. Thus, 4,329, rounded to the nearest hundred is 4,300. Example 1.14.  Round 16,500 to the nearest thousand. On the number line, 16,500 is exactly halfway from 16,000 to 17,000. By convention, when the number to be rounded is exactly halfway between two numbers, it is rounded to the higher number. Thus, 16,500, rounded to the nearest thousand, is 17,000. Example 1.15.  A person whose salary is $41,450 per year might tell a friend that she makes $41,000 per year. She has rounded 41,450 to the nearest thousand. The number 41,450 is closer to 41,000 than it is to 42,000.  || 
book4_ch01_4_3	The Method of Rounding Whole Numbers From the observations made in the preceding examples, we can use the following method to round a whole number to a particular position. Mark the position of the round-off digit. Note the digit to the immediate right of the round-off digit. If it is less than 5, replace it and all the digits to its right with zeros. Leave the round-off digit unchanged. If it is 5 or larger, replace it and all the digits to its right with zeros. Increase the round-off digit by 1. Sample Set A Use the method of rounding whole numbers to solve the following problems. Example 1.16.  Round 3,426 to the nearest ten. We are rounding to the tens position. Mark the digit in the tens position Observe the digit immediately to the right of the tens position. It is 6. Since 6 is greater than 5, we round up by replacing 6 with 0 and adding 1 to the digit in the tens position (the round-off position): 2 + 1 = 3 . 3,430 Thus, 3,426 rounded to the nearest ten is 3,430. Example 1.17.  Round 9,614,018,007 to the nearest ten million. We are rounding to the nearest ten million. Observe the digit immediately to the right of the ten millions position. It is 4. Since 4 is less than 5, we round down by replacing 4 and all the digits to its right with zeros. 9,610,000,000 Thus, 9,614,018,007 rounded to the nearest ten million is 9,610,000,000. Example 1.18.  Round 148,422 to the nearest million. Since we are rounding to the nearest million, we'll have to imagine a digit in the millions position. We'll write 148,422 as 0,148,422. The digit immediately to the right is 1. Since 1 is less than 5, we'll round down by replacing it and all the digits to its right with zeros. 0,000,000 This number is 0. Thus, 148,422 rounded to the nearest million is 0. Example 1.19.  Round 397,000 to the nearest ten thousand. We are rounding to the nearest ten thousand. The digit immediately to the right of the ten thousand position is 7. Since 7 is greater than 5, we round up by replacing 7 and all the digits to its right with zeros and adding 1 to the digit in the ten thousands position. But 9 + 1 = 10 and we must carry the 1 to the next (the hundred thousands) position. 400,000 Thus, 397,000 rounded to the nearest ten thousand is 400,000. Practice Set A Use the method of rounding whole numbers to solve each problem. Exercise 1.4.1. (Go to Solution) Round 3387 to the nearest hundred. Exercise 1.4.2. (Go to Solution) Round 26,515 to the nearest thousand. Exercise 1.4.3. (Go to Solution) Round 30,852,900 to the nearest million. Exercise 1.4.4. (Go to Solution) Round 39 to the nearest hundred. Exercise 1.4.5. (Go to Solution) Round 59,600 to the nearest thousand. The Method of Rounding Whole Numbers From the observations made in the preceding examples, we can use the following method to round a whole number to a particular position. Mark the position of the round-off digit. Note the digit to the immediate right of the round-off digit. If it is less than 5, replace it and all the digits to its right with zeros. Leave the round-off digit unchanged. If it is 5 or larger, replace it and all the digits to its right with zeros. Increase the round-off digit by 1. Sample Set A Use the method of rounding whole numbers to solve the following problems. Example 1.16.  Round 3,426 to the nearest ten. We are rounding to the tens position. Mark the digit in the tens position Observe the digit immediately to the right of the tens position. It is 6. Since 6 is greater than 5, we round up by replacing 6 with 0 and adding 1 to the digit in the tens position (the round-off position): 2 + 1 = 3 . 3,430 Thus, 3,426 rounded to the nearest ten is 3,430. Example 1.17.  Round 9,614,018,007 to the nearest ten million. We are rounding to the nearest ten million. Observe the digit immediately to the right of the ten millions position. It is 4. Since 4 is less than 5, we round down by replacing 4 and all the digits to its right with zeros. 9,610,000,000 Thus, 9,614,018,007 rounded to the nearest ten million is 9,610,000,000. Example 1.18.  Round 148,422 to the nearest million. Since we are rounding to the nearest million, we'll have to imagine a digit in the millions position. We'll write 148,422 as 0,148,422. The digit immediately to the right is 1. Since 1 is less than 5, we'll round down by replacing it and all the digits to its right with zeros. 0,000,000 This number is 0. Thus, 148,422 rounded to the nearest million is 0. Example 1.19.  Round 397,000 to the nearest ten thousand. We are rounding to the nearest ten thousand. The digit immediately to the right of the ten thousand position is 7. Since 7 is greater than 5, we round up by replacing 7 and all the digits to its right with zeros and adding 1 to the digit in the ten thousands position. But 9 + 1 = 10 and we must carry the 1 to the next (the hundred thousands) position. 400,000 Thus, 397,000 rounded to the nearest ten thousand is 400,000. Practice Set A Use the method of rounding whole numbers to solve each problem. Exercise 1.4.1. (Go to Solution) Round 3387 to the nearest hundred. Exercise 1.4.2. (Go to Solution) Round 26,515 to the nearest thousand. Exercise 1.4.3. (Go to Solution) Round 30,852,900 to the nearest million. Exercise 1.4.4. (Go to Solution) Round 39 to the nearest hundred. Exercise 1.4.5. (Go to Solution) Round 59,600 to the nearest thousand.  || 
book4_ch01_5	 || Addition Suppose we have two collections of objects that we combine together to form a third collection. For example, We are combining a collection of four objects with a collection of three objects to obtain a collection of seven objects. Addition The process of combining two or more objects (real or intuitive) to form a third, the total, is called addition. In addition, the numbers being added are called addends or terms, and the total is called the sum. The plus symbol (+) is used to indicate addition, and the equal symbol (=) is used to represent the word "equal." For example, 4 + 3 = 7 means "four added to three equals seven."  || Addition Visualized on the Number Line Addition is easily visualized on the number line. Let's visualize the addition of 4 and 3 using the number line. To find 4 + 3, Start at 0. Move to the right 4 units. We are now located at 4. From 4, move to the right 3 units. We are now located at 7. Thus, 4 + 3 = 7.  || The Addition Process We'll study the process of addition by considering the sum of 25 and 43. We write this as 68. We can suggest the following procedure for adding whole numbers using this example. Example 1.20. The Process of Adding Whole Numbers To add whole numbers, The process: Write the numbers vertically, placing corresponding positions in the same column. Add the digits in each column. Start at the right (in the ones position) and move to the left, placing the sum at the bottom. Caution Confusion and incorrect sums can occur when the numbers are not aligned in columns properly. Avoid writing such additions as Sample Set A Example 1.21.  Add 276 and 103. Example 1.22.  Add 1459 and 130 In each of these examples, each individual sum does not exceed 9. We will examine individual sums that exceed 9 in the next section. Practice Set A Perform each addition. Show the expanded form in problems 1 and 2. Exercise 1.5.1. (Go to Solution) Add 63 and 25. Exercise 1.5.2. (Go to Solution) Add 4,026 and 1,501. Exercise 1.5.3. (Go to Solution) Add 231,045 and 36,121.  || Addition Involving Carrying It often happens in addition that the sum of the digits in a column will exceed 9. This happens when we add 18 and 34. We show this in expanded form as follows. Notice that when we add the 8 ones to the 4 ones we get 12 ones. We then convert the 12 ones to 1 ten and 2 ones. In vertical addition, we show this conversion by carrying the ten to the tens column. We write a 1 at the top of the tens column to indicate the carry. This same example is shown in a shorter form as follows: 8 + 4 = 12 Write 2, carry 1 ten to the top of the next column to the left. Sample Set B Perform the following additions. Use the process of carrying when needed. Example 1.23.  Add 1875 and 358. The sum is 2233. Example 1.24.  Add 89,208 and 4,946. The sum is 94,154. Example 1.25.  Add 38 and 95. As you proceed with the addition, it is a good idea to keep in mind what is actually happening. The sum is 133. Example 1.26.  Find the sum 2648, 1359, and 861. The sum is 4,868. Numbers other than 1 can be carried as illustrated in Example 1.27. Example 1.27.  Find the sum of the following numbers. The sum is 983,689. Example 1.28.  The number of students enrolled at Riemann College in the years 1984, 1985, 1986, and 1987 was 10,406, 9,289, 10,108, and 11,412, respectively. What was the total number of students en­rolled at Riemann College in the years 1985, 1986, and 1987? We can determine the total number of students enrolled by adding 9,289, 10,108, and 11,412, the number of students enrolled in the years 1985, 1986, and 1987. The total number of students enrolled at Riemann College in the years 1985, 1986, and 1987 was 30,809. Practice Set B Perform each addition. For the next three problems, show the expanded form. Exercise 1.5.4. (Go to Solution) Add 58 and 29. Exercise 1.5.5. (Go to Solution) Add 476 and 85. Exercise 1.5.6. (Go to Solution) Add 27 and 88. Exercise 1.5.7. (Go to Solution) Add 67,898 and 85,627. For the next three problems, find the sums. Exercise 1.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.5.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.5.10. (Go to Solution)  || Calculators Calculators provide a very simple and quick way to find sums of whole numbers. For the two problems in Sample Set C, assume the use of a calculator that does not require the use of an ENTER key (such as many Hewlett-Packard calculators). Sample Set C Use a calculator to find each sum. Example 1.29.  Table 1.36. 34 + 21 Display Reads Type 34 34 Press + 34 Type 21 21 Press = 55 The sum is 55. Example 1.30.  Table 1.37. 106 + 85 + 322 + 406 Display Reads   Type 106 106 The calculator keeps a running subtotal Press + 106   Type 85 85   Press = 191 ← 106 + 85 Type 322 322   Press + 513 ← 191 + 322 Type 406 406   Press = 919 ← 513 + 406 The sum is 919. Practice Set C Use a calculator to find the following sums. Exercise 1.5.11. (Go to Solution) 62 + 81 + 12 Exercise 1.5.12. (Go to Solution) 9,261 + 8,543 + 884 + 1,062 Exercise 1.5.13. (Go to Solution) 10,221 + 9,016 + 11,445  || 
book4_ch01_5_2	Addition Suppose we have two collections of objects that we combine together to form a third collection. For example, We are combining a collection of four objects with a collection of three objects to obtain a collection of seven objects. Addition The process of combining two or more objects (real or intuitive) to form a third, the total, is called addition. In addition, the numbers being added are called addends or terms, and the total is called the sum. The plus symbol (+) is used to indicate addition, and the equal symbol (=) is used to represent the word "equal." For example, 4 + 3 = 7 means "four added to three equals seven." Addition Suppose we have two collections of objects that we combine together to form a third collection. For example, We are combining a collection of four objects with a collection of three objects to obtain a collection of seven objects. Addition The process of combining two or more objects (real or intuitive) to form a third, the total, is called addition. In addition, the numbers being added are called addends or terms, and the total is called the sum. The plus symbol (+) is used to indicate addition, and the equal symbol (=) is used to represent the word "equal." For example, 4 + 3 = 7 means "four added to three equals seven."  || 
book4_ch01_5_3	Addition Visualized on the Number Line Addition is easily visualized on the number line. Let's visualize the addition of 4 and 3 using the number line. To find 4 + 3, Start at 0. Move to the right 4 units. We are now located at 4. From 4, move to the right 3 units. We are now located at 7. Thus, 4 + 3 = 7. Addition Visualized on the Number Line Addition is easily visualized on the number line. Let's visualize the addition of 4 and 3 using the number line. To find 4 + 3, Start at 0. Move to the right 4 units. We are now located at 4. From 4, move to the right 3 units. We are now located at 7. Thus, 4 + 3 = 7.  || 
book4_ch01_5_4	The Addition Process We'll study the process of addition by considering the sum of 25 and 43. We write this as 68. We can suggest the following procedure for adding whole numbers using this example. Example 1.20. The Process of Adding Whole Numbers To add whole numbers, The process: Write the numbers vertically, placing corresponding positions in the same column. Add the digits in each column. Start at the right (in the ones position) and move to the left, placing the sum at the bottom. Caution Confusion and incorrect sums can occur when the numbers are not aligned in columns properly. Avoid writing such additions as Sample Set A Example 1.21.  Add 276 and 103. Example 1.22.  Add 1459 and 130 In each of these examples, each individual sum does not exceed 9. We will examine individual sums that exceed 9 in the next section. Practice Set A Perform each addition. Show the expanded form in problems 1 and 2. Exercise 1.5.1. (Go to Solution) Add 63 and 25. Exercise 1.5.2. (Go to Solution) Add 4,026 and 1,501. Exercise 1.5.3. (Go to Solution) Add 231,045 and 36,121. The Addition Process We'll study the process of addition by considering the sum of 25 and 43. We write this as 68. We can suggest the following procedure for adding whole numbers using this example. Example 1.20. The Process of Adding Whole Numbers To add whole numbers, The process: Write the numbers vertically, placing corresponding positions in the same column. Add the digits in each column. Start at the right (in the ones position) and move to the left, placing the sum at the bottom. Caution Confusion and incorrect sums can occur when the numbers are not aligned in columns properly. Avoid writing such additions as Sample Set A Example 1.21.  Add 276 and 103. Example 1.22.  Add 1459 and 130 In each of these examples, each individual sum does not exceed 9. We will examine individual sums that exceed 9 in the next section. Practice Set A Perform each addition. Show the expanded form in problems 1 and 2. Exercise 1.5.1. (Go to Solution) Add 63 and 25. Exercise 1.5.2. (Go to Solution) Add 4,026 and 1,501. Exercise 1.5.3. (Go to Solution) Add 231,045 and 36,121.  || 
book4_ch01_5_7	Addition Involving Carrying It often happens in addition that the sum of the digits in a column will exceed 9. This happens when we add 18 and 34. We show this in expanded form as follows. Notice that when we add the 8 ones to the 4 ones we get 12 ones. We then convert the 12 ones to 1 ten and 2 ones. In vertical addition, we show this conversion by carrying the ten to the tens column. We write a 1 at the top of the tens column to indicate the carry. This same example is shown in a shorter form as follows: 8 + 4 = 12 Write 2, carry 1 ten to the top of the next column to the left. Sample Set B Perform the following additions. Use the process of carrying when needed. Example 1.23.  Add 1875 and 358. The sum is 2233. Example 1.24.  Add 89,208 and 4,946. The sum is 94,154. Example 1.25.  Add 38 and 95. As you proceed with the addition, it is a good idea to keep in mind what is actually happening. The sum is 133. Example 1.26.  Find the sum 2648, 1359, and 861. The sum is 4,868. Numbers other than 1 can be carried as illustrated in Example 1.27. Example 1.27.  Find the sum of the following numbers. The sum is 983,689. Example 1.28.  The number of students enrolled at Riemann College in the years 1984, 1985, 1986, and 1987 was 10,406, 9,289, 10,108, and 11,412, respectively. What was the total number of students en­rolled at Riemann College in the years 1985, 1986, and 1987? We can determine the total number of students enrolled by adding 9,289, 10,108, and 11,412, the number of students enrolled in the years 1985, 1986, and 1987. The total number of students enrolled at Riemann College in the years 1985, 1986, and 1987 was 30,809. Practice Set B Perform each addition. For the next three problems, show the expanded form. Exercise 1.5.4. (Go to Solution) Add 58 and 29. Exercise 1.5.5. (Go to Solution) Add 476 and 85. Exercise 1.5.6. (Go to Solution) Add 27 and 88. Exercise 1.5.7. (Go to Solution) Add 67,898 and 85,627. For the next three problems, find the sums. Exercise 1.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.5.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.5.10. (Go to Solution) Addition Involving Carrying It often happens in addition that the sum of the digits in a column will exceed 9. This happens when we add 18 and 34. We show this in expanded form as follows. Notice that when we add the 8 ones to the 4 ones we get 12 ones. We then convert the 12 ones to 1 ten and 2 ones. In vertical addition, we show this conversion by carrying the ten to the tens column. We write a 1 at the top of the tens column to indicate the carry. This same example is shown in a shorter form as follows: 8 + 4 = 12 Write 2, carry 1 ten to the top of the next column to the left. Sample Set B Perform the following additions. Use the process of carrying when needed. Example 1.23.  Add 1875 and 358. The sum is 2233. Example 1.24.  Add 89,208 and 4,946. The sum is 94,154. Example 1.25.  Add 38 and 95. As you proceed with the addition, it is a good idea to keep in mind what is actually happening. The sum is 133. Example 1.26.  Find the sum 2648, 1359, and 861. The sum is 4,868. Numbers other than 1 can be carried as illustrated in Example 1.27. Example 1.27.  Find the sum of the following numbers. The sum is 983,689. Example 1.28.  The number of students enrolled at Riemann College in the years 1984, 1985, 1986, and 1987 was 10,406, 9,289, 10,108, and 11,412, respectively. What was the total number of students en­rolled at Riemann College in the years 1985, 1986, and 1987? We can determine the total number of students enrolled by adding 9,289, 10,108, and 11,412, the number of students enrolled in the years 1985, 1986, and 1987. The total number of students enrolled at Riemann College in the years 1985, 1986, and 1987 was 30,809. Practice Set B Perform each addition. For the next three problems, show the expanded form. Exercise 1.5.4. (Go to Solution) Add 58 and 29. Exercise 1.5.5. (Go to Solution) Add 476 and 85. Exercise 1.5.6. (Go to Solution) Add 27 and 88. Exercise 1.5.7. (Go to Solution) Add 67,898 and 85,627. For the next three problems, find the sums. Exercise 1.5.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.5.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.5.10. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch01_5_10	Calculators Calculators provide a very simple and quick way to find sums of whole numbers. For the two problems in Sample Set C, assume the use of a calculator that does not require the use of an ENTER key (such as many Hewlett-Packard calculators). Sample Set C Use a calculator to find each sum. Example 1.29.  Table 1.36. 34 + 21 Display Reads Type 34 34 Press + 34 Type 21 21 Press = 55 The sum is 55. Example 1.30.  Table 1.37. 106 + 85 + 322 + 406 Display Reads   Type 106 106 The calculator keeps a running subtotal Press + 106   Type 85 85   Press = 191 ← 106 + 85 Type 322 322   Press + 513 ← 191 + 322 Type 406 406   Press = 919 ← 513 + 406 The sum is 919. Practice Set C Use a calculator to find the following sums. Exercise 1.5.11. (Go to Solution) 62 + 81 + 12 Exercise 1.5.12. (Go to Solution) 9,261 + 8,543 + 884 + 1,062 Exercise 1.5.13. (Go to Solution) 10,221 + 9,016 + 11,445 Calculators Calculators provide a very simple and quick way to find sums of whole numbers. For the two problems in Sample Set C, assume the use of a calculator that does not require the use of an ENTER key (such as many Hewlett-Packard calculators). Sample Set C Use a calculator to find each sum. Example 1.29.  Table 1.36. 34 + 21 Display Reads Type 34 34 Press + 34 Type 21 21 Press = 55 The sum is 55. Example 1.30.  Table 1.37. 106 + 85 + 322 + 406 Display Reads   Type 106 106 The calculator keeps a running subtotal Press + 106   Type 85 85   Press = 191 ← 106 + 85 Type 322 322   Press + 513 ← 191 + 322 Type 406 406   Press = 919 ← 513 + 406 The sum is 919. Practice Set C Use a calculator to find the following sums. Exercise 1.5.11. (Go to Solution) 62 + 81 + 12 Exercise 1.5.12. (Go to Solution) 9,261 + 8,543 + 884 + 1,062 Exercise 1.5.13. (Go to Solution) 10,221 + 9,016 + 11,445  || 
book4_ch01_6	 || Subtraction Subtraction Subtraction is the process of determining the remainder when part of the total is removed. Suppose the sum of two whole numbers is 11, and from 11 we remove 4. Using the number line to help our visualization, we see that if we are located at 11 and move 4 units to the left, and thus remove 4 units, we will be located at 7. Thus, 7 units remain when we remove 4 units from 11 units. The Minus Symbol The minus symbol (-) is used to indicate subtraction. For example, 11 − 4 indicates that 4 is to be subtracted from 11. Minuend The number immediately in front of or the minus symbol is called the minuend, and it represents the original number of units. Subtrahend The number immediately following or below the minus symbol is called the subtrahend, and it represents the number of units to be removed. Difference The result of the subtraction is called the difference of the two numbers. For example, in 11 − 4 = 7, 11 is the minuend, 4 is the subtrahend, and 7 is the difference.  || Subtraction as the Opposite of Addition Subtraction can be thought of as the opposite of addition. We show this in the problems in Sample Set A. Sample Set A Example 1.31.  8 − 5 = 3 since 3 + 5 = 8. Example 1.32.  9 − 3 = 6 since 6 + 3 = 9. Practice Set A Complete the following statements. Exercise 1.6.1. (Go to Solution) 7 − 5 = __________ since __________ + 5 = 7. Exercise 1.6.2. (Go to Solution) 9 − 1 = __________ since __________ + 1 = 9. Exercise 1.6.3. (Go to Solution) 17 − 8 = __________ since __________ + 8 = 17.  || The Subtraction Process We'll study the process of the subtraction of two whole numbers by considering the difference between 48 and 35. which we write as 13. Example 1.33. The Process of Subtracting Whole Numbers To subtract two whole numbers, The process Write the numbers vertically, placing corresponding positions in the same column. Subtract the digits in each column. Start at the right, in the ones position, and move to the left, placing the difference at the bottom. Sample Set B Perform the following subtractions. Example 1.34.  Example 1.35.  Example 1.36.  Find the difference between 977 and 235. Write the numbers vertically, placing the larger number on top. Line up the columns properly. The difference between 977 and 235 is 742. Example 1.37.  In Keys County in 1987, there were 809 cable television installations. In Flags County in 1987, there were 1,159 cable television installations. How many more cable television installations were there in Flags County than in Keys County in 1987? We need to determine the difference between 1,159 and 809. There were 350 more cable television installations in Flags County than in Keys County in 1987. Practice Set B Perform the following subtractions. Exercise 1.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.8. (Go to Solution) Find the difference between 88,526 and 26,412. In each of these problems, each bottom digit is less than the corresponding top digit. This may not always be the case. We will examine the case where the bottom digit is greater than the corresponding top digit in the next section.  || Subtraction Involving Borrowing Minuend and Subtrahend It often happens in the subtraction of two whole numbers that a digit in the minuend (top number) will be less than the digit in the same position in the subtrahend (bottom number). This happens when we subtract 27 from 84. We do not have a name for 4 − 7. We need to rename 84 in order to continue. We'll do so as follows: Our new name for 84 is 7 tens + 14 ones. Notice that we converted 8 tens to 7 tens + 1 ten, and then we converted the 1 ten to 10 ones. We then had 14 ones and were able to perform the subtraction. Borrowing The process of borrowing (converting) is illustrated in the problems of Sample Set C. Sample Set C Example 1.38.  Borrow 1 ten from the 8 tens. This leaves 7 tens. Convert the 1 ten to 10 ones. Add 10 ones to 4 ones to get 14 ones. Example 1.39.  Borrow 1 hundred from the 6 hundreds. This leaves 5 hundreds. Convert the 1 hundred to 10 tens. Add 10 tens to 7 tens to get 17 tens. Practice Set C Perform the following subtractions. Show the expanded form for the first three problems. Exercise 1.6.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.14. (Go to Solution) Borrowing More Than Once Sometimes it is necessary to borrow more than once. This is shown in the problems in the section called “Sample Set D”. Sample Set D Perform the Subtractions. Borrowing more than once if necessary Example 1.40.  Borrow 1 ten from the 4 tens. This leaves 3 tens. Convert the 1 ten to 10 ones. Add 10 ones to 1 one to get 11 ones. We can now perform 11 − 8. Borrow 1 hundred from the 6 hundreds. This leaves 5 hundreds. Convert the 1 hundred to 10 tens. Add 10 tens to 3 tens to get 13 tens. Now 13 − 5 = 8. 5 − 3 = 2. Example 1.41.  Borrow 1 ten from the 3 tens. This leaves 2 tens. Convert the 1 ten to 10 ones. Add 10 ones to 4 ones to get 14 ones. We can now perform 14 − 5. Borrow 1 hundred from the 5 hundreds. This leaves 4 hundreds. Convert the 1 hundred to 10 tens. Add 10 tens to 2 tens to get 12 tens. We can now perform 12 − 8 = 4. Finally, 4 − 0 = 4. Example 1.42.  After borrowing, we have Practice Set D Perform the following subtractions. Exercise 1.6.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.17. (Go to Solution)  || Borrowing from Zero It often happens in a subtraction problem that we have to borrow from one or more zeros. This occurs in problems such as and We'll examine each case. Example 1.43. Borrowing from a single zero. Consider the problem Since we do not have a name for 3 − 7, we must borrow from 0. Since there are no tens to borrow, we must borrow 1 hundred. One hundred = 10 tens. We can now borrow 1 ten from 10 tens (leaving 9 tens). One ten = 10 ones and 10 ones + 3 ones = 13 ones. Now we can suggest the following method for borrowing from a single zero. Borrowing from a Single Zero To borrow from a single zero, Decrease the digit to the immediate left of zero by one. Draw a line through the zero and make it a 10. Proceed to subtract as usual. Sample Set E Example 1.44.  Perform this subtraction. The number 503 contains a single zero The number to the immediate left of 0 is 5. Decrease 5 by 1. 5 − 1 = 4 Draw a line through the zero and make it a 10. Borrow from the 10 and proceed. 1 ten + 10 ones 10 ones + 3 ones = 13 ones Practice Set E Perform each subtraction. Exercise 1.6.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.20. (Go to Solution) Example 1.45. Borrowing from a group of zeros Consider the problem In this case, we have a group of zeros. Since we cannot borrow any tens or hundreds, we must borrow 1 thousand. One thousand = 10 hundreds. We can now borrow 1 hundred from 10 hundreds. One hundred = 10 tens. We can now borrow 1 ten from 10 tens. One ten = 10 ones. From observations made in this procedure we can suggest the following method for borrowing from a group of zeros. Borrowing from a Group of zeros To borrow from a group of zeros, Decrease the digit to the immediate left of the group of zeros by one. Draw a line through each zero in the group and make it a 9, except the rightmost zero, make it 10. Proceed to subtract as usual. Sample Set F Perform each subtraction. Example 1.46.  The number 40,000 contains a group of zeros. The number to the immediate left of the group is 4. Decrease 4 by 1. 4 − 1 = 3 Make each 0, except the rightmost one, 9. Make the rightmost 0 a 10. Subtract as usual. Example 1.47.  The number 8,000,006 contains a group of zeros. The number to the immediate left of the group is 8. Decrease 8 by 1. 8 − 1 = 7 Make each zero, except the rightmost one, 9. Make the rightmost 0 a 10. To perform the subtraction, we’ll need to borrow from the ten. Practice Set F Perform each subtraction. Exercise 1.6.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.22. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.23. (Go to Solution)  || Calculators In practice, calculators are used to find the difference between two whole numbers. Sample Set G Find the difference between 1006 and 284. Table 1.38. Display Reads Type 1006 1006 Press 1006 Type 284 284 Press = 722 The difference between 1006 and 284 is 722. (What happens if you type 284 first and then 1006? We'll study such numbers in Section 1.6Chapter 10.) Practice Set G Exercise 1.6.24. (Go to Solution) Use a calculator to find the difference between 7338 and 2809. Exercise 1.6.25. (Go to Solution) Use a calculator to find the difference between 31,060,001 and 8,591,774.  || 
book4_ch01_6_2	Subtraction Subtraction Subtraction is the process of determining the remainder when part of the total is removed. Suppose the sum of two whole numbers is 11, and from 11 we remove 4. Using the number line to help our visualization, we see that if we are located at 11 and move 4 units to the left, and thus remove 4 units, we will be located at 7. Thus, 7 units remain when we remove 4 units from 11 units. The Minus Symbol The minus symbol (-) is used to indicate subtraction. For example, 11 − 4 indicates that 4 is to be subtracted from 11. Minuend The number immediately in front of or the minus symbol is called the minuend, and it represents the original number of units. Subtrahend The number immediately following or below the minus symbol is called the subtrahend, and it represents the number of units to be removed. Difference The result of the subtraction is called the difference of the two numbers. For example, in 11 − 4 = 7, 11 is the minuend, 4 is the subtrahend, and 7 is the difference. Subtraction Subtraction Subtraction is the process of determining the remainder when part of the total is removed. Suppose the sum of two whole numbers is 11, and from 11 we remove 4. Using the number line to help our visualization, we see that if we are located at 11 and move 4 units to the left, and thus remove 4 units, we will be located at 7. Thus, 7 units remain when we remove 4 units from 11 units. The Minus Symbol The minus symbol (-) is used to indicate subtraction. For example, 11 − 4 indicates that 4 is to be subtracted from 11. Minuend The number immediately in front of or the minus symbol is called the minuend, and it represents the original number of units. Subtrahend The number immediately following or below the minus symbol is called the subtrahend, and it represents the number of units to be removed. Difference The result of the subtraction is called the difference of the two numbers. For example, in 11 − 4 = 7, 11 is the minuend, 4 is the subtrahend, and 7 is the difference.  || 
book4_ch01_6_3	Subtraction as the Opposite of Addition Subtraction can be thought of as the opposite of addition. We show this in the problems in Sample Set A. Sample Set A Example 1.31.  8 − 5 = 3 since 3 + 5 = 8. Example 1.32.  9 − 3 = 6 since 6 + 3 = 9. Practice Set A Complete the following statements. Exercise 1.6.1. (Go to Solution) 7 − 5 = __________ since __________ + 5 = 7. Exercise 1.6.2. (Go to Solution) 9 − 1 = __________ since __________ + 1 = 9. Exercise 1.6.3. (Go to Solution) 17 − 8 = __________ since __________ + 8 = 17. Subtraction as the Opposite of Addition Subtraction can be thought of as the opposite of addition. We show this in the problems in Sample Set A. Sample Set A Example 1.31.  8 − 5 = 3 since 3 + 5 = 8. Example 1.32.  9 − 3 = 6 since 6 + 3 = 9. Practice Set A Complete the following statements. Exercise 1.6.1. (Go to Solution) 7 − 5 = __________ since __________ + 5 = 7. Exercise 1.6.2. (Go to Solution) 9 − 1 = __________ since __________ + 1 = 9. Exercise 1.6.3. (Go to Solution) 17 − 8 = __________ since __________ + 8 = 17.  || 
book4_ch01_6_6	The Subtraction Process We'll study the process of the subtraction of two whole numbers by considering the difference between 48 and 35. which we write as 13. Example 1.33. The Process of Subtracting Whole Numbers To subtract two whole numbers, The process Write the numbers vertically, placing corresponding positions in the same column. Subtract the digits in each column. Start at the right, in the ones position, and move to the left, placing the difference at the bottom. Sample Set B Perform the following subtractions. Example 1.34.  Example 1.35.  Example 1.36.  Find the difference between 977 and 235. Write the numbers vertically, placing the larger number on top. Line up the columns properly. The difference between 977 and 235 is 742. Example 1.37.  In Keys County in 1987, there were 809 cable television installations. In Flags County in 1987, there were 1,159 cable television installations. How many more cable television installations were there in Flags County than in Keys County in 1987? We need to determine the difference between 1,159 and 809. There were 350 more cable television installations in Flags County than in Keys County in 1987. Practice Set B Perform the following subtractions. Exercise 1.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.8. (Go to Solution) Find the difference between 88,526 and 26,412. In each of these problems, each bottom digit is less than the corresponding top digit. This may not always be the case. We will examine the case where the bottom digit is greater than the corresponding top digit in the next section. The Subtraction Process We'll study the process of the subtraction of two whole numbers by considering the difference between 48 and 35. which we write as 13. Example 1.33. The Process of Subtracting Whole Numbers To subtract two whole numbers, The process Write the numbers vertically, placing corresponding positions in the same column. Subtract the digits in each column. Start at the right, in the ones position, and move to the left, placing the difference at the bottom. Sample Set B Perform the following subtractions. Example 1.34.  Example 1.35.  Example 1.36.  Find the difference between 977 and 235. Write the numbers vertically, placing the larger number on top. Line up the columns properly. The difference between 977 and 235 is 742. Example 1.37.  In Keys County in 1987, there were 809 cable television installations. In Flags County in 1987, there were 1,159 cable television installations. How many more cable television installations were there in Flags County than in Keys County in 1987? We need to determine the difference between 1,159 and 809. There were 350 more cable television installations in Flags County than in Keys County in 1987. Practice Set B Perform the following subtractions. Exercise 1.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.8. (Go to Solution) Find the difference between 88,526 and 26,412. In each of these problems, each bottom digit is less than the corresponding top digit. This may not always be the case. We will examine the case where the bottom digit is greater than the corresponding top digit in the next section.  || 
book4_ch01_6_9	Subtraction Involving Borrowing Minuend and Subtrahend It often happens in the subtraction of two whole numbers that a digit in the minuend (top number) will be less than the digit in the same position in the subtrahend (bottom number). This happens when we subtract 27 from 84. We do not have a name for 4 − 7. We need to rename 84 in order to continue. We'll do so as follows: Our new name for 84 is 7 tens + 14 ones. Notice that we converted 8 tens to 7 tens + 1 ten, and then we converted the 1 ten to 10 ones. We then had 14 ones and were able to perform the subtraction. Borrowing The process of borrowing (converting) is illustrated in the problems of Sample Set C. Sample Set C Example 1.38.  Borrow 1 ten from the 8 tens. This leaves 7 tens. Convert the 1 ten to 10 ones. Add 10 ones to 4 ones to get 14 ones. Example 1.39.  Borrow 1 hundred from the 6 hundreds. This leaves 5 hundreds. Convert the 1 hundred to 10 tens. Add 10 tens to 7 tens to get 17 tens. Practice Set C Perform the following subtractions. Show the expanded form for the first three problems. Exercise 1.6.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.14. (Go to Solution) Borrowing More Than Once Sometimes it is necessary to borrow more than once. This is shown in the problems in the section called “Sample Set D”. Sample Set D Perform the Subtractions. Borrowing more than once if necessary Example 1.40.  Borrow 1 ten from the 4 tens. This leaves 3 tens. Convert the 1 ten to 10 ones. Add 10 ones to 1 one to get 11 ones. We can now perform 11 − 8. Borrow 1 hundred from the 6 hundreds. This leaves 5 hundreds. Convert the 1 hundred to 10 tens. Add 10 tens to 3 tens to get 13 tens. Now 13 − 5 = 8. 5 − 3 = 2. Example 1.41.  Borrow 1 ten from the 3 tens. This leaves 2 tens. Convert the 1 ten to 10 ones. Add 10 ones to 4 ones to get 14 ones. We can now perform 14 − 5. Borrow 1 hundred from the 5 hundreds. This leaves 4 hundreds. Convert the 1 hundred to 10 tens. Add 10 tens to 2 tens to get 12 tens. We can now perform 12 − 8 = 4. Finally, 4 − 0 = 4. Example 1.42.  After borrowing, we have Practice Set D Perform the following subtractions. Exercise 1.6.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.17. (Go to Solution) Subtraction Involving Borrowing Minuend and Subtrahend It often happens in the subtraction of two whole numbers that a digit in the minuend (top number) will be less than the digit in the same position in the subtrahend (bottom number). This happens when we subtract 27 from 84. We do not have a name for 4 − 7. We need to rename 84 in order to continue. We'll do so as follows: Our new name for 84 is 7 tens + 14 ones. Notice that we converted 8 tens to 7 tens + 1 ten, and then we converted the 1 ten to 10 ones. We then had 14 ones and were able to perform the subtraction. Borrowing The process of borrowing (converting) is illustrated in the problems of Sample Set C. Sample Set C Example 1.38.  Borrow 1 ten from the 8 tens. This leaves 7 tens. Convert the 1 ten to 10 ones. Add 10 ones to 4 ones to get 14 ones. Example 1.39.  Borrow 1 hundred from the 6 hundreds. This leaves 5 hundreds. Convert the 1 hundred to 10 tens. Add 10 tens to 7 tens to get 17 tens. Practice Set C Perform the following subtractions. Show the expanded form for the first three problems. Exercise 1.6.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.14. (Go to Solution) Borrowing More Than Once Sometimes it is necessary to borrow more than once. This is shown in the problems in the section called “Sample Set D”. Sample Set D Perform the Subtractions. Borrowing more than once if necessary Example 1.40.  Borrow 1 ten from the 4 tens. This leaves 3 tens. Convert the 1 ten to 10 ones. Add 10 ones to 1 one to get 11 ones. We can now perform 11 − 8. Borrow 1 hundred from the 6 hundreds. This leaves 5 hundreds. Convert the 1 hundred to 10 tens. Add 10 tens to 3 tens to get 13 tens. Now 13 − 5 = 8. 5 − 3 = 2. Example 1.41.  Borrow 1 ten from the 3 tens. This leaves 2 tens. Convert the 1 ten to 10 ones. Add 10 ones to 4 ones to get 14 ones. We can now perform 14 − 5. Borrow 1 hundred from the 5 hundreds. This leaves 4 hundreds. Convert the 1 hundred to 10 tens. Add 10 tens to 2 tens to get 12 tens. We can now perform 12 − 8 = 4. Finally, 4 − 0 = 4. Example 1.42.  After borrowing, we have Practice Set D Perform the following subtractions. Exercise 1.6.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.17. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch01_6_14	Borrowing from Zero It often happens in a subtraction problem that we have to borrow from one or more zeros. This occurs in problems such as and We'll examine each case. Example 1.43. Borrowing from a single zero. Consider the problem Since we do not have a name for 3 − 7, we must borrow from 0. Since there are no tens to borrow, we must borrow 1 hundred. One hundred = 10 tens. We can now borrow 1 ten from 10 tens (leaving 9 tens). One ten = 10 ones and 10 ones + 3 ones = 13 ones. Now we can suggest the following method for borrowing from a single zero. Borrowing from a Single Zero To borrow from a single zero, Decrease the digit to the immediate left of zero by one. Draw a line through the zero and make it a 10. Proceed to subtract as usual. Sample Set E Example 1.44.  Perform this subtraction. The number 503 contains a single zero The number to the immediate left of 0 is 5. Decrease 5 by 1. 5 − 1 = 4 Draw a line through the zero and make it a 10. Borrow from the 10 and proceed. 1 ten + 10 ones 10 ones + 3 ones = 13 ones Practice Set E Perform each subtraction. Exercise 1.6.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.20. (Go to Solution) Example 1.45. Borrowing from a group of zeros Consider the problem In this case, we have a group of zeros. Since we cannot borrow any tens or hundreds, we must borrow 1 thousand. One thousand = 10 hundreds. We can now borrow 1 hundred from 10 hundreds. One hundred = 10 tens. We can now borrow 1 ten from 10 tens. One ten = 10 ones. From observations made in this procedure we can suggest the following method for borrowing from a group of zeros. Borrowing from a Group of zeros To borrow from a group of zeros, Decrease the digit to the immediate left of the group of zeros by one. Draw a line through each zero in the group and make it a 9, except the rightmost zero, make it 10. Proceed to subtract as usual. Sample Set F Perform each subtraction. Example 1.46.  The number 40,000 contains a group of zeros. The number to the immediate left of the group is 4. Decrease 4 by 1. 4 − 1 = 3 Make each 0, except the rightmost one, 9. Make the rightmost 0 a 10. Subtract as usual. Example 1.47.  The number 8,000,006 contains a group of zeros. The number to the immediate left of the group is 8. Decrease 8 by 1. 8 − 1 = 7 Make each zero, except the rightmost one, 9. Make the rightmost 0 a 10. To perform the subtraction, we’ll need to borrow from the ten. Practice Set F Perform each subtraction. Exercise 1.6.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.22. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.23. (Go to Solution) Borrowing from Zero It often happens in a subtraction problem that we have to borrow from one or more zeros. This occurs in problems such as and We'll examine each case. Example 1.43. Borrowing from a single zero. Consider the problem Since we do not have a name for 3 − 7, we must borrow from 0. Since there are no tens to borrow, we must borrow 1 hundred. One hundred = 10 tens. We can now borrow 1 ten from 10 tens (leaving 9 tens). One ten = 10 ones and 10 ones + 3 ones = 13 ones. Now we can suggest the following method for borrowing from a single zero. Borrowing from a Single Zero To borrow from a single zero, Decrease the digit to the immediate left of zero by one. Draw a line through the zero and make it a 10. Proceed to subtract as usual. Sample Set E Example 1.44.  Perform this subtraction. The number 503 contains a single zero The number to the immediate left of 0 is 5. Decrease 5 by 1. 5 − 1 = 4 Draw a line through the zero and make it a 10. Borrow from the 10 and proceed. 1 ten + 10 ones 10 ones + 3 ones = 13 ones Practice Set E Perform each subtraction. Exercise 1.6.18. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.19. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.20. (Go to Solution) Example 1.45. Borrowing from a group of zeros Consider the problem In this case, we have a group of zeros. Since we cannot borrow any tens or hundreds, we must borrow 1 thousand. One thousand = 10 hundreds. We can now borrow 1 hundred from 10 hundreds. One hundred = 10 tens. We can now borrow 1 ten from 10 tens. One ten = 10 ones. From observations made in this procedure we can suggest the following method for borrowing from a group of zeros. Borrowing from a Group of zeros To borrow from a group of zeros, Decrease the digit to the immediate left of the group of zeros by one. Draw a line through each zero in the group and make it a 9, except the rightmost zero, make it 10. Proceed to subtract as usual. Sample Set F Perform each subtraction. Example 1.46.  The number 40,000 contains a group of zeros. The number to the immediate left of the group is 4. Decrease 4 by 1. 4 − 1 = 3 Make each 0, except the rightmost one, 9. Make the rightmost 0 a 10. Subtract as usual. Example 1.47.  The number 8,000,006 contains a group of zeros. The number to the immediate left of the group is 8. Decrease 8 by 1. 8 − 1 = 7 Make each zero, except the rightmost one, 9. Make the rightmost 0 a 10. To perform the subtraction, we’ll need to borrow from the ten. Practice Set F Perform each subtraction. Exercise 1.6.21. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.22. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.6.23. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch01_6_19	Calculators In practice, calculators are used to find the difference between two whole numbers. Sample Set G Find the difference between 1006 and 284. Table 1.38. Display Reads Type 1006 1006 Press 1006 Type 284 284 Press = 722 The difference between 1006 and 284 is 722. (What happens if you type 284 first and then 1006? We'll study such numbers in Section 1.6Chapter 10.) Practice Set G Exercise 1.6.24. (Go to Solution) Use a calculator to find the difference between 7338 and 2809. Exercise 1.6.25. (Go to Solution) Use a calculator to find the difference between 31,060,001 and 8,591,774. Calculators In practice, calculators are used to find the difference between two whole numbers. Sample Set G Find the difference between 1006 and 284. Table 1.38. Display Reads Type 1006 1006 Press 1006 Type 284 284 Press = 722 The difference between 1006 and 284 is 722. (What happens if you type 284 first and then 1006? We'll study such numbers in Section 1.6Chapter 10.) Practice Set G Exercise 1.6.24. (Go to Solution) Use a calculator to find the difference between 7338 and 2809. Exercise 1.6.25. (Go to Solution) Use a calculator to find the difference between 31,060,001 and 8,591,774.  || 
book4_ch01_7	 || The Commutative Property of Addition Commutative Property of Addition If two whole numbers are added in any order, the sum will not change. Sample Set A Example 1.48.  Add the whole numbers 8 + 5 = 13 5 + 8 = 13 The numbers 8 and 5 can be added in any order. Regardless of the order they are added, the sum is 13. Practice Set A Exercise 1.7.1. (Go to Solution) Use the commutative property of addition to find the sum of 12 and 41 in two different ways. Exercise 1.7.2. (Go to Solution) Add the whole numbers  || The Associative Property of Addition Associative Property of Addition If three whole numbers are to be added, the sum will be the same if the first two are added first, then that sum is added to the third, or, the second two are added first, and that sum is added to the first. Using Parentheses It is a common mathematical practice to use parentheses to show which pair of numbers we wish to combine first. Sample Set B Example 1.49.  Add the whole numbers. Practice Set B Exercise 1.7.3. (Go to Solution) Use the associative property of addition to add the following whole numbers two different ways. Exercise 1.7.4. (Go to Solution)  || The Additive Identity 0 Is the Additive Identity The whole number 0 is called the additive identity, since when it is added to any whole number, the sum is identical to that whole number. Sample Set C Example 1.50.  Add the whole numbers. 29 + 0 = 29 0 + 29 = 29 Zero added to 29 does not change the identity of 29. Practice Set C Add the following whole numbers. Exercise 1.7.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.7.6. (Go to Solution) Suppose we let the letter x represent a choice for some whole number. For the first two problems, find the sums. For the third problem, find the sum provided we now know that x represents the whole number 17. Exercise 1.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.7.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.7.9. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch01_7_2	The Commutative Property of Addition Commutative Property of Addition If two whole numbers are added in any order, the sum will not change. Sample Set A Example 1.48.  Add the whole numbers 8 + 5 = 13 5 + 8 = 13 The numbers 8 and 5 can be added in any order. Regardless of the order they are added, the sum is 13. Practice Set A Exercise 1.7.1. (Go to Solution) Use the commutative property of addition to find the sum of 12 and 41 in two different ways. Exercise 1.7.2. (Go to Solution) Add the whole numbers The Commutative Property of Addition Commutative Property of Addition If two whole numbers are added in any order, the sum will not change. Sample Set A Example 1.48.  Add the whole numbers 8 + 5 = 13 5 + 8 = 13 The numbers 8 and 5 can be added in any order. Regardless of the order they are added, the sum is 13. Practice Set A Exercise 1.7.1. (Go to Solution) Use the commutative property of addition to find the sum of 12 and 41 in two different ways. Exercise 1.7.2. (Go to Solution) Add the whole numbers  || 
book4_ch01_7_5	The Associative Property of Addition Associative Property of Addition If three whole numbers are to be added, the sum will be the same if the first two are added first, then that sum is added to the third, or, the second two are added first, and that sum is added to the first. Using Parentheses It is a common mathematical practice to use parentheses to show which pair of numbers we wish to combine first. Sample Set B Example 1.49.  Add the whole numbers. Practice Set B Exercise 1.7.3. (Go to Solution) Use the associative property of addition to add the following whole numbers two different ways. Exercise 1.7.4. (Go to Solution) The Associative Property of Addition Associative Property of Addition If three whole numbers are to be added, the sum will be the same if the first two are added first, then that sum is added to the third, or, the second two are added first, and that sum is added to the first. Using Parentheses It is a common mathematical practice to use parentheses to show which pair of numbers we wish to combine first. Sample Set B Example 1.49.  Add the whole numbers. Practice Set B Exercise 1.7.3. (Go to Solution) Use the associative property of addition to add the following whole numbers two different ways. Exercise 1.7.4. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch01_7_8	The Additive Identity 0 Is the Additive Identity The whole number 0 is called the additive identity, since when it is added to any whole number, the sum is identical to that whole number. Sample Set C Example 1.50.  Add the whole numbers. 29 + 0 = 29 0 + 29 = 29 Zero added to 29 does not change the identity of 29. Practice Set C Add the following whole numbers. Exercise 1.7.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.7.6. (Go to Solution) Suppose we let the letter x represent a choice for some whole number. For the first two problems, find the sums. For the third problem, find the sum provided we now know that x represents the whole number 17. Exercise 1.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.7.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.7.9. (Go to Solution) The Additive Identity 0 Is the Additive Identity The whole number 0 is called the additive identity, since when it is added to any whole number, the sum is identical to that whole number. Sample Set C Example 1.50.  Add the whole numbers. 29 + 0 = 29 0 + 29 = 29 Zero added to 29 does not change the identity of 29. Practice Set C Add the following whole numbers. Exercise 1.7.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.7.6. (Go to Solution) Suppose we let the letter x represent a choice for some whole number. For the first two problems, find the sums. For the third problem, find the sum provided we now know that x represents the whole number 17. Exercise 1.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.7.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 1.7.9. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch09	 ||  || Measurement There are two major systems of measurement in use today. They are the United States system and the metric system. Before we describe these systems, let's gain a clear understanding of the concept of measurement. Measurement Measurement is comparison to some standard. Standard Unit of Measure The concept of measurement is based on the idea of direct comparison. This means that measurement is the result of the comparison of two quantities. The quantity that is used for comparison is called the standard unit of measure. Over the years, standards have changed. Quite some time in the past, the stan­dard unit of measure was determined by a king. For example, 1 inch was the distance between the tip of the thumb and the knuckle of the king. 1 inch was also the length of 16 barley grains placed end to end. Today, standard units of measure rarely change. Standard units of measure are the responsibility of the Bureau of Standards in Washington D.C. Some desirable properties of a standard are the following: Accessibility. We should have access to the standard so we can make comparisons. Invariance. We should be confident that the standard is not subject to change. Reproducibility. We should be able to reproduce the standard so that measure­ments are convenient and accessible to many people.  || The United States System of Measurement Some of the common units (along with their abbreviations) for the United States system of measurement are listed in the following table. Table 9.1. Unit Conversion Table Length 1 foot (ft) = 12 inches (in.) 1 yard (yd) = 3 feet (ft) 1 mile (mi) = 5,280 feet Weight 1 pound (lb) =16 ounces (oz) 1 ton (T) = 2,000 pounds Liquid Volume 1 tablespoon (tbsp) = 3 teaspoons (tsp) 1 fluid ounce (fl oz) = 2 tablespoons 1 cup (c) = 8 fluid ounces 1 pint (pt) = 2 cups1 quart (qt) = 2 pints1 gallon (gal) = 4 quarts Time 1 minute (min) = 60 seconds (sec) 1 hour ( hr) = 60 minutes1 day (da) = 24 hours1 week (wk) = 7 days  || Conversions in the United States System It is often convenient or necessary to convert from one unit of measure to another. For example, it may be convenient to convert a measurement of length that is given in feet to one that is given in inches. Such conversions can be made using unit fractions. Unit Fraction A unit fraction is a fraction with a value of 1. Unit fractions are formed by using two equal measurements. One measurement is placed in the numerator of the fraction, and the other in the denominator. Place­ment depends on the desired conversion. Placement of Units Place the unit being converted to in the numerator. Place the unit being converted from in the denominator. For example, Table 9.2. Equal Measurements Unit Fraction 1ft = 12in. 1pt = 16 fl oz 1wk = 7da Sample Set A Make the following conversions. If a fraction occurs, convert it to a decimal rounded to two decimal places. Example 9.1.  Convert 11 yards to feet. Looking in the unit conversion table under length, we see that 1 yd = 3 ft. There are two corresponding unit fractions, and . Which one should we use? Look to see which unit we wish to convert to. Choose the unit fraction with this unit in the numerator. We will choose since this unit fraction has feet in the numerator. Now, multiply 11 yd by the unit fraction. Notice that since the unit fraction has the value of 1, multiplying by it does not change the value of 11 yd. Thus, 11 yd = 33ft. Example 9.2.  Convert 36 fl oz to pints. Looking in the unit conversion table under liquid volume, we see that 1 pt = 16 fl oz. Since we are to convert to pints, we will construct a unit fraction with pints in the numerator. Thus, 36 fl oz = 2.25 pt. Example 9.3.  Convert 2,016 hr to weeks. Looking in the unit conversion table under time, we see that 1wk = 7da and that 1 da = 24 hr. To convert from hours to weeks, we must first convert from hours to days and then from days to weeks. We need two unit fractions. The unit fraction needed for converting from hours to days is . The unit fraction needed for converting from days to weeks is . Thus, 2,016 hr = 12 wk. Practice Set A Make the following conversions. If a fraction occurs, convert it to a decimal rounded to two decimal places. Exercise 9.2.1. (Go to Solution) Convert 18 ft to yards. Exercise 9.2.2. (Go to Solution) Convert 2 mi to feet. Exercise 9.2.3. (Go to Solution) Convert 26 ft to yards. Exercise 9.2.4. (Go to Solution) Convert 9 qt to pints. Exercise 9.2.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 52 min to hours. Exercise 9.2.6. (Go to Solution) Convert 412 hr to weeks.  ||  || The Advantages of the Base Ten Number System The metric system of measurement takes advantage of our base ten number sys­tem. The advantage of the metric system over the United States system is that in the metric system it is possible to convert from one unit of measure to another simply by multiplying or dividing the given number by a power of 10. This means we can make a conversion simply by moving the decimal point to the right or the left.  || Prefixes Common units of measure in the metric system are the meter (for length), the liter (for volume), and the gram (for mass). To each of the units can be attached a prefix. The metric prefixes along with their meaning are listed below. kilo — thousand deci — tenth hecto — hundred centi — hundredth deka — ten milli — thousandth For example, if length is being measured, 1 kilometer is equivalent to 1000 meters. 1 centimeter is equivalent to one hundredth of a meter. 1 millimeter is equivalent to one thousandth of a meter.  || Conversion from One Unit to Another Unit Let's note three characteristics of the metric system that occur in the metric table of measurements. In each category, the prefixes are the same. We can move from a larger to a smaller unit of measure by moving the decimal point to the right. We can move from a smaller to a larger unit of measure by moving the decimal point to the left. The following table provides a summary of the relationship between the basic unit of measure (meter, gram, liter) and each prefix, and how many places the decimal point is moved and in what direction. kilo hecto deka unit deci centi milli Table 9.3. Basic Unit to Prefix   Move the Decimal Point unit to deka 1 to 10 1 place to the left unit to hector 1 to 100 2 places to the left unit to kilo 1 to 1,000 3 places to the left unit to deci 1 to 0.1 1 place to the right unit to centi 1 to 0.01 2 places to the right unit to milli 1 to 0.001 3 places to the right  || Conversion Table Listed below, in the unit conversion table, are some of the common metric units of measure. Table 9.4. Unit Conversion Table Length 1   kilometer  ( km ) = 1,000 meters  ( m ) 1, 000 × 1 m 1   hectometer  ( hm ) = 100 meters 100 × 1 m 1   dekameter  ( dam ) = 10 meters 10 × 1 m 1 meter (m) 1 × 1 m . 1 × 1 m . 01 × 1 m . 001 × 1 m Mass 1   kilogram   ( kg ) = 1,000 grams   ( g ) 1, 000 × 1 g 1   hectogram  ( hg ) = 100 grams 100 × 1 g 1   dekagram   ( dag ) = 10 grams 10 × 1 g 1   gram   (g) 1 × 1 g . 1 × 1 g . 01 × 1 g . 001 × 1 g Volume 1   kiloliter   ( kL ) = 1, 000   liters   ( L ) 1, 000 × 1 L 1   hectoliter   ( hL ) = 100   liters 100 × 1 L 1   dekaliter   ( daL ) = 10   liters 10 × 1 L 1 liter (L) 1 × 1 L . 1 × 1 L . 01 × 1 L . 001 × 1 L Time Same as the United States system   Distinction Between Mass and Weight There is a distinction between mass and weight. The weight of a body is related to gravity whereas the mass of a body is not. For example, your weight on the earth is different than it is on the moon, but your mass is the same in both places. Mass is a measure of a body's resistance to motion. The more massive a body, the more resistant it is to motion. Also, more massive bodies weigh more than less massive bodies. Converting Metric Units To convert from one metric unit to another metric unit: Determine the location of the original number on the metric scale (pictured in each of the following examples). Move the decimal point of the original number in the same direction and same number of places as is necessary to move to the metric unit you wish to go to. We can also convert from one metric unit to another using unit fractions. Both methods are shown in Example 9.4 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Example 9.4.  Convert 3 kilograms to grams. 3 kg can be written as 3.0 kg. Then, Thus, 3kg = 3,000 g. We can also use unit fractions to make this conversion. Since we are converting to grams, and 1,000    g = 1   kg, we choose the unit fraction since grams is in the numerator. Example 9.5.  Convert 67.2 hectoliters to milliliters. Thus, 67.2 hL = 6,720,000 mL. Example 9.6.  Convert 100.07 centimeters to meters. Thus, 100.07 cm = 1.0007 m. Example 9.7.  Convert 0.16 milligrams to grams. Thus, 0.16   mg = 0.00016 g. Practice Set A Exercise 9.3.1. (Go to Solution) Convert 411 kilograms to grams. Exercise 9.3.2. (Go to Solution) Convert 5.626 liters to centiliters. Exercise 9.3.3. (Go to Solution) Convert 80 milliliters to kiloliters. Exercise 9.3.4. (Go to Solution) Convert 150 milligrams to centigrams. Exercise 9.3.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 2.5 centimeters to meters.  ||  || Converting to Multiple Units Denominate Numbers Numbers that have units of measure associated with them are called denominate numbers. It is often convenient, or even necessary, to simplify a denominate number. Simplified Denominate Number A denominate number is simplified when the number of standard units of measure associated With it does not exceed the next higher type of unit. The denominate number 55 min is simplified since it is smaller than the next higher type of unit, 1 hr. The denominate number 65 min is not simplified since it is not smaller than the next higher type of unit, 1 hr. The denominate number 65 min can be simplified to 1 hr 5 min. The denominate number 1 hr 5 min is simplified since the next higher type of unit is day, and 1 hr does not exceed 1 day. Sample Set A Example 9.8.  Simplify 19 in. Since 12  in. = 1 ft, and 19 = 12 + 7, Example 9.9.  Simplify 4 gal 5 qt. Since 4  qt = 1 gal, and 5 = 4 + 1, Example 9.10.  Simplify 2 hr 75 min. Since 60 min = 1 hr, and 75 = 60 + 15, Example 9.11.  Simplify 43 fl oz. Since 8 fl oz = 1 c (1 cup), and 43÷8 = 5 R3, But, 2 c = 1 pt and 5÷2 = 2 R1. So, But, 2 pt = 1 qt, so 2 pt + 1 c + 3 fl oz = 1 qt 1 c 3 fl oz Practice Set A Simplify each denominate number. Refer to the conversion tables given in Section 9.2, if necessary. Exercise 9.4.1. (Go to Solution) 18 in. Exercise 9.4.2. (Go to Solution) 8 gal 9 qt Exercise 9.4.3. (Go to Solution) 5 hr 80 min Exercise 9.4.4. (Go to Solution) 8 wk 11 da Exercise 9.4.5. (Go to Solution) 86 da  || Adding and Subtracting Denominate Numbers Adding and Subtracting Denominate Numbers Denominate numbers can be added or subtracted by: writing the numbers vertically so that the like units appear in the same column. adding or subtracting the number parts, carrying along the unit. simplifying the sum or difference. Sample Set B Example 9.12.  Add 6 ft 8 in. to 2 ft 9 in. Since 12 in. = 1 ft, Example 9.13.  Subtract 5 da 3 hr from 8 da 11 hr. Example 9.14.  Subtract 3 lb 14 oz from 5 lb 3 oz. We cannot directly subtract 14 oz from 3 oz, so we must borrow 16 oz from the pounds. Example 9.15.  Subtract 4 da 9 hr 21 min from 7 da 10 min. Borrow 1 da from the 7 da. Borrow 1 hr from the 24 hr. Practice Set B Perform each operation. Simplify when possible. Exercise 9.4.6. (Go to Solution) Add 4 gal 3 qt to 1 gal 2 qt. Exercise 9.4.7. (Go to Solution) Add 9 hr 48 min to 4 hr 26 min. Exercise 9.4.8. (Go to Solution) Subtract 2 ft 5 in. from 8 ft 7 in. Exercise 9.4.9. (Go to Solution) Subtract 15 km 460 m from 27 km 800 m. Exercise 9.4.10. (Go to Solution) Subtract 8 min 35 sec from 12 min 10 sec. Exercise 9.4.11. (Go to Solution) Add 4 yd 2 ft 7 in. to 9 yd 2 ft 8 in. Exercise 9.4.12. (Go to Solution) Subtract 11 min 55 sec from 25 min 8 sec.  || Multiplying a Denominate Number by a Whole Number Let's examine the repeated sum Recalling that multiplication is a description of repeated addition, by the distribu­tive property we have From these observations, we can suggest the following rule. Multiplying a Denominate Number by a Whole Number To multiply a denominate number by a whole number, multiply the number part of each unit by the whole number and affix the unit to this product. Sample Set C Perform the following multiplications. Simplify if necessary. Example 9.16.  Since 3 ft = 1 yd and 12  in. = 1 ft, Example 9.17.  Practice Set C Perform the following multiplications. Simplify. Exercise 9.4.13. (Go to Solution) 2⋅(10 min) Exercise 9.4.14. (Go to Solution) 5⋅(3 qt) Exercise 9.4.15. (Go to Solution) 4⋅(5 ft 8 in.) Exercise 9.4.16. (Go to Solution) 10⋅(2 hr 15 min 40 sec)  || Dividing a Denominate Number by a Whole Number Dividing a Denominate Number by a Whole Number To divide a denominate number by a whole number, divide the number part of each unit by the whole number beginning with the largest unit. Affix the unit to this quotient. Carry any remainder to the next unit. Sample Set D Perform the following divisions. Simplify if necessary. Example 9.18.  (12 min 40 sec)÷4 Thus (12 min 40 sec)÷4 = 3 min 10 sec Example 9.19.  (5 yd 2 ft 9 in.)÷3 Thus (5 yd 2 ft 9 in.)÷3 = 1 yd 2 ft 11 in. Practice Set D Perform the following divisions. Simplify if necessary. Exercise 9.4.17. (Go to Solution) (18 hr 36 min)÷9 Exercise 9.4.18. (Go to Solution) (34 hr 8 min.)÷8 Exercise 9.4.19. (Go to Solution) (13 yd 7 in.)÷5 Exercise 9.4.20. (Go to Solution) (47 gal 2 qt 1 pt)÷3  ||  || Polygons We can make use of conversion skills with denominate numbers to make measure­ments of geometric figures such as rectangles, triangles, and circles. To make these measurements we need to be familiar with several definitions. Polygon A polygon is a closed plane (flat) figure whose sides are line segments (portions of straight lines). Polygons Not polygons  || Perimeter Perimeter The perimeter of a polygon is the distance around the polygon. To find the perimeter of a polygon, we simply add up the lengths of all the sides. Sample Set A Find the perimeter of each polygon. Example 9.20.  Example 9.21.  Example 9.22.  Our first observation is that three of the dimensions are missing. However, we can determine the missing measurements using the following process. Let A, B, and C represent the missing measurements. Visualize A = 12m – 2m = 10m B = 9m + 1m – 2m = 8m C = 12m – 1m = 11m Practice Set A Find the perimeter of each polygon. Exercise 9.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.5.3. (Go to Solution)  || Circumference/Diameter/Radius Circumference The circumference of a circle is the distance around the circle. Diameter A diameter of a circle is any line segment that passes through the center of the circle and has its endpoints on the circle. Radius A radius of a circle is any line segment having as its endpoints the center of the circle and a point on the circle. The radius is one half the diameter.  || The Number π The symbol π , read "pi," represents the nonterminating, nonrepeating decimal number 3.14159 … . This number has been computed to millions of decimal places without the appearance of a repeating block of digits. For computational purposes, π is often approximated as 3.14. We will write π ≈ 3.14 to denote that π is approximately equal to 3.14. The symbol "≈" means "approximately equal to."  || Formulas To find the circumference of a circle, we need only know its diameter or radius. We then use a formula for computing the circumference of the circle. Formula A formula is a rule or method for performing a task. In mathematics, a formula is a rule that directs us in computations. Formulas are usually composed of letters that represent important, but possibly unknown, quantities. If C , d , and r represent, respectively, the circumference, diameter, and radius of a circle, then the following two formulas give us directions for computing the circum­ference of the circle. Circumference Formulas C = π d or C ≈ (3.14)d C = 2 π r or C ≈ 2(3.14)r Sample Set B Example 9.23.  Find the exact circumference of the circle. Use the formula C = π d . By commutativity of multiplication, , exactly This result is exact since π has not been approximated. Example 9.24.  Find the approximate circumference of the circle. Use the formula C = π d . C ≈ ( 3 . 14 ) ( 6 . 2 ) C ≈ 19 . 648   mm This result is approximate since π has been approximated by 3.14. Example 9.25.  Find the approximate circumference of a circle with radius 18 inches. Since we're given that the radius, r , is 18 in., we'll use the formula C = 2 π r . C ≈ (2) ( 3 . 14 ) ( 18   in . ) C ≈ 113 . 04   in . Example 9.26.  Find the approximate perimeter of the figure. We notice that we have two semicircles (half circles). The larger radius is 6.2 cm. The smaller radius is 6.2 cm - 2.0 cm = 4.2 cm. The width of the bottom part of the rectangle is 2.0 cm. Practice Set B Exercise 9.5.4. (Go to Solution) Find the exact circumference of the circle. Exercise 9.5.5. (Go to Solution) Find the approximate circumference of the circle. Exercise 9.5.6. (Go to Solution) Find the approximate circumference of the circle with radius 20.1 m. Exercise 9.5.7. (Go to Solution) Find the approximate outside perimeter of  ||  || The Meaning and Notation for Area The product (length unit)⋅(length unit) = (length unit)2 , or, square length unit (sq length unit), can be interpreted physically as the area of a surface. Area The area of a surface is the amount of square length units contained in the surface. For example, 3 sq in. means that 3 squares, 1 inch on each side, can be placed precisely on some surface. (The squares may have to be cut and rearranged so they match the shape of the surface.) We will examine the area of the following geometric figures.  || Area Formulas We can determine the areas of these geometric figures using the following formulas. Table 9.5.   Figure Area Formula Statement Triangle Area of a triangle is one half the base times the height. Rectangle A R = l ⋅ w Area of a rectangle is the length times the width. Parallelogram A P = b ⋅ h Area of a parallelogram is base times the height. Trapezoid Area of a trapezoid is one half the sum of the two bases times the height. Circle A C = πr 2 Area of a circle is π times the square of the radius.  || Finding Areas of Some Common Geometric Figures Sample Set A Example 9.27.  Find the area of the triangle. The area of this triangle is 60 sq ft, which is often written as 60 ft2. Example 9.28.  Find the area of the rectangle. Let's first convert 4 ft 2 in. to inches. Since we wish to convert to inches, we'll use the unit fraction since it has inches in the numerator. Then, Thus, 4 ft 2 in. = 48 in. + 2 in. = 50 in. The area of this rectangle is 400 sq in. Example 9.29.  Find the area of the parallelogram. The area of this parallelogram is 63.86 sq cm. Example 9.30.  Find the area of the trapezoid. The area of this trapezoid is 71.545 sq mm. Example 9.31.  Find the approximate area of the circle. The area of this circle is approximately 886.23 sq ft. Practice Set A Find the area of each of the following geometric figures. Exercise 9.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.6. (Go to Solution)  || The Meaning and Notation for Volume The product (length unit)(length unit)(length unit) = (length unit)3 , or cubic length unit (cu length unit), can be interpreted physically as the volume of a three-dimensional object. Volume The volume of an object is the amount of cubic length units contained in the object. For example, 4 cu mm means that 4 cubes, 1 mm on each side, would precisely fill some three-dimensional object. (The cubes may have to be cut and rearranged so they match the shape of the object.)  || Volume Formulas Table 9.6.   Figure Volume Formula Statement Rectangular solid The volume of a rectangular solid is the length times the width times the height. Sphere The volume of a sphere is times π times the cube of the radius. Cylinder The volume of a cylinder is π times the square of the radius times the height. Cone The volume of a cone is times π times the square of the radius times the height.  || Finding Volumes of Some Common Geometric Objects Sample Set B Example 9.32.  Find the volume of the rectangular solid. The volume of this rectangular solid is 270 cu in. Example 9.33.  Find the approximate volume of the sphere. The approximate volume of this sphere is 904.32 cu cm, which is often written as 904.32 cm3. Example 9.34.  Find the approximate volume of the cylinder. The volume of this cylinder is approximately 588.05292 cu ft. The volume is approximate because we approximated π with 3.14. Example 9.35.  Find the approximate volume of the cone. Round to two decimal places. The volume of this cone is approximately 20.93 cu mm. The volume is approximate because we approximated π with 3.14. Practice Set B Find the volume of each geometric object. If π is required, approximate it with 3.14 and find the approximate volume. Exercise 9.6.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.8. (Go to Solution) Sphere Exercise 9.6.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.10. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch09_2	 || Measurement There are two major systems of measurement in use today. They are the United States system and the metric system. Before we describe these systems, let's gain a clear understanding of the concept of measurement. Measurement Measurement is comparison to some standard. Standard Unit of Measure The concept of measurement is based on the idea of direct comparison. This means that measurement is the result of the comparison of two quantities. The quantity that is used for comparison is called the standard unit of measure. Over the years, standards have changed. Quite some time in the past, the stan­dard unit of measure was determined by a king. For example, 1 inch was the distance between the tip of the thumb and the knuckle of the king. 1 inch was also the length of 16 barley grains placed end to end. Today, standard units of measure rarely change. Standard units of measure are the responsibility of the Bureau of Standards in Washington D.C. Some desirable properties of a standard are the following: Accessibility. We should have access to the standard so we can make comparisons. Invariance. We should be confident that the standard is not subject to change. Reproducibility. We should be able to reproduce the standard so that measure­ments are convenient and accessible to many people.  || The United States System of Measurement Some of the common units (along with their abbreviations) for the United States system of measurement are listed in the following table. Table 9.1. Unit Conversion Table Length 1 foot (ft) = 12 inches (in.) 1 yard (yd) = 3 feet (ft) 1 mile (mi) = 5,280 feet Weight 1 pound (lb) =16 ounces (oz) 1 ton (T) = 2,000 pounds Liquid Volume 1 tablespoon (tbsp) = 3 teaspoons (tsp) 1 fluid ounce (fl oz) = 2 tablespoons 1 cup (c) = 8 fluid ounces 1 pint (pt) = 2 cups1 quart (qt) = 2 pints1 gallon (gal) = 4 quarts Time 1 minute (min) = 60 seconds (sec) 1 hour ( hr) = 60 minutes1 day (da) = 24 hours1 week (wk) = 7 days  || Conversions in the United States System It is often convenient or necessary to convert from one unit of measure to another. For example, it may be convenient to convert a measurement of length that is given in feet to one that is given in inches. Such conversions can be made using unit fractions. Unit Fraction A unit fraction is a fraction with a value of 1. Unit fractions are formed by using two equal measurements. One measurement is placed in the numerator of the fraction, and the other in the denominator. Place­ment depends on the desired conversion. Placement of Units Place the unit being converted to in the numerator. Place the unit being converted from in the denominator. For example, Table 9.2. Equal Measurements Unit Fraction 1ft = 12in. 1pt = 16 fl oz 1wk = 7da Sample Set A Make the following conversions. If a fraction occurs, convert it to a decimal rounded to two decimal places. Example 9.1.  Convert 11 yards to feet. Looking in the unit conversion table under length, we see that 1 yd = 3 ft. There are two corresponding unit fractions, and . Which one should we use? Look to see which unit we wish to convert to. Choose the unit fraction with this unit in the numerator. We will choose since this unit fraction has feet in the numerator. Now, multiply 11 yd by the unit fraction. Notice that since the unit fraction has the value of 1, multiplying by it does not change the value of 11 yd. Thus, 11 yd = 33ft. Example 9.2.  Convert 36 fl oz to pints. Looking in the unit conversion table under liquid volume, we see that 1 pt = 16 fl oz. Since we are to convert to pints, we will construct a unit fraction with pints in the numerator. Thus, 36 fl oz = 2.25 pt. Example 9.3.  Convert 2,016 hr to weeks. Looking in the unit conversion table under time, we see that 1wk = 7da and that 1 da = 24 hr. To convert from hours to weeks, we must first convert from hours to days and then from days to weeks. We need two unit fractions. The unit fraction needed for converting from hours to days is . The unit fraction needed for converting from days to weeks is . Thus, 2,016 hr = 12 wk. Practice Set A Make the following conversions. If a fraction occurs, convert it to a decimal rounded to two decimal places. Exercise 9.2.1. (Go to Solution) Convert 18 ft to yards. Exercise 9.2.2. (Go to Solution) Convert 2 mi to feet. Exercise 9.2.3. (Go to Solution) Convert 26 ft to yards. Exercise 9.2.4. (Go to Solution) Convert 9 qt to pints. Exercise 9.2.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 52 min to hours. Exercise 9.2.6. (Go to Solution) Convert 412 hr to weeks.  || 
book4_ch09_2_2	Measurement There are two major systems of measurement in use today. They are the United States system and the metric system. Before we describe these systems, let's gain a clear understanding of the concept of measurement. Measurement Measurement is comparison to some standard. Standard Unit of Measure The concept of measurement is based on the idea of direct comparison. This means that measurement is the result of the comparison of two quantities. The quantity that is used for comparison is called the standard unit of measure. Over the years, standards have changed. Quite some time in the past, the stan­dard unit of measure was determined by a king. For example, 1 inch was the distance between the tip of the thumb and the knuckle of the king. 1 inch was also the length of 16 barley grains placed end to end. Today, standard units of measure rarely change. Standard units of measure are the responsibility of the Bureau of Standards in Washington D.C. Some desirable properties of a standard are the following: Accessibility. We should have access to the standard so we can make comparisons. Invariance. We should be confident that the standard is not subject to change. Reproducibility. We should be able to reproduce the standard so that measure­ments are convenient and accessible to many people. Measurement There are two major systems of measurement in use today. They are the United States system and the metric system. Before we describe these systems, let's gain a clear understanding of the concept of measurement. Measurement Measurement is comparison to some standard. Standard Unit of Measure The concept of measurement is based on the idea of direct comparison. This means that measurement is the result of the comparison of two quantities. The quantity that is used for comparison is called the standard unit of measure. Over the years, standards have changed. Quite some time in the past, the stan­dard unit of measure was determined by a king. For example, 1 inch was the distance between the tip of the thumb and the knuckle of the king. 1 inch was also the length of 16 barley grains placed end to end. Today, standard units of measure rarely change. Standard units of measure are the responsibility of the Bureau of Standards in Washington D.C. Some desirable properties of a standard are the following: Accessibility. We should have access to the standard so we can make comparisons. Invariance. We should be confident that the standard is not subject to change. Reproducibility. We should be able to reproduce the standard so that measure­ments are convenient and accessible to many people.  || 
book4_ch09_2_3	The United States System of Measurement Some of the common units (along with their abbreviations) for the United States system of measurement are listed in the following table. Table 9.1. Unit Conversion Table Length 1 foot (ft) = 12 inches (in.) 1 yard (yd) = 3 feet (ft) 1 mile (mi) = 5,280 feet Weight 1 pound (lb) =16 ounces (oz) 1 ton (T) = 2,000 pounds Liquid Volume 1 tablespoon (tbsp) = 3 teaspoons (tsp) 1 fluid ounce (fl oz) = 2 tablespoons 1 cup (c) = 8 fluid ounces 1 pint (pt) = 2 cups1 quart (qt) = 2 pints1 gallon (gal) = 4 quarts Time 1 minute (min) = 60 seconds (sec) 1 hour ( hr) = 60 minutes1 day (da) = 24 hours1 week (wk) = 7 days The United States System of Measurement Some of the common units (along with their abbreviations) for the United States system of measurement are listed in the following table. Table 9.1. Unit Conversion Table Length 1 foot (ft) = 12 inches (in.) 1 yard (yd) = 3 feet (ft) 1 mile (mi) = 5,280 feet Weight 1 pound (lb) =16 ounces (oz) 1 ton (T) = 2,000 pounds Liquid Volume 1 tablespoon (tbsp) = 3 teaspoons (tsp) 1 fluid ounce (fl oz) = 2 tablespoons 1 cup (c) = 8 fluid ounces 1 pint (pt) = 2 cups1 quart (qt) = 2 pints1 gallon (gal) = 4 quarts Time 1 minute (min) = 60 seconds (sec) 1 hour ( hr) = 60 minutes1 day (da) = 24 hours1 week (wk) = 7 days  || 
book4_ch09_2_4	Conversions in the United States System It is often convenient or necessary to convert from one unit of measure to another. For example, it may be convenient to convert a measurement of length that is given in feet to one that is given in inches. Such conversions can be made using unit fractions. Unit Fraction A unit fraction is a fraction with a value of 1. Unit fractions are formed by using two equal measurements. One measurement is placed in the numerator of the fraction, and the other in the denominator. Place­ment depends on the desired conversion. Placement of Units Place the unit being converted to in the numerator. Place the unit being converted from in the denominator. For example, Table 9.2. Equal Measurements Unit Fraction 1ft = 12in. 1pt = 16 fl oz 1wk = 7da Sample Set A Make the following conversions. If a fraction occurs, convert it to a decimal rounded to two decimal places. Example 9.1.  Convert 11 yards to feet. Looking in the unit conversion table under length, we see that 1 yd = 3 ft. There are two corresponding unit fractions, and . Which one should we use? Look to see which unit we wish to convert to. Choose the unit fraction with this unit in the numerator. We will choose since this unit fraction has feet in the numerator. Now, multiply 11 yd by the unit fraction. Notice that since the unit fraction has the value of 1, multiplying by it does not change the value of 11 yd. Thus, 11 yd = 33ft. Example 9.2.  Convert 36 fl oz to pints. Looking in the unit conversion table under liquid volume, we see that 1 pt = 16 fl oz. Since we are to convert to pints, we will construct a unit fraction with pints in the numerator. Thus, 36 fl oz = 2.25 pt. Example 9.3.  Convert 2,016 hr to weeks. Looking in the unit conversion table under time, we see that 1wk = 7da and that 1 da = 24 hr. To convert from hours to weeks, we must first convert from hours to days and then from days to weeks. We need two unit fractions. The unit fraction needed for converting from hours to days is . The unit fraction needed for converting from days to weeks is . Thus, 2,016 hr = 12 wk. Practice Set A Make the following conversions. If a fraction occurs, convert it to a decimal rounded to two decimal places. Exercise 9.2.1. (Go to Solution) Convert 18 ft to yards. Exercise 9.2.2. (Go to Solution) Convert 2 mi to feet. Exercise 9.2.3. (Go to Solution) Convert 26 ft to yards. Exercise 9.2.4. (Go to Solution) Convert 9 qt to pints. Exercise 9.2.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 52 min to hours. Exercise 9.2.6. (Go to Solution) Convert 412 hr to weeks. Conversions in the United States System It is often convenient or necessary to convert from one unit of measure to another. For example, it may be convenient to convert a measurement of length that is given in feet to one that is given in inches. Such conversions can be made using unit fractions. Unit Fraction A unit fraction is a fraction with a value of 1. Unit fractions are formed by using two equal measurements. One measurement is placed in the numerator of the fraction, and the other in the denominator. Place­ment depends on the desired conversion. Placement of Units Place the unit being converted to in the numerator. Place the unit being converted from in the denominator. For example, Table 9.2. Equal Measurements Unit Fraction 1ft = 12in. 1pt = 16 fl oz 1wk = 7da Sample Set A Make the following conversions. If a fraction occurs, convert it to a decimal rounded to two decimal places. Example 9.1.  Convert 11 yards to feet. Looking in the unit conversion table under length, we see that 1 yd = 3 ft. There are two corresponding unit fractions, and . Which one should we use? Look to see which unit we wish to convert to. Choose the unit fraction with this unit in the numerator. We will choose since this unit fraction has feet in the numerator. Now, multiply 11 yd by the unit fraction. Notice that since the unit fraction has the value of 1, multiplying by it does not change the value of 11 yd. Thus, 11 yd = 33ft. Example 9.2.  Convert 36 fl oz to pints. Looking in the unit conversion table under liquid volume, we see that 1 pt = 16 fl oz. Since we are to convert to pints, we will construct a unit fraction with pints in the numerator. Thus, 36 fl oz = 2.25 pt. Example 9.3.  Convert 2,016 hr to weeks. Looking in the unit conversion table under time, we see that 1wk = 7da and that 1 da = 24 hr. To convert from hours to weeks, we must first convert from hours to days and then from days to weeks. We need two unit fractions. The unit fraction needed for converting from hours to days is . The unit fraction needed for converting from days to weeks is . Thus, 2,016 hr = 12 wk. Practice Set A Make the following conversions. If a fraction occurs, convert it to a decimal rounded to two decimal places. Exercise 9.2.1. (Go to Solution) Convert 18 ft to yards. Exercise 9.2.2. (Go to Solution) Convert 2 mi to feet. Exercise 9.2.3. (Go to Solution) Convert 26 ft to yards. Exercise 9.2.4. (Go to Solution) Convert 9 qt to pints. Exercise 9.2.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 52 min to hours. Exercise 9.2.6. (Go to Solution) Convert 412 hr to weeks.  || 
book4_ch09_3	 || The Advantages of the Base Ten Number System The metric system of measurement takes advantage of our base ten number sys­tem. The advantage of the metric system over the United States system is that in the metric system it is possible to convert from one unit of measure to another simply by multiplying or dividing the given number by a power of 10. This means we can make a conversion simply by moving the decimal point to the right or the left.  || Prefixes Common units of measure in the metric system are the meter (for length), the liter (for volume), and the gram (for mass). To each of the units can be attached a prefix. The metric prefixes along with their meaning are listed below. kilo — thousand deci — tenth hecto — hundred centi — hundredth deka — ten milli — thousandth For example, if length is being measured, 1 kilometer is equivalent to 1000 meters. 1 centimeter is equivalent to one hundredth of a meter. 1 millimeter is equivalent to one thousandth of a meter.  || Conversion from One Unit to Another Unit Let's note three characteristics of the metric system that occur in the metric table of measurements. In each category, the prefixes are the same. We can move from a larger to a smaller unit of measure by moving the decimal point to the right. We can move from a smaller to a larger unit of measure by moving the decimal point to the left. The following table provides a summary of the relationship between the basic unit of measure (meter, gram, liter) and each prefix, and how many places the decimal point is moved and in what direction. kilo hecto deka unit deci centi milli Table 9.3. Basic Unit to Prefix   Move the Decimal Point unit to deka 1 to 10 1 place to the left unit to hector 1 to 100 2 places to the left unit to kilo 1 to 1,000 3 places to the left unit to deci 1 to 0.1 1 place to the right unit to centi 1 to 0.01 2 places to the right unit to milli 1 to 0.001 3 places to the right  || Conversion Table Listed below, in the unit conversion table, are some of the common metric units of measure. Table 9.4. Unit Conversion Table Length 1   kilometer  ( km ) = 1,000 meters  ( m ) 1, 000 × 1 m 1   hectometer  ( hm ) = 100 meters 100 × 1 m 1   dekameter  ( dam ) = 10 meters 10 × 1 m 1 meter (m) 1 × 1 m . 1 × 1 m . 01 × 1 m . 001 × 1 m Mass 1   kilogram   ( kg ) = 1,000 grams   ( g ) 1, 000 × 1 g 1   hectogram  ( hg ) = 100 grams 100 × 1 g 1   dekagram   ( dag ) = 10 grams 10 × 1 g 1   gram   (g) 1 × 1 g . 1 × 1 g . 01 × 1 g . 001 × 1 g Volume 1   kiloliter   ( kL ) = 1, 000   liters   ( L ) 1, 000 × 1 L 1   hectoliter   ( hL ) = 100   liters 100 × 1 L 1   dekaliter   ( daL ) = 10   liters 10 × 1 L 1 liter (L) 1 × 1 L . 1 × 1 L . 01 × 1 L . 001 × 1 L Time Same as the United States system   Distinction Between Mass and Weight There is a distinction between mass and weight. The weight of a body is related to gravity whereas the mass of a body is not. For example, your weight on the earth is different than it is on the moon, but your mass is the same in both places. Mass is a measure of a body's resistance to motion. The more massive a body, the more resistant it is to motion. Also, more massive bodies weigh more than less massive bodies. Converting Metric Units To convert from one metric unit to another metric unit: Determine the location of the original number on the metric scale (pictured in each of the following examples). Move the decimal point of the original number in the same direction and same number of places as is necessary to move to the metric unit you wish to go to. We can also convert from one metric unit to another using unit fractions. Both methods are shown in Example 9.4 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Example 9.4.  Convert 3 kilograms to grams. 3 kg can be written as 3.0 kg. Then, Thus, 3kg = 3,000 g. We can also use unit fractions to make this conversion. Since we are converting to grams, and 1,000    g = 1   kg, we choose the unit fraction since grams is in the numerator. Example 9.5.  Convert 67.2 hectoliters to milliliters. Thus, 67.2 hL = 6,720,000 mL. Example 9.6.  Convert 100.07 centimeters to meters. Thus, 100.07 cm = 1.0007 m. Example 9.7.  Convert 0.16 milligrams to grams. Thus, 0.16   mg = 0.00016 g. Practice Set A Exercise 9.3.1. (Go to Solution) Convert 411 kilograms to grams. Exercise 9.3.2. (Go to Solution) Convert 5.626 liters to centiliters. Exercise 9.3.3. (Go to Solution) Convert 80 milliliters to kiloliters. Exercise 9.3.4. (Go to Solution) Convert 150 milligrams to centigrams. Exercise 9.3.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 2.5 centimeters to meters.  || 
book4_ch09_3_2	The Advantages of the Base Ten Number System The metric system of measurement takes advantage of our base ten number sys­tem. The advantage of the metric system over the United States system is that in the metric system it is possible to convert from one unit of measure to another simply by multiplying or dividing the given number by a power of 10. This means we can make a conversion simply by moving the decimal point to the right or the left. The Advantages of the Base Ten Number System The metric system of measurement takes advantage of our base ten number sys­tem. The advantage of the metric system over the United States system is that in the metric system it is possible to convert from one unit of measure to another simply by multiplying or dividing the given number by a power of 10. This means we can make a conversion simply by moving the decimal point to the right or the left.  || 
book4_ch09_3_3	Prefixes Common units of measure in the metric system are the meter (for length), the liter (for volume), and the gram (for mass). To each of the units can be attached a prefix. The metric prefixes along with their meaning are listed below. kilo — thousand deci — tenth hecto — hundred centi — hundredth deka — ten milli — thousandth For example, if length is being measured, 1 kilometer is equivalent to 1000 meters. 1 centimeter is equivalent to one hundredth of a meter. 1 millimeter is equivalent to one thousandth of a meter. Prefixes Common units of measure in the metric system are the meter (for length), the liter (for volume), and the gram (for mass). To each of the units can be attached a prefix. The metric prefixes along with their meaning are listed below. kilo — thousand deci — tenth hecto — hundred centi — hundredth deka — ten milli — thousandth For example, if length is being measured, 1 kilometer is equivalent to 1000 meters. 1 centimeter is equivalent to one hundredth of a meter. 1 millimeter is equivalent to one thousandth of a meter.  || 
book4_ch09_3_4	Conversion from One Unit to Another Unit Let's note three characteristics of the metric system that occur in the metric table of measurements. In each category, the prefixes are the same. We can move from a larger to a smaller unit of measure by moving the decimal point to the right. We can move from a smaller to a larger unit of measure by moving the decimal point to the left. The following table provides a summary of the relationship between the basic unit of measure (meter, gram, liter) and each prefix, and how many places the decimal point is moved and in what direction. kilo hecto deka unit deci centi milli Table 9.3. Basic Unit to Prefix   Move the Decimal Point unit to deka 1 to 10 1 place to the left unit to hector 1 to 100 2 places to the left unit to kilo 1 to 1,000 3 places to the left unit to deci 1 to 0.1 1 place to the right unit to centi 1 to 0.01 2 places to the right unit to milli 1 to 0.001 3 places to the right Conversion from One Unit to Another Unit Let's note three characteristics of the metric system that occur in the metric table of measurements. In each category, the prefixes are the same. We can move from a larger to a smaller unit of measure by moving the decimal point to the right. We can move from a smaller to a larger unit of measure by moving the decimal point to the left. The following table provides a summary of the relationship between the basic unit of measure (meter, gram, liter) and each prefix, and how many places the decimal point is moved and in what direction. kilo hecto deka unit deci centi milli Table 9.3. Basic Unit to Prefix   Move the Decimal Point unit to deka 1 to 10 1 place to the left unit to hector 1 to 100 2 places to the left unit to kilo 1 to 1,000 3 places to the left unit to deci 1 to 0.1 1 place to the right unit to centi 1 to 0.01 2 places to the right unit to milli 1 to 0.001 3 places to the right  || 
book4_ch09_3_5	Conversion Table Listed below, in the unit conversion table, are some of the common metric units of measure. Table 9.4. Unit Conversion Table Length 1   kilometer  ( km ) = 1,000 meters  ( m ) 1, 000 × 1 m 1   hectometer  ( hm ) = 100 meters 100 × 1 m 1   dekameter  ( dam ) = 10 meters 10 × 1 m 1 meter (m) 1 × 1 m . 1 × 1 m . 01 × 1 m . 001 × 1 m Mass 1   kilogram   ( kg ) = 1,000 grams   ( g ) 1, 000 × 1 g 1   hectogram  ( hg ) = 100 grams 100 × 1 g 1   dekagram   ( dag ) = 10 grams 10 × 1 g 1   gram   (g) 1 × 1 g . 1 × 1 g . 01 × 1 g . 001 × 1 g Volume 1   kiloliter   ( kL ) = 1, 000   liters   ( L ) 1, 000 × 1 L 1   hectoliter   ( hL ) = 100   liters 100 × 1 L 1   dekaliter   ( daL ) = 10   liters 10 × 1 L 1 liter (L) 1 × 1 L . 1 × 1 L . 01 × 1 L . 001 × 1 L Time Same as the United States system   Distinction Between Mass and Weight There is a distinction between mass and weight. The weight of a body is related to gravity whereas the mass of a body is not. For example, your weight on the earth is different than it is on the moon, but your mass is the same in both places. Mass is a measure of a body's resistance to motion. The more massive a body, the more resistant it is to motion. Also, more massive bodies weigh more than less massive bodies. Converting Metric Units To convert from one metric unit to another metric unit: Determine the location of the original number on the metric scale (pictured in each of the following examples). Move the decimal point of the original number in the same direction and same number of places as is necessary to move to the metric unit you wish to go to. We can also convert from one metric unit to another using unit fractions. Both methods are shown in Example 9.4 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Example 9.4.  Convert 3 kilograms to grams. 3 kg can be written as 3.0 kg. Then, Thus, 3kg = 3,000 g. We can also use unit fractions to make this conversion. Since we are converting to grams, and 1,000    g = 1   kg, we choose the unit fraction since grams is in the numerator. Example 9.5.  Convert 67.2 hectoliters to milliliters. Thus, 67.2 hL = 6,720,000 mL. Example 9.6.  Convert 100.07 centimeters to meters. Thus, 100.07 cm = 1.0007 m. Example 9.7.  Convert 0.16 milligrams to grams. Thus, 0.16   mg = 0.00016 g. Practice Set A Exercise 9.3.1. (Go to Solution) Convert 411 kilograms to grams. Exercise 9.3.2. (Go to Solution) Convert 5.626 liters to centiliters. Exercise 9.3.3. (Go to Solution) Convert 80 milliliters to kiloliters. Exercise 9.3.4. (Go to Solution) Convert 150 milligrams to centigrams. Exercise 9.3.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 2.5 centimeters to meters. Conversion Table Listed below, in the unit conversion table, are some of the common metric units of measure. Table 9.4. Unit Conversion Table Length 1   kilometer  ( km ) = 1,000 meters  ( m ) 1, 000 × 1 m 1   hectometer  ( hm ) = 100 meters 100 × 1 m 1   dekameter  ( dam ) = 10 meters 10 × 1 m 1 meter (m) 1 × 1 m . 1 × 1 m . 01 × 1 m . 001 × 1 m Mass 1   kilogram   ( kg ) = 1,000 grams   ( g ) 1, 000 × 1 g 1   hectogram  ( hg ) = 100 grams 100 × 1 g 1   dekagram   ( dag ) = 10 grams 10 × 1 g 1   gram   (g) 1 × 1 g . 1 × 1 g . 01 × 1 g . 001 × 1 g Volume 1   kiloliter   ( kL ) = 1, 000   liters   ( L ) 1, 000 × 1 L 1   hectoliter   ( hL ) = 100   liters 100 × 1 L 1   dekaliter   ( daL ) = 10   liters 10 × 1 L 1 liter (L) 1 × 1 L . 1 × 1 L . 01 × 1 L . 001 × 1 L Time Same as the United States system   Distinction Between Mass and Weight There is a distinction between mass and weight. The weight of a body is related to gravity whereas the mass of a body is not. For example, your weight on the earth is different than it is on the moon, but your mass is the same in both places. Mass is a measure of a body's resistance to motion. The more massive a body, the more resistant it is to motion. Also, more massive bodies weigh more than less massive bodies. Converting Metric Units To convert from one metric unit to another metric unit: Determine the location of the original number on the metric scale (pictured in each of the following examples). Move the decimal point of the original number in the same direction and same number of places as is necessary to move to the metric unit you wish to go to. We can also convert from one metric unit to another using unit fractions. Both methods are shown in Example 9.4 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Example 9.4.  Convert 3 kilograms to grams. 3 kg can be written as 3.0 kg. Then, Thus, 3kg = 3,000 g. We can also use unit fractions to make this conversion. Since we are converting to grams, and 1,000    g = 1   kg, we choose the unit fraction since grams is in the numerator. Example 9.5.  Convert 67.2 hectoliters to milliliters. Thus, 67.2 hL = 6,720,000 mL. Example 9.6.  Convert 100.07 centimeters to meters. Thus, 100.07 cm = 1.0007 m. Example 9.7.  Convert 0.16 milligrams to grams. Thus, 0.16   mg = 0.00016 g. Practice Set A Exercise 9.3.1. (Go to Solution) Convert 411 kilograms to grams. Exercise 9.3.2. (Go to Solution) Convert 5.626 liters to centiliters. Exercise 9.3.3. (Go to Solution) Convert 80 milliliters to kiloliters. Exercise 9.3.4. (Go to Solution) Convert 150 milligrams to centigrams. Exercise 9.3.5. (Go to Solution) Convert 2.5 centimeters to meters.  || 
book4_ch09_4	 || Converting to Multiple Units Denominate Numbers Numbers that have units of measure associated with them are called denominate numbers. It is often convenient, or even necessary, to simplify a denominate number. Simplified Denominate Number A denominate number is simplified when the number of standard units of measure associated With it does not exceed the next higher type of unit. The denominate number 55 min is simplified since it is smaller than the next higher type of unit, 1 hr. The denominate number 65 min is not simplified since it is not smaller than the next higher type of unit, 1 hr. The denominate number 65 min can be simplified to 1 hr 5 min. The denominate number 1 hr 5 min is simplified since the next higher type of unit is day, and 1 hr does not exceed 1 day. Sample Set A Example 9.8.  Simplify 19 in. Since 12  in. = 1 ft, and 19 = 12 + 7, Example 9.9.  Simplify 4 gal 5 qt. Since 4  qt = 1 gal, and 5 = 4 + 1, Example 9.10.  Simplify 2 hr 75 min. Since 60 min = 1 hr, and 75 = 60 + 15, Example 9.11.  Simplify 43 fl oz. Since 8 fl oz = 1 c (1 cup), and 43÷8 = 5 R3, But, 2 c = 1 pt and 5÷2 = 2 R1. So, But, 2 pt = 1 qt, so 2 pt + 1 c + 3 fl oz = 1 qt 1 c 3 fl oz Practice Set A Simplify each denominate number. Refer to the conversion tables given in Section 9.2, if necessary. Exercise 9.4.1. (Go to Solution) 18 in. Exercise 9.4.2. (Go to Solution) 8 gal 9 qt Exercise 9.4.3. (Go to Solution) 5 hr 80 min Exercise 9.4.4. (Go to Solution) 8 wk 11 da Exercise 9.4.5. (Go to Solution) 86 da  || Adding and Subtracting Denominate Numbers Adding and Subtracting Denominate Numbers Denominate numbers can be added or subtracted by: writing the numbers vertically so that the like units appear in the same column. adding or subtracting the number parts, carrying along the unit. simplifying the sum or difference. Sample Set B Example 9.12.  Add 6 ft 8 in. to 2 ft 9 in. Since 12 in. = 1 ft, Example 9.13.  Subtract 5 da 3 hr from 8 da 11 hr. Example 9.14.  Subtract 3 lb 14 oz from 5 lb 3 oz. We cannot directly subtract 14 oz from 3 oz, so we must borrow 16 oz from the pounds. Example 9.15.  Subtract 4 da 9 hr 21 min from 7 da 10 min. Borrow 1 da from the 7 da. Borrow 1 hr from the 24 hr. Practice Set B Perform each operation. Simplify when possible. Exercise 9.4.6. (Go to Solution) Add 4 gal 3 qt to 1 gal 2 qt. Exercise 9.4.7. (Go to Solution) Add 9 hr 48 min to 4 hr 26 min. Exercise 9.4.8. (Go to Solution) Subtract 2 ft 5 in. from 8 ft 7 in. Exercise 9.4.9. (Go to Solution) Subtract 15 km 460 m from 27 km 800 m. Exercise 9.4.10. (Go to Solution) Subtract 8 min 35 sec from 12 min 10 sec. Exercise 9.4.11. (Go to Solution) Add 4 yd 2 ft 7 in. to 9 yd 2 ft 8 in. Exercise 9.4.12. (Go to Solution) Subtract 11 min 55 sec from 25 min 8 sec.  || Multiplying a Denominate Number by a Whole Number Let's examine the repeated sum Recalling that multiplication is a description of repeated addition, by the distribu­tive property we have From these observations, we can suggest the following rule. Multiplying a Denominate Number by a Whole Number To multiply a denominate number by a whole number, multiply the number part of each unit by the whole number and affix the unit to this product. Sample Set C Perform the following multiplications. Simplify if necessary. Example 9.16.  Since 3 ft = 1 yd and 12  in. = 1 ft, Example 9.17.  Practice Set C Perform the following multiplications. Simplify. Exercise 9.4.13. (Go to Solution) 2⋅(10 min) Exercise 9.4.14. (Go to Solution) 5⋅(3 qt) Exercise 9.4.15. (Go to Solution) 4⋅(5 ft 8 in.) Exercise 9.4.16. (Go to Solution) 10⋅(2 hr 15 min 40 sec)  || Dividing a Denominate Number by a Whole Number Dividing a Denominate Number by a Whole Number To divide a denominate number by a whole number, divide the number part of each unit by the whole number beginning with the largest unit. Affix the unit to this quotient. Carry any remainder to the next unit. Sample Set D Perform the following divisions. Simplify if necessary. Example 9.18.  (12 min 40 sec)÷4 Thus (12 min 40 sec)÷4 = 3 min 10 sec Example 9.19.  (5 yd 2 ft 9 in.)÷3 Thus (5 yd 2 ft 9 in.)÷3 = 1 yd 2 ft 11 in. Practice Set D Perform the following divisions. Simplify if necessary. Exercise 9.4.17. (Go to Solution) (18 hr 36 min)÷9 Exercise 9.4.18. (Go to Solution) (34 hr 8 min.)÷8 Exercise 9.4.19. (Go to Solution) (13 yd 7 in.)÷5 Exercise 9.4.20. (Go to Solution) (47 gal 2 qt 1 pt)÷3  || 
book4_ch09_4_2	Converting to Multiple Units Denominate Numbers Numbers that have units of measure associated with them are called denominate numbers. It is often convenient, or even necessary, to simplify a denominate number. Simplified Denominate Number A denominate number is simplified when the number of standard units of measure associated With it does not exceed the next higher type of unit. The denominate number 55 min is simplified since it is smaller than the next higher type of unit, 1 hr. The denominate number 65 min is not simplified since it is not smaller than the next higher type of unit, 1 hr. The denominate number 65 min can be simplified to 1 hr 5 min. The denominate number 1 hr 5 min is simplified since the next higher type of unit is day, and 1 hr does not exceed 1 day. Sample Set A Example 9.8.  Simplify 19 in. Since 12  in. = 1 ft, and 19 = 12 + 7, Example 9.9.  Simplify 4 gal 5 qt. Since 4  qt = 1 gal, and 5 = 4 + 1, Example 9.10.  Simplify 2 hr 75 min. Since 60 min = 1 hr, and 75 = 60 + 15, Example 9.11.  Simplify 43 fl oz. Since 8 fl oz = 1 c (1 cup), and 43÷8 = 5 R3, But, 2 c = 1 pt and 5÷2 = 2 R1. So, But, 2 pt = 1 qt, so 2 pt + 1 c + 3 fl oz = 1 qt 1 c 3 fl oz Practice Set A Simplify each denominate number. Refer to the conversion tables given in Section 9.2, if necessary. Exercise 9.4.1. (Go to Solution) 18 in. Exercise 9.4.2. (Go to Solution) 8 gal 9 qt Exercise 9.4.3. (Go to Solution) 5 hr 80 min Exercise 9.4.4. (Go to Solution) 8 wk 11 da Exercise 9.4.5. (Go to Solution) 86 da Converting to Multiple Units Denominate Numbers Numbers that have units of measure associated with them are called denominate numbers. It is often convenient, or even necessary, to simplify a denominate number. Simplified Denominate Number A denominate number is simplified when the number of standard units of measure associated With it does not exceed the next higher type of unit. The denominate number 55 min is simplified since it is smaller than the next higher type of unit, 1 hr. The denominate number 65 min is not simplified since it is not smaller than the next higher type of unit, 1 hr. The denominate number 65 min can be simplified to 1 hr 5 min. The denominate number 1 hr 5 min is simplified since the next higher type of unit is day, and 1 hr does not exceed 1 day. Sample Set A Example 9.8.  Simplify 19 in. Since 12  in. = 1 ft, and 19 = 12 + 7, Example 9.9.  Simplify 4 gal 5 qt. Since 4  qt = 1 gal, and 5 = 4 + 1, Example 9.10.  Simplify 2 hr 75 min. Since 60 min = 1 hr, and 75 = 60 + 15, Example 9.11.  Simplify 43 fl oz. Since 8 fl oz = 1 c (1 cup), and 43÷8 = 5 R3, But, 2 c = 1 pt and 5÷2 = 2 R1. So, But, 2 pt = 1 qt, so 2 pt + 1 c + 3 fl oz = 1 qt 1 c 3 fl oz Practice Set A Simplify each denominate number. Refer to the conversion tables given in Section 9.2, if necessary. Exercise 9.4.1. (Go to Solution) 18 in. Exercise 9.4.2. (Go to Solution) 8 gal 9 qt Exercise 9.4.3. (Go to Solution) 5 hr 80 min Exercise 9.4.4. (Go to Solution) 8 wk 11 da Exercise 9.4.5. (Go to Solution) 86 da  || 
book4_ch09_4_5	Adding and Subtracting Denominate Numbers Adding and Subtracting Denominate Numbers Denominate numbers can be added or subtracted by: writing the numbers vertically so that the like units appear in the same column. adding or subtracting the number parts, carrying along the unit. simplifying the sum or difference. Sample Set B Example 9.12.  Add 6 ft 8 in. to 2 ft 9 in. Since 12 in. = 1 ft, Example 9.13.  Subtract 5 da 3 hr from 8 da 11 hr. Example 9.14.  Subtract 3 lb 14 oz from 5 lb 3 oz. We cannot directly subtract 14 oz from 3 oz, so we must borrow 16 oz from the pounds. Example 9.15.  Subtract 4 da 9 hr 21 min from 7 da 10 min. Borrow 1 da from the 7 da. Borrow 1 hr from the 24 hr. Practice Set B Perform each operation. Simplify when possible. Exercise 9.4.6. (Go to Solution) Add 4 gal 3 qt to 1 gal 2 qt. Exercise 9.4.7. (Go to Solution) Add 9 hr 48 min to 4 hr 26 min. Exercise 9.4.8. (Go to Solution) Subtract 2 ft 5 in. from 8 ft 7 in. Exercise 9.4.9. (Go to Solution) Subtract 15 km 460 m from 27 km 800 m. Exercise 9.4.10. (Go to Solution) Subtract 8 min 35 sec from 12 min 10 sec. Exercise 9.4.11. (Go to Solution) Add 4 yd 2 ft 7 in. to 9 yd 2 ft 8 in. Exercise 9.4.12. (Go to Solution) Subtract 11 min 55 sec from 25 min 8 sec. Adding and Subtracting Denominate Numbers Adding and Subtracting Denominate Numbers Denominate numbers can be added or subtracted by: writing the numbers vertically so that the like units appear in the same column. adding or subtracting the number parts, carrying along the unit. simplifying the sum or difference. Sample Set B Example 9.12.  Add 6 ft 8 in. to 2 ft 9 in. Since 12 in. = 1 ft, Example 9.13.  Subtract 5 da 3 hr from 8 da 11 hr. Example 9.14.  Subtract 3 lb 14 oz from 5 lb 3 oz. We cannot directly subtract 14 oz from 3 oz, so we must borrow 16 oz from the pounds. Example 9.15.  Subtract 4 da 9 hr 21 min from 7 da 10 min. Borrow 1 da from the 7 da. Borrow 1 hr from the 24 hr. Practice Set B Perform each operation. Simplify when possible. Exercise 9.4.6. (Go to Solution) Add 4 gal 3 qt to 1 gal 2 qt. Exercise 9.4.7. (Go to Solution) Add 9 hr 48 min to 4 hr 26 min. Exercise 9.4.8. (Go to Solution) Subtract 2 ft 5 in. from 8 ft 7 in. Exercise 9.4.9. (Go to Solution) Subtract 15 km 460 m from 27 km 800 m. Exercise 9.4.10. (Go to Solution) Subtract 8 min 35 sec from 12 min 10 sec. Exercise 9.4.11. (Go to Solution) Add 4 yd 2 ft 7 in. to 9 yd 2 ft 8 in. Exercise 9.4.12. (Go to Solution) Subtract 11 min 55 sec from 25 min 8 sec.  || 
book4_ch09_4_8	Multiplying a Denominate Number by a Whole Number Let's examine the repeated sum Recalling that multiplication is a description of repeated addition, by the distribu­tive property we have From these observations, we can suggest the following rule. Multiplying a Denominate Number by a Whole Number To multiply a denominate number by a whole number, multiply the number part of each unit by the whole number and affix the unit to this product. Sample Set C Perform the following multiplications. Simplify if necessary. Example 9.16.  Since 3 ft = 1 yd and 12  in. = 1 ft, Example 9.17.  Practice Set C Perform the following multiplications. Simplify. Exercise 9.4.13. (Go to Solution) 2⋅(10 min) Exercise 9.4.14. (Go to Solution) 5⋅(3 qt) Exercise 9.4.15. (Go to Solution) 4⋅(5 ft 8 in.) Exercise 9.4.16. (Go to Solution) 10⋅(2 hr 15 min 40 sec) Multiplying a Denominate Number by a Whole Number Let's examine the repeated sum Recalling that multiplication is a description of repeated addition, by the distribu­tive property we have From these observations, we can suggest the following rule. Multiplying a Denominate Number by a Whole Number To multiply a denominate number by a whole number, multiply the number part of each unit by the whole number and affix the unit to this product. Sample Set C Perform the following multiplications. Simplify if necessary. Example 9.16.  Since 3 ft = 1 yd and 12  in. = 1 ft, Example 9.17.  Practice Set C Perform the following multiplications. Simplify. Exercise 9.4.13. (Go to Solution) 2⋅(10 min) Exercise 9.4.14. (Go to Solution) 5⋅(3 qt) Exercise 9.4.15. (Go to Solution) 4⋅(5 ft 8 in.) Exercise 9.4.16. (Go to Solution) 10⋅(2 hr 15 min 40 sec)  || 
book4_ch09_4_11	Dividing a Denominate Number by a Whole Number Dividing a Denominate Number by a Whole Number To divide a denominate number by a whole number, divide the number part of each unit by the whole number beginning with the largest unit. Affix the unit to this quotient. Carry any remainder to the next unit. Sample Set D Perform the following divisions. Simplify if necessary. Example 9.18.  (12 min 40 sec)÷4 Thus (12 min 40 sec)÷4 = 3 min 10 sec Example 9.19.  (5 yd 2 ft 9 in.)÷3 Thus (5 yd 2 ft 9 in.)÷3 = 1 yd 2 ft 11 in. Practice Set D Perform the following divisions. Simplify if necessary. Exercise 9.4.17. (Go to Solution) (18 hr 36 min)÷9 Exercise 9.4.18. (Go to Solution) (34 hr 8 min.)÷8 Exercise 9.4.19. (Go to Solution) (13 yd 7 in.)÷5 Exercise 9.4.20. (Go to Solution) (47 gal 2 qt 1 pt)÷3 Dividing a Denominate Number by a Whole Number Dividing a Denominate Number by a Whole Number To divide a denominate number by a whole number, divide the number part of each unit by the whole number beginning with the largest unit. Affix the unit to this quotient. Carry any remainder to the next unit. Sample Set D Perform the following divisions. Simplify if necessary. Example 9.18.  (12 min 40 sec)÷4 Thus (12 min 40 sec)÷4 = 3 min 10 sec Example 9.19.  (5 yd 2 ft 9 in.)÷3 Thus (5 yd 2 ft 9 in.)÷3 = 1 yd 2 ft 11 in. Practice Set D Perform the following divisions. Simplify if necessary. Exercise 9.4.17. (Go to Solution) (18 hr 36 min)÷9 Exercise 9.4.18. (Go to Solution) (34 hr 8 min.)÷8 Exercise 9.4.19. (Go to Solution) (13 yd 7 in.)÷5 Exercise 9.4.20. (Go to Solution) (47 gal 2 qt 1 pt)÷3  || 
book4_ch09_5	 || Polygons We can make use of conversion skills with denominate numbers to make measure­ments of geometric figures such as rectangles, triangles, and circles. To make these measurements we need to be familiar with several definitions. Polygon A polygon is a closed plane (flat) figure whose sides are line segments (portions of straight lines). Polygons Not polygons  || Perimeter Perimeter The perimeter of a polygon is the distance around the polygon. To find the perimeter of a polygon, we simply add up the lengths of all the sides. Sample Set A Find the perimeter of each polygon. Example 9.20.  Example 9.21.  Example 9.22.  Our first observation is that three of the dimensions are missing. However, we can determine the missing measurements using the following process. Let A, B, and C represent the missing measurements. Visualize A = 12m – 2m = 10m B = 9m + 1m – 2m = 8m C = 12m – 1m = 11m Practice Set A Find the perimeter of each polygon. Exercise 9.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.5.3. (Go to Solution)  || Circumference/Diameter/Radius Circumference The circumference of a circle is the distance around the circle. Diameter A diameter of a circle is any line segment that passes through the center of the circle and has its endpoints on the circle. Radius A radius of a circle is any line segment having as its endpoints the center of the circle and a point on the circle. The radius is one half the diameter.  || The Number π The symbol π , read "pi," represents the nonterminating, nonrepeating decimal number 3.14159 … . This number has been computed to millions of decimal places without the appearance of a repeating block of digits. For computational purposes, π is often approximated as 3.14. We will write π ≈ 3.14 to denote that π is approximately equal to 3.14. The symbol "≈" means "approximately equal to."  || Formulas To find the circumference of a circle, we need only know its diameter or radius. We then use a formula for computing the circumference of the circle. Formula A formula is a rule or method for performing a task. In mathematics, a formula is a rule that directs us in computations. Formulas are usually composed of letters that represent important, but possibly unknown, quantities. If C , d , and r represent, respectively, the circumference, diameter, and radius of a circle, then the following two formulas give us directions for computing the circum­ference of the circle. Circumference Formulas C = π d or C ≈ (3.14)d C = 2 π r or C ≈ 2(3.14)r Sample Set B Example 9.23.  Find the exact circumference of the circle. Use the formula C = π d . By commutativity of multiplication, , exactly This result is exact since π has not been approximated. Example 9.24.  Find the approximate circumference of the circle. Use the formula C = π d . C ≈ ( 3 . 14 ) ( 6 . 2 ) C ≈ 19 . 648   mm This result is approximate since π has been approximated by 3.14. Example 9.25.  Find the approximate circumference of a circle with radius 18 inches. Since we're given that the radius, r , is 18 in., we'll use the formula C = 2 π r . C ≈ (2) ( 3 . 14 ) ( 18   in . ) C ≈ 113 . 04   in . Example 9.26.  Find the approximate perimeter of the figure. We notice that we have two semicircles (half circles). The larger radius is 6.2 cm. The smaller radius is 6.2 cm - 2.0 cm = 4.2 cm. The width of the bottom part of the rectangle is 2.0 cm. Practice Set B Exercise 9.5.4. (Go to Solution) Find the exact circumference of the circle. Exercise 9.5.5. (Go to Solution) Find the approximate circumference of the circle. Exercise 9.5.6. (Go to Solution) Find the approximate circumference of the circle with radius 20.1 m. Exercise 9.5.7. (Go to Solution) Find the approximate outside perimeter of  || 
book4_ch09_5_2	Polygons We can make use of conversion skills with denominate numbers to make measure­ments of geometric figures such as rectangles, triangles, and circles. To make these measurements we need to be familiar with several definitions. Polygon A polygon is a closed plane (flat) figure whose sides are line segments (portions of straight lines). Polygons Not polygons Polygons We can make use of conversion skills with denominate numbers to make measure­ments of geometric figures such as rectangles, triangles, and circles. To make these measurements we need to be familiar with several definitions. Polygon A polygon is a closed plane (flat) figure whose sides are line segments (portions of straight lines). Polygons Not polygons  || 
book4_ch09_5_3	Perimeter Perimeter The perimeter of a polygon is the distance around the polygon. To find the perimeter of a polygon, we simply add up the lengths of all the sides. Sample Set A Find the perimeter of each polygon. Example 9.20.  Example 9.21.  Example 9.22.  Our first observation is that three of the dimensions are missing. However, we can determine the missing measurements using the following process. Let A, B, and C represent the missing measurements. Visualize A = 12m – 2m = 10m B = 9m + 1m – 2m = 8m C = 12m – 1m = 11m Practice Set A Find the perimeter of each polygon. Exercise 9.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.5.3. (Go to Solution) Perimeter Perimeter The perimeter of a polygon is the distance around the polygon. To find the perimeter of a polygon, we simply add up the lengths of all the sides. Sample Set A Find the perimeter of each polygon. Example 9.20.  Example 9.21.  Example 9.22.  Our first observation is that three of the dimensions are missing. However, we can determine the missing measurements using the following process. Let A, B, and C represent the missing measurements. Visualize A = 12m – 2m = 10m B = 9m + 1m – 2m = 8m C = 12m – 1m = 11m Practice Set A Find the perimeter of each polygon. Exercise 9.5.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.5.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.5.3. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch09_5_6	Circumference/Diameter/Radius Circumference The circumference of a circle is the distance around the circle. Diameter A diameter of a circle is any line segment that passes through the center of the circle and has its endpoints on the circle. Radius A radius of a circle is any line segment having as its endpoints the center of the circle and a point on the circle. The radius is one half the diameter. Circumference/Diameter/Radius Circumference The circumference of a circle is the distance around the circle. Diameter A diameter of a circle is any line segment that passes through the center of the circle and has its endpoints on the circle. Radius A radius of a circle is any line segment having as its endpoints the center of the circle and a point on the circle. The radius is one half the diameter.  || 
book4_ch09_5_7	The Number π The symbol π , read "pi," represents the nonterminating, nonrepeating decimal number 3.14159 … . This number has been computed to millions of decimal places without the appearance of a repeating block of digits. For computational purposes, π is often approximated as 3.14. We will write π ≈ 3.14 to denote that π is approximately equal to 3.14. The symbol "≈" means "approximately equal to." The Number π The symbol π , read "pi," represents the nonterminating, nonrepeating decimal number 3.14159 … . This number has been computed to millions of decimal places without the appearance of a repeating block of digits. For computational purposes, π is often approximated as 3.14. We will write π ≈ 3.14 to denote that π is approximately equal to 3.14. The symbol "≈" means "approximately equal to."  || 
book4_ch09_5_8	Formulas To find the circumference of a circle, we need only know its diameter or radius. We then use a formula for computing the circumference of the circle. Formula A formula is a rule or method for performing a task. In mathematics, a formula is a rule that directs us in computations. Formulas are usually composed of letters that represent important, but possibly unknown, quantities. If C , d , and r represent, respectively, the circumference, diameter, and radius of a circle, then the following two formulas give us directions for computing the circum­ference of the circle. Circumference Formulas C = π d or C ≈ (3.14)d C = 2 π r or C ≈ 2(3.14)r Sample Set B Example 9.23.  Find the exact circumference of the circle. Use the formula C = π d . By commutativity of multiplication, , exactly This result is exact since π has not been approximated. Example 9.24.  Find the approximate circumference of the circle. Use the formula C = π d . C ≈ ( 3 . 14 ) ( 6 . 2 ) C ≈ 19 . 648   mm This result is approximate since π has been approximated by 3.14. Example 9.25.  Find the approximate circumference of a circle with radius 18 inches. Since we're given that the radius, r , is 18 in., we'll use the formula C = 2 π r . C ≈ (2) ( 3 . 14 ) ( 18   in . ) C ≈ 113 . 04   in . Example 9.26.  Find the approximate perimeter of the figure. We notice that we have two semicircles (half circles). The larger radius is 6.2 cm. The smaller radius is 6.2 cm - 2.0 cm = 4.2 cm. The width of the bottom part of the rectangle is 2.0 cm. Practice Set B Exercise 9.5.4. (Go to Solution) Find the exact circumference of the circle. Exercise 9.5.5. (Go to Solution) Find the approximate circumference of the circle. Exercise 9.5.6. (Go to Solution) Find the approximate circumference of the circle with radius 20.1 m. Exercise 9.5.7. (Go to Solution) Find the approximate outside perimeter of Formulas To find the circumference of a circle, we need only know its diameter or radius. We then use a formula for computing the circumference of the circle. Formula A formula is a rule or method for performing a task. In mathematics, a formula is a rule that directs us in computations. Formulas are usually composed of letters that represent important, but possibly unknown, quantities. If C , d , and r represent, respectively, the circumference, diameter, and radius of a circle, then the following two formulas give us directions for computing the circum­ference of the circle. Circumference Formulas C = π d or C ≈ (3.14)d C = 2 π r or C ≈ 2(3.14)r Sample Set B Example 9.23.  Find the exact circumference of the circle. Use the formula C = π d . By commutativity of multiplication, , exactly This result is exact since π has not been approximated. Example 9.24.  Find the approximate circumference of the circle. Use the formula C = π d . C ≈ ( 3 . 14 ) ( 6 . 2 ) C ≈ 19 . 648   mm This result is approximate since π has been approximated by 3.14. Example 9.25.  Find the approximate circumference of a circle with radius 18 inches. Since we're given that the radius, r , is 18 in., we'll use the formula C = 2 π r . C ≈ (2) ( 3 . 14 ) ( 18   in . ) C ≈ 113 . 04   in . Example 9.26.  Find the approximate perimeter of the figure. We notice that we have two semicircles (half circles). The larger radius is 6.2 cm. The smaller radius is 6.2 cm - 2.0 cm = 4.2 cm. The width of the bottom part of the rectangle is 2.0 cm. Practice Set B Exercise 9.5.4. (Go to Solution) Find the exact circumference of the circle. Exercise 9.5.5. (Go to Solution) Find the approximate circumference of the circle. Exercise 9.5.6. (Go to Solution) Find the approximate circumference of the circle with radius 20.1 m. Exercise 9.5.7. (Go to Solution) Find the approximate outside perimeter of  || 
book4_ch09_6	 || The Meaning and Notation for Area The product (length unit)⋅(length unit) = (length unit)2 , or, square length unit (sq length unit), can be interpreted physically as the area of a surface. Area The area of a surface is the amount of square length units contained in the surface. For example, 3 sq in. means that 3 squares, 1 inch on each side, can be placed precisely on some surface. (The squares may have to be cut and rearranged so they match the shape of the surface.) We will examine the area of the following geometric figures.  || Area Formulas We can determine the areas of these geometric figures using the following formulas. Table 9.5.   Figure Area Formula Statement Triangle Area of a triangle is one half the base times the height. Rectangle A R = l ⋅ w Area of a rectangle is the length times the width. Parallelogram A P = b ⋅ h Area of a parallelogram is base times the height. Trapezoid Area of a trapezoid is one half the sum of the two bases times the height. Circle A C = πr 2 Area of a circle is π times the square of the radius.  || Finding Areas of Some Common Geometric Figures Sample Set A Example 9.27.  Find the area of the triangle. The area of this triangle is 60 sq ft, which is often written as 60 ft2. Example 9.28.  Find the area of the rectangle. Let's first convert 4 ft 2 in. to inches. Since we wish to convert to inches, we'll use the unit fraction since it has inches in the numerator. Then, Thus, 4 ft 2 in. = 48 in. + 2 in. = 50 in. The area of this rectangle is 400 sq in. Example 9.29.  Find the area of the parallelogram. The area of this parallelogram is 63.86 sq cm. Example 9.30.  Find the area of the trapezoid. The area of this trapezoid is 71.545 sq mm. Example 9.31.  Find the approximate area of the circle. The area of this circle is approximately 886.23 sq ft. Practice Set A Find the area of each of the following geometric figures. Exercise 9.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.6. (Go to Solution)  || The Meaning and Notation for Volume The product (length unit)(length unit)(length unit) = (length unit)3 , or cubic length unit (cu length unit), can be interpreted physically as the volume of a three-dimensional object. Volume The volume of an object is the amount of cubic length units contained in the object. For example, 4 cu mm means that 4 cubes, 1 mm on each side, would precisely fill some three-dimensional object. (The cubes may have to be cut and rearranged so they match the shape of the object.)  || Volume Formulas Table 9.6.   Figure Volume Formula Statement Rectangular solid The volume of a rectangular solid is the length times the width times the height. Sphere The volume of a sphere is times π times the cube of the radius. Cylinder The volume of a cylinder is π times the square of the radius times the height. Cone The volume of a cone is times π times the square of the radius times the height.  || Finding Volumes of Some Common Geometric Objects Sample Set B Example 9.32.  Find the volume of the rectangular solid. The volume of this rectangular solid is 270 cu in. Example 9.33.  Find the approximate volume of the sphere. The approximate volume of this sphere is 904.32 cu cm, which is often written as 904.32 cm3. Example 9.34.  Find the approximate volume of the cylinder. The volume of this cylinder is approximately 588.05292 cu ft. The volume is approximate because we approximated π with 3.14. Example 9.35.  Find the approximate volume of the cone. Round to two decimal places. The volume of this cone is approximately 20.93 cu mm. The volume is approximate because we approximated π with 3.14. Practice Set B Find the volume of each geometric object. If π is required, approximate it with 3.14 and find the approximate volume. Exercise 9.6.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.8. (Go to Solution) Sphere Exercise 9.6.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.10. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch09_6_2	The Meaning and Notation for Area The product (length unit)⋅(length unit) = (length unit)2 , or, square length unit (sq length unit), can be interpreted physically as the area of a surface. Area The area of a surface is the amount of square length units contained in the surface. For example, 3 sq in. means that 3 squares, 1 inch on each side, can be placed precisely on some surface. (The squares may have to be cut and rearranged so they match the shape of the surface.) We will examine the area of the following geometric figures. The Meaning and Notation for Area The product (length unit)⋅(length unit) = (length unit)2 , or, square length unit (sq length unit), can be interpreted physically as the area of a surface. Area The area of a surface is the amount of square length units contained in the surface. For example, 3 sq in. means that 3 squares, 1 inch on each side, can be placed precisely on some surface. (The squares may have to be cut and rearranged so they match the shape of the surface.) We will examine the area of the following geometric figures.  || 
book4_ch09_6_3	Area Formulas We can determine the areas of these geometric figures using the following formulas. Table 9.5.   Figure Area Formula Statement Triangle Area of a triangle is one half the base times the height. Rectangle A R = l ⋅ w Area of a rectangle is the length times the width. Parallelogram A P = b ⋅ h Area of a parallelogram is base times the height. Trapezoid Area of a trapezoid is one half the sum of the two bases times the height. Circle A C = πr 2 Area of a circle is π times the square of the radius. Area Formulas We can determine the areas of these geometric figures using the following formulas. Table 9.5.   Figure Area Formula Statement Triangle Area of a triangle is one half the base times the height. Rectangle A R = l ⋅ w Area of a rectangle is the length times the width. Parallelogram A P = b ⋅ h Area of a parallelogram is base times the height. Trapezoid Area of a trapezoid is one half the sum of the two bases times the height. Circle A C = πr 2 Area of a circle is π times the square of the radius.  || 
book4_ch09_6_4	Finding Areas of Some Common Geometric Figures Sample Set A Example 9.27.  Find the area of the triangle. The area of this triangle is 60 sq ft, which is often written as 60 ft2. Example 9.28.  Find the area of the rectangle. Let's first convert 4 ft 2 in. to inches. Since we wish to convert to inches, we'll use the unit fraction since it has inches in the numerator. Then, Thus, 4 ft 2 in. = 48 in. + 2 in. = 50 in. The area of this rectangle is 400 sq in. Example 9.29.  Find the area of the parallelogram. The area of this parallelogram is 63.86 sq cm. Example 9.30.  Find the area of the trapezoid. The area of this trapezoid is 71.545 sq mm. Example 9.31.  Find the approximate area of the circle. The area of this circle is approximately 886.23 sq ft. Practice Set A Find the area of each of the following geometric figures. Exercise 9.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.6. (Go to Solution) Finding Areas of Some Common Geometric Figures Sample Set A Example 9.27.  Find the area of the triangle. The area of this triangle is 60 sq ft, which is often written as 60 ft2. Example 9.28.  Find the area of the rectangle. Let's first convert 4 ft 2 in. to inches. Since we wish to convert to inches, we'll use the unit fraction since it has inches in the numerator. Then, Thus, 4 ft 2 in. = 48 in. + 2 in. = 50 in. The area of this rectangle is 400 sq in. Example 9.29.  Find the area of the parallelogram. The area of this parallelogram is 63.86 sq cm. Example 9.30.  Find the area of the trapezoid. The area of this trapezoid is 71.545 sq mm. Example 9.31.  Find the approximate area of the circle. The area of this circle is approximately 886.23 sq ft. Practice Set A Find the area of each of the following geometric figures. Exercise 9.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.6. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch09_6_7	The Meaning and Notation for Volume The product (length unit)(length unit)(length unit) = (length unit)3 , or cubic length unit (cu length unit), can be interpreted physically as the volume of a three-dimensional object. Volume The volume of an object is the amount of cubic length units contained in the object. For example, 4 cu mm means that 4 cubes, 1 mm on each side, would precisely fill some three-dimensional object. (The cubes may have to be cut and rearranged so they match the shape of the object.) The Meaning and Notation for Volume The product (length unit)(length unit)(length unit) = (length unit)3 , or cubic length unit (cu length unit), can be interpreted physically as the volume of a three-dimensional object. Volume The volume of an object is the amount of cubic length units contained in the object. For example, 4 cu mm means that 4 cubes, 1 mm on each side, would precisely fill some three-dimensional object. (The cubes may have to be cut and rearranged so they match the shape of the object.)  || 
book4_ch09_6_8	Volume Formulas Table 9.6.   Figure Volume Formula Statement Rectangular solid The volume of a rectangular solid is the length times the width times the height. Sphere The volume of a sphere is times π times the cube of the radius. Cylinder The volume of a cylinder is π times the square of the radius times the height. Cone The volume of a cone is times π times the square of the radius times the height. Volume Formulas Table 9.6.   Figure Volume Formula Statement Rectangular solid The volume of a rectangular solid is the length times the width times the height. Sphere The volume of a sphere is times π times the cube of the radius. Cylinder The volume of a cylinder is π times the square of the radius times the height. Cone The volume of a cone is times π times the square of the radius times the height.  || 
book4_ch09_6_9	Finding Volumes of Some Common Geometric Objects Sample Set B Example 9.32.  Find the volume of the rectangular solid. The volume of this rectangular solid is 270 cu in. Example 9.33.  Find the approximate volume of the sphere. The approximate volume of this sphere is 904.32 cu cm, which is often written as 904.32 cm3. Example 9.34.  Find the approximate volume of the cylinder. The volume of this cylinder is approximately 588.05292 cu ft. The volume is approximate because we approximated π with 3.14. Example 9.35.  Find the approximate volume of the cone. Round to two decimal places. The volume of this cone is approximately 20.93 cu mm. The volume is approximate because we approximated π with 3.14. Practice Set B Find the volume of each geometric object. If π is required, approximate it with 3.14 and find the approximate volume. Exercise 9.6.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.8. (Go to Solution) Sphere Exercise 9.6.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.10. (Go to Solution) Finding Volumes of Some Common Geometric Objects Sample Set B Example 9.32.  Find the volume of the rectangular solid. The volume of this rectangular solid is 270 cu in. Example 9.33.  Find the approximate volume of the sphere. The approximate volume of this sphere is 904.32 cu cm, which is often written as 904.32 cm3. Example 9.34.  Find the approximate volume of the cylinder. The volume of this cylinder is approximately 588.05292 cu ft. The volume is approximate because we approximated π with 3.14. Example 9.35.  Find the approximate volume of the cone. Round to two decimal places. The volume of this cone is approximately 20.93 cu mm. The volume is approximate because we approximated π with 3.14. Practice Set B Find the volume of each geometric object. If π is required, approximate it with 3.14 and find the approximate volume. Exercise 9.6.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.8. (Go to Solution) Sphere Exercise 9.6.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 9.6.10. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch03	 ||  || Exponential Notation Exponential Notation We have noted that multiplication is a description of repeated addition. Exponen­tial notation is a description of repeated multiplication. Suppose we have the repeated multiplication 8 ⋅ 8 ⋅ 8 ⋅ 8 ⋅ 8 Exponent The factor 8 is repeated 5 times. Exponential notation uses a superscript for the number of times the factor is repeated. The superscript is placed on the repeated factor, 8 5 , in this case. The superscript is called an exponent. The Function of an Exponent An exponent records the number of identical factors that are repeated in a multiplication. Sample Set A Write the following multiplication using exponents. Example 3.1.  3⋅3. Since the factor 3 appears 2 times, we record this as 32 Example 3.2.  62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62. Since the factor 62 appears 9 times, we record this as 629 Expand (write without exponents) each number. Example 3.3.  124 . The exponent 4 is recording 4 factors of 12 in a multiplication. Thus, 124 = 12⋅12⋅12⋅12 Example 3.4.  7063 . The exponent 3 is recording 3 factors of 706 in a multiplication. Thus, 7063 = 706⋅706⋅706 Practice Set A Write the following using exponents. Exercise 3.2.1. (Go to Solution) 37⋅37 Exercise 3.2.2. (Go to Solution) 16⋅16⋅16⋅16⋅16 Exercise 3.2.3. (Go to Solution) 9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9 Write each number without exponents. Exercise 3.2.4. (Go to Solution) 853 Exercise 3.2.5. (Go to Solution) 47 Exercise 3.2.6. (Go to Solution) 1,7392  || Reading Exponential Notation In a number such as 85 , Base 8 is called the base. Exponent, Power 5 is called the exponent, or power. 85 is read as "eight to the fifth power," or more simply as "eight to the fifth," or "the fifth power of eight." Squared When a whole number is raised to the second power, it is said to be squared. The number 52 can be read as 5 to the second power, or 5 to the second, or 5 squared. Cubed When a whole number is raised to the third power, it is said to be cubed. The number 53 can be read as 5 to the third power, or 5 to the third, or 5 cubed. When a whole number is raised to the power of 4 or higher, we simply say that that number is raised to that particular power. The number 58 can be read as 5 to the eighth power, or just 5 to the eighth.  || Roots In the English language, the word "root" can mean a source of something. In mathematical terms, the word "root" is used to indicate that one number is the source of another number through repeated multiplication. Square Root We know that 49 = 72 , that is, 49 = 7⋅7. Through repeated multiplication, 7 is the source of 49. Thus, 7 is a root of 49. Since two 7's must be multiplied together to produce 49, the 7 is called the second or square root of 49. Cube Root We know that 8 = 23 , that is, 8 = 2⋅2⋅2. Through repeated multiplication, 2 is the source of 8. Thus, 2 is a root of 8. Since three 2's must be multiplied together to produce 8, 2 is called the third or cube root of 8. We can continue this way to see such roots as fourth roots, fifth roots, sixth roots, and so on.  || Reading Root Notation There is a symbol used to indicate roots of a number. It is called the radical sign The Radical Sign The symbol is called a radical sign and indicates the nth root of a number. We discuss particular roots using the radical sign as follows: Square Root indicates the square root of the number under the radical sign. It is customary to drop the 2 in the radical sign when discussing square roots. The symbol is understood to be the square root radical sign. = 7 since 7⋅7 = 72 = 49 Cube Root indicates the cube root of the number under the radical sign. since 2⋅2⋅2 = 23 = 8 Fourth Root indicates the fourth root of the number under the radical sign. since 3⋅3⋅3⋅3 = 34 = 81 In an expression such as Radical Sign is called the radical sign. Index 5 is called the index. (The index describes the indicated root.) Radicand 32 is called the radicand. Radical is called a radical (or radical expression). Sample Set B Find each root. Example 3.5.  To determine the square root of 25, we ask, "What whole number squared equals 25?" From our experience with multiplication, we know this number to be 5. Thus, Check: 5 ⋅ 5 = 5 2 = 25 Example 3.6.  To determine the fifth root of 32, we ask, "What whole number raised to the fifth power equals 32?" This number is 2. Check: 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = 2 5 = 32 Practice Set B Find the following roots using only a knowledge of multiplication. Exercise 3.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.10. (Go to Solution)  || Calculators Calculators with the , y x , and 1 / x keys can be used to find or approximate roots. Sample Set C Example 3.7.  Use the calculator to find Table 3.1.     Display Reads Type 121 121 Press 11 Example 3.8.  Find . Table 3.2.     Display Reads Type 2187 2187 Press y x 2187 Type 7 7 Press 1 / x .14285714 Press = 3 (Which means that 37 = 2187 .) Practice Set C Use a calculator to find the following roots. Exercise 3.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.14. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Grouping Symbols Grouping symbols are used to indicate that a particular collection of numbers and meaningful operations are to be grouped together and considered as one number. The grouping symbols commonly used in mathematics are the following: ( ), [ ], { }, ___ Parentheses: ( ) Brackets: [ ] Braces: { } Bar: ___ In a computation in which more than one operation is involved, grouping symbols indicate which operation to perform first. If possible, we perform operations inside grouping symbols first. Sample Set A If possible, determine the value of each of the following. Example 3.9.  9 + ( 3 ⋅ 8 ) Since 3 and 8 are within parentheses, they are to be combined first. Thus, 9 + ( 3 ⋅ 8 ) = 33 Example 3.10.  ( 10 ÷ 0 ) ⋅ 6 Since 10÷0 is undefined, this operation is meaningless, and we attach no value to it. We write, "undefined." Practice Set A If possible, determine the value of each of the following. Exercise 3.3.1. (Go to Solution) 16 − (3⋅2) Exercise 3.3.2. (Go to Solution) 5 + (7⋅9) Exercise 3.3.3. (Go to Solution) (4 + 8)⋅2 Exercise 3.3.4. (Go to Solution) 28÷(18 − 11) Exercise 3.3.5. (Go to Solution) (33÷3) − 11 Exercise 3.3.6. (Go to Solution) 4 + (0÷0)  || Multiple Grouping Symbols When a set of grouping symbols occurs inside another set of grouping symbols, we perform the operations within the innermost set first. Sample Set B Determine the value of each of the following. Example 3.11.  2 + ( 8 ⋅ 3 ) − ( 5 + 6 ) Combine 8 and 3 first, then combine 5 and 6. Example 3.12.  10 + [ 30 − ( 2 ⋅ 9 ) ] Combine 2 and 9 since they occur in the innermost set of parentheses. Practice Set B Determine the value of each of the following. Exercise 3.3.7. (Go to Solution) (17 + 8) + (9 + 20) Exercise 3.3.8. (Go to Solution) (55 − 6) − (13⋅2) Exercise 3.3.9. (Go to Solution) 23 + (12÷4) − (11⋅2) Exercise 3.3.10. (Go to Solution) 86 + [14÷(10 − 8)] Exercise 3.3.11. (Go to Solution) 31 + {9 + [1 + (35 − 2)]} Exercise 3.3.12. (Go to Solution) {6 − [24÷(4⋅2)]}3  || The Order of Operations Sometimes there are no grouping symbols indicating which operations to perform first. For example, suppose we wish to find the value of 3 + 5⋅2. We could do either of two things: Add 3 and 5, then multiply this sum by 2. Multiply 5 and 2, then add 3 to this product. We now have two values for one number. To determine the correct value, we must use the accepted order of operations. Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols, beginning with the innermost set, in the order 2, 3, 4 described below, Perform all exponential and root operations. Perform all multiplications and divisions, moving left to right. Perform all additions and subtractions, moving left to right. Sample Set C Determine the value of each of the following. Example 3.13.  Example 3.14.  Example 3.15.  Example 3.16.  Example 3.17.  Example 3.18.  Practice Set C Determine the value of each of the following. Exercise 3.3.13. (Go to Solution) 8 + (32 − 7) Exercise 3.3.14. (Go to Solution) (34 + 18 − 2⋅3) + 11 Exercise 3.3.15. (Go to Solution) 8(10) + 4(2 + 3) − (20 + 3⋅15 + 40 − 5) Exercise 3.3.16. (Go to Solution) 5⋅8 + 42 − 22 Exercise 3.3.17. (Go to Solution) 4(62 − 33)÷(42 − 4) Exercise 3.3.18. (Go to Solution) (8 + 9⋅3)÷7 + 5⋅(8÷4 + 7 + 3⋅5) Exercise 3.3.19. (Go to Solution)  || Calculators Using a calculator is helpful for simplifying computations that involve large num­bers. Sample Set D Use a calculator to determine each value. Example 3.19.  9, 842 + 56 ⋅ 85 Table 3.3.   Key   Display Reads Perform the multiplication first. Type 56 56   Press × 56   Type 85 85 Now perform the addition. Press + 4760   Type 9842 9842   Press = 14602 The display now reads 14,602. Example 3.20.  42 ( 27 + 18 ) + 105 ( 810 ÷ 18 ) Table 3.4.   Key   Display Reads Operate inside the parentheses Type 27 27   Press + 27   Type 18 18   Press = 45 Multiply by 42. Press × 45   Type 42 42   Press = 1890 Place this result into memory by pressing the memory key. Table 3.5.   Key   Display Reads Now operate in the other parentheses. Type 810 810   Press ÷ 810   Type 18 18   Press = 45 Now multiply by 105. Press × 45   Type 105 105   Press = 4725 We are now ready to add these two quantities together. Press + 4725 Press the memory recall key.     1890   Press = 6615 Thus, 42(27 + 18) + 105(810÷18) = 6,615 Example 3.21.  16 4 + 37 3 Table 3.6. Nonscientific Calculators Key   Display Reads Type 16 16 Press × 16 Type 16 16 Press × 256 Type 16 16 Press × 4096 Type 16 16 Press = 65536 Press the memory key     Type 37 37 Press × 37 Type 37 37 Press × 1396 Type 37 37 Press × 50653 Press + 50653 Press memory recall key   65536 Press = 116189 Table 3.7. Calculators with yx Key Key   Display Reads Type 16 16 Press y x 16 Type 4 4 Press = 4096 Press + 4096 Type 37 37 Press y x 37 Type 3 3 Press = 116189 Thus, 164 + 373 = 116,189 We can certainly see that the more powerful calculator simplifies computations. Example 3.22.  Nonscientific calculators are unable to handle calculations involving very large numbers. 85612 ⋅ 21065 Table 3.8. Key   Display Reads Type 85612 85612 Press × 85612 Type 21065 21065 Press =   This number is too big for the display of some calculators and we'll probably get some kind of error message. On some scientific calculators such large numbers are coped with by placing them in a form called "scientific notation." Others can do the multiplication directly. (1803416780) Practice Set D Use a calculator to find each value. Exercise 3.3.20. (Go to Solution) 9,285 + 86(49) Exercise 3.3.21. (Go to Solution) 55(84 − 26) + 120(512 − 488) Exercise 3.3.22. (Go to Solution) 1063 − 174 Exercise 3.3.23. (Go to Solution) 6,0533  ||  || Factors From observations made in the process of multiplication, we have seen that ( factor ) ⋅ ( factor ) = product Factors, Product The two numbers being multiplied are the factors and the result of the multiplication is the product. Now, using our knowledge of division, we can see that a first number is a factor of a second number if the first number divides into the second number a whole number of times (without a remainder). One Number as a Factor of Another A first number is a factor of a second number if the first number divides into the second number a whole number of times (without a remainder). We show this in the following examples: Example 3.23.  3 is a factor of 27, since 27÷3 = 9, or 3⋅9 = 27. Example 3.24.  7 is a factor of 56, since 56÷7 = 8, or 7⋅8 = 56. Example 3.25.  4 is not a factor of 10, since 10÷4 = 2R2. (There is a remainder.)  || Determining the Factors of a Whole Number We can use the tests for divisibility from Section 2.5 to determine all the factors of a whole number. Sample Set A Example 3.26.  Find all the factors of 24. The next number to try is 6, but we already have that 6 is a factor. Once we come upon a factor that we already have discovered, we can stop. All the whole number factors of 24 are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, and 24. Practice Set A Find all the factors of each of the following numbers. Exercise 3.4.1. (Go to Solution) 6 Exercise 3.4.2. (Go to Solution) 12 Exercise 3.4.3. (Go to Solution) 18 Exercise 3.4.4. (Go to Solution) 5 Exercise 3.4.5. (Go to Solution) 10 Exercise 3.4.6. (Go to Solution) 33 Exercise 3.4.7. (Go to Solution) 19  || Prime and Composite Numbers Notice that the only factors of 7 are 1 and 7 itself, and that the only factors of 3 are 1 and 3 itself. However, the number 8 has the factors 1, 2, 4, and 8, and the number 10 has the factors 1, 2, 5, and 10. Thus, we can see that a whole number can have only two factors (itself and 1) and another whole number can have several factors. We can use this observation to make a useful classification for whole numbers: prime numbers and composite numbers. Prime Number A whole number (greater than one) whose only factors are itself and 1 is called a prime number. The Number 1 is Not a Prime Number The first seven prime numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and 17. Notice that the whole number 1 is not considered to be a prime number, and the whole number 2 is the first prime and the only even prime number. Composite Number A whole number composed of factors other than itself and 1 is called a compos­ite number. Composite numbers are not prime numbers. Some composite numbers are 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, and 15. Sample Set B Determine which whole numbers are prime and which are composite. Example 3.27.  39. Since 3 divides into 39, the number 39 is composite: 39÷3 = 13 Example 3.28.  47. A few division trials will assure us that 47 is only divisible by 1 and 47. Therefore, 47 is prime. Practice Set B Determine which of the following whole numbers are prime and which are composite. Exercise 3.4.8. (Go to Solution) 3 Exercise 3.4.9. (Go to Solution) 16 Exercise 3.4.10. (Go to Solution) 21 Exercise 3.4.11. (Go to Solution) 35 Exercise 3.4.12. (Go to Solution) 47 Exercise 3.4.13. (Go to Solution) 29 Exercise 3.4.14. (Go to Solution) 101 Exercise 3.4.15. (Go to Solution) 51  || The Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic Prime numbers are very useful in the study of mathematics. We will see how they are used in subsequent sections. We now state the Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic. Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic Except for the order of the factors, every natural number other than 1 can be factored in one and only one way as a product of prime numbers. Prime Factorization When a number is factored so that all its factors are prime numbers. the factori­zation is called the prime factorization of the number. The technique of prime factorization is illustrated in the following three examples. 10 = 5⋅2. Both 2 and 5 are primes. Therefore, 2⋅5 is the prime factorization of 10. 11. The number 11 is a prime number. Prime factorization applies only to composite numbers. Thus, 11 has no prime factorization. 60 = 2⋅30. The number 30 is not prime: 30 = 2⋅15. 60 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 15 The number 15 is not prime: 15 = 3⋅5 60 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 We'll use exponents. 60 = 2 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 The numbers 2, 3, and 5 are each prime. Therefore, 22⋅3⋅5 is the prime factorization of 60.  || The Prime Factorization of a Natural Number The following method provides a way of finding the prime factorization of a natural number. The Method of Finding the Prime Factorization of a Natural Number Divide the number repeatedly by the smallest prime number that will divide into it a whole number of times (without a remainder). When the prime number used in step 1 no longer divides into the given number without a remainder, repeat the division process with the next largest prime that divides the given number. Continue this process until the quotient is smaller than the divisor. The prime factorization of the given number is the product of all these prime divisors. If the number has no prime divisors, it is a prime number. We may be able to use some of the tests for divisibility we studied in Section 2.5 to help find the primes that divide the given number. Sample Set C Example 3.29.  Find the prime factorization of 60. Since the last digit of 60 is 0, which is even, 60 is divisible by 2. We will repeatedly divide by 2 until we no longer can. We shall divide as follows: The quotient 1 is finally smaller than the divisor 5, and the prime factorization of 60 is the product of these prime divisors. 60 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 We use exponents when possible. 60 = 2 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 Example 3.30.  Find the prime factorization of 441. 441 is not divisible by 2 since its last digit is not divisible by 2. 441 is divisible by 3 since 4 + 4 + 1 = 9 and 9 is divisible by 3. The quotient 1 is finally smaller than the divisor 7, and the prime factorization of 441 is the product of these prime divisors. 441 = 3 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 7 ⋅ 7 Use exponents. 441 = 3 2 ⋅ 7 2 Example 3.31.  Find the prime factorization of 31. The number 31 is a prime number Practice Set C Find the prime factorization of each whole number. Exercise 3.4.16. (Go to Solution) 22 Exercise 3.4.17. (Go to Solution) 40 Exercise 3.4.18. (Go to Solution) 48 Exercise 3.4.19. (Go to Solution) 63 Exercise 3.4.20. (Go to Solution) 945 Exercise 3.4.21. (Go to Solution) 1,617 Exercise 3.4.22. (Go to Solution) 17 Exercise 3.4.23. (Go to Solution) 61  ||  || The Greatest Common Factor (GCF) Using the method we studied in Section 3.4, we could obtain the prime factoriza­tions of 30 and 42. 30 = 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 42 = 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 7 Common Factor We notice that 2 appears as a factor in both numbers, that is, 2 is a common factor of 30 and 42. We also notice that 3 appears as a factor in both numbers. Three is also a common factor of 30 and 42. Greatest Common Factor (GCF) When considering two or more numbers, it is often useful to know if there is a largest common factor of the numbers, and if so, what that number is. The largest common factor of two or more whole numbers is called the greatest common factor, and is abbreviated by GCF. The greatest common factor of a collection of whole numbers is useful in working with fractions (which we will do in Section 4.1).  || A Method for Determining the Greatest Common Factor A straightforward method for determining the GCF of two or more whole numbers makes use of both the prime factorization of the numbers and exponents. Finding the GCF To find the greatest common factor (GCF) of two or more whole numbers: Write the prime factorization of each number, using exponents on repeated factors. Write each base that is common to each of the numbers. To each base listed in step 2, attach the smallest exponent that appears on it in either of the prime factorizations. The GCF is the product of the numbers found in step 3. Sample Set A Find the GCF of the following numbers. Example 3.32.  12 and 18 The common bases are 2 and 3. The smallest exponents appearing on 2 and 3 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 1 and 1 ( 21 and 31 ), or 2 and 3. The GCF is the product of these numbers. 2 ⋅ 3 = 6 The GCF of 30 and 42 is 6 because 6 is the largest number that divides both 30 and 42 without a remainder. Example 3.33.  18, 60, and 72 The common bases are 2 and 3. The smallest exponents appearing on 2 and 3 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 1 and 1: 21 from 18 31 from 60 The GCF is the product of these numbers. GCF is 2⋅3 = 6 Thus, 6 is the largest number that divides 18, 60, and 72 without a remainder. Example 3.34.  700, 1,880, and 6,160 The common bases are 2 and 5 The smallest exponents appearing on 2 and 5 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 2 and 1. 22 from 700. 51 from either 1,880 or 6,160. The GCF is the product of these numbers. GCF is 22⋅5 = 4⋅5 = 20 Thus, 20 is the largest number that divides 700, 1,880, and 6,160 without a remainder. Practice Set A Find the GCF of the following numbers. Exercise 3.5.1. (Go to Solution) 24 and 36 Exercise 3.5.2. (Go to Solution) 48 and 72 Exercise 3.5.3. (Go to Solution) 50 and 140 Exercise 3.5.4. (Go to Solution) 21 and 225 Exercise 3.5.5. (Go to Solution) 450, 600, and 540  ||  || Multiples When a whole number is multiplied by other whole numbers, with the exception of zero, the resulting products are called multiples of the given whole number. Note that any whole number is a multiple of itself. Sample Set A Table 3.9. Multiples of 2 Multiples of 3 Multiples of 8 Multiples of 10 2 × 1 = 2 3 × 1 = 3 8 × 1 = 8 10 × 1 = 10 2 × 2 = 4 3 × 2 = 6 8 × 2 = 16 10 × 2 = 20 2 × 3 = 6 3 × 3 = 9 8 × 3 = 24 10 × 3 = 30 2 × 4 = 8 3 × 4 = 12 8 × 4 = 32 10 × 4 = 40 2 × 5 = 10 3 × 5 = 15 8 × 5 = 40 10 × 5 = 50 ⋮ ⋮ ⋮ ⋮ Practice Set A Find the first five multiples of the following numbers. Exercise 3.6.1. (Go to Solution) 4 Exercise 3.6.2. (Go to Solution) 5 Exercise 3.6.3. (Go to Solution) 6 Exercise 3.6.4. (Go to Solution) 7 Exercise 3.6.5. (Go to Solution) 9  || Common Multiples There will be times when we are given two or more whole numbers and we will need to know if there are any multiples that are common to each of them. If there are, we will need to know what they are. For example, some of the multiples that are common to 2 and 3 are 6, 12, and 18. Sample Set B Example 3.35.  We can visualize common multiples using the number line. Notice that the common multiples can be divided by both whole numbers. Practice Set B Find the first five common multiples of the following numbers. Exercise 3.6.6. (Go to Solution) 2 and 4 Exercise 3.6.7. (Go to Solution) 3 and 4 Exercise 3.6.8. (Go to Solution) 2 and 5 Exercise 3.6.9. (Go to Solution) 3 and 6 Exercise 3.6.10. (Go to Solution) 4 and 5  || The Least Common Multiple (LCM) Notice that in our number line visualization of common multiples (above), the first common multiple is also the smallest, or least common multiple, abbreviated by LCM. Least Common Multiple The least common multiple, LCM, of two or more whole numbers is the smallest whole number that each of the given numbers will divide into without a remainder. The least common multiple will be extremely useful in working with fractions (Section 4.1).  || Finding the Least Common Multiple Finding the LCM To find the LCM of two or more numbers: Write the prime factorization of each number, using exponents on repeated factors. Write each base that appears in each of the prime factorizations. To each base, attach the largest exponent that appears on it in the prime factorizations. The LCM is the product of the numbers found in step 3. There are some major differences between using the processes for obtaining the GCF and the LCM that we must note carefully: The Difference Between the Processes for Obtaining the GCF and the LCM Notice the difference between step 2 for the LCM and step 2 for the GCF. For the GCF, we use only the bases that are common in the prime factorizations, whereas for the LCM, we use each base that appears in the prime factorizations. Notice the difference between step 3 for the LCM and step 3 for the GCF. For the GCF, we attach the smallest exponents to the common bases, whereas for the LCM, we attach the largest exponents to the bases. Sample Set C Find the LCM of the following numbers. Example 3.36.  9 and 12 The bases that appear in the prime factorizations are 2 and 3. The largest exponents appearing on 2 and 3 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 2 and 2: 22 from 12. 32 from 9. The LCM is the product of these numbers. LCM = 22⋅32 = 4⋅9 = 36 Thus, 36 is the smallest number that both 9 and 12 divide into without remainders. Example 3.37.  90 and 630 The bases that appear in the prime factorizations are 2, 3, 5, and 7. The largest exponents that appear on 2, 3, 5, and 7 are, respectively, 1, 2, 1, and 1: 21 from either 90 or 630. 32 from either 90 or 630. 51 from either 90 or 630. 71 from 630. The LCM is the product of these numbers. LCM = 2⋅32⋅5⋅7 = 2⋅9⋅5⋅7 = 630 Thus, 630 is the smallest number that both 90 and 630 divide into with no remainders. Example 3.38.  33, 110, and 484 The bases that appear in the prime factorizations are 2, 3, 5, and 11. The largest exponents that appear on 2, 3, 5, and 11 are, respectively, 2, 1, 1, and 2: 22 from 484. 31 from 33. 51 from 110 112 from 484. The LCM is the product of these numbers. Thus, 7260 is the smallest number that 33, 110, and 484 divide into without remainders. Practice Set C Find the LCM of the following numbers. Exercise 3.6.11. (Go to Solution) 20 and 54 Exercise 3.6.12. (Go to Solution) 14 and 28 Exercise 3.6.13. (Go to Solution) 6 and 63 Exercise 3.6.14. (Go to Solution) 28, 40, and 98 Exercise 3.6.15. (Go to Solution) 16, 27, 125, and 363  || 
book4_ch03_2	 || Exponential Notation Exponential Notation We have noted that multiplication is a description of repeated addition. Exponen­tial notation is a description of repeated multiplication. Suppose we have the repeated multiplication 8 ⋅ 8 ⋅ 8 ⋅ 8 ⋅ 8 Exponent The factor 8 is repeated 5 times. Exponential notation uses a superscript for the number of times the factor is repeated. The superscript is placed on the repeated factor, 8 5 , in this case. The superscript is called an exponent. The Function of an Exponent An exponent records the number of identical factors that are repeated in a multiplication. Sample Set A Write the following multiplication using exponents. Example 3.1.  3⋅3. Since the factor 3 appears 2 times, we record this as 32 Example 3.2.  62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62. Since the factor 62 appears 9 times, we record this as 629 Expand (write without exponents) each number. Example 3.3.  124 . The exponent 4 is recording 4 factors of 12 in a multiplication. Thus, 124 = 12⋅12⋅12⋅12 Example 3.4.  7063 . The exponent 3 is recording 3 factors of 706 in a multiplication. Thus, 7063 = 706⋅706⋅706 Practice Set A Write the following using exponents. Exercise 3.2.1. (Go to Solution) 37⋅37 Exercise 3.2.2. (Go to Solution) 16⋅16⋅16⋅16⋅16 Exercise 3.2.3. (Go to Solution) 9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9 Write each number without exponents. Exercise 3.2.4. (Go to Solution) 853 Exercise 3.2.5. (Go to Solution) 47 Exercise 3.2.6. (Go to Solution) 1,7392  || Reading Exponential Notation In a number such as 85 , Base 8 is called the base. Exponent, Power 5 is called the exponent, or power. 85 is read as "eight to the fifth power," or more simply as "eight to the fifth," or "the fifth power of eight." Squared When a whole number is raised to the second power, it is said to be squared. The number 52 can be read as 5 to the second power, or 5 to the second, or 5 squared. Cubed When a whole number is raised to the third power, it is said to be cubed. The number 53 can be read as 5 to the third power, or 5 to the third, or 5 cubed. When a whole number is raised to the power of 4 or higher, we simply say that that number is raised to that particular power. The number 58 can be read as 5 to the eighth power, or just 5 to the eighth.  || Roots In the English language, the word "root" can mean a source of something. In mathematical terms, the word "root" is used to indicate that one number is the source of another number through repeated multiplication. Square Root We know that 49 = 72 , that is, 49 = 7⋅7. Through repeated multiplication, 7 is the source of 49. Thus, 7 is a root of 49. Since two 7's must be multiplied together to produce 49, the 7 is called the second or square root of 49. Cube Root We know that 8 = 23 , that is, 8 = 2⋅2⋅2. Through repeated multiplication, 2 is the source of 8. Thus, 2 is a root of 8. Since three 2's must be multiplied together to produce 8, 2 is called the third or cube root of 8. We can continue this way to see such roots as fourth roots, fifth roots, sixth roots, and so on.  || Reading Root Notation There is a symbol used to indicate roots of a number. It is called the radical sign The Radical Sign The symbol is called a radical sign and indicates the nth root of a number. We discuss particular roots using the radical sign as follows: Square Root indicates the square root of the number under the radical sign. It is customary to drop the 2 in the radical sign when discussing square roots. The symbol is understood to be the square root radical sign. = 7 since 7⋅7 = 72 = 49 Cube Root indicates the cube root of the number under the radical sign. since 2⋅2⋅2 = 23 = 8 Fourth Root indicates the fourth root of the number under the radical sign. since 3⋅3⋅3⋅3 = 34 = 81 In an expression such as Radical Sign is called the radical sign. Index 5 is called the index. (The index describes the indicated root.) Radicand 32 is called the radicand. Radical is called a radical (or radical expression). Sample Set B Find each root. Example 3.5.  To determine the square root of 25, we ask, "What whole number squared equals 25?" From our experience with multiplication, we know this number to be 5. Thus, Check: 5 ⋅ 5 = 5 2 = 25 Example 3.6.  To determine the fifth root of 32, we ask, "What whole number raised to the fifth power equals 32?" This number is 2. Check: 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = 2 5 = 32 Practice Set B Find the following roots using only a knowledge of multiplication. Exercise 3.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.10. (Go to Solution)  || Calculators Calculators with the , y x , and 1 / x keys can be used to find or approximate roots. Sample Set C Example 3.7.  Use the calculator to find Table 3.1.     Display Reads Type 121 121 Press 11 Example 3.8.  Find . Table 3.2.     Display Reads Type 2187 2187 Press y x 2187 Type 7 7 Press 1 / x .14285714 Press = 3 (Which means that 37 = 2187 .) Practice Set C Use a calculator to find the following roots. Exercise 3.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.14. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch03_2_2	Exponential Notation Exponential Notation We have noted that multiplication is a description of repeated addition. Exponen­tial notation is a description of repeated multiplication. Suppose we have the repeated multiplication 8 ⋅ 8 ⋅ 8 ⋅ 8 ⋅ 8 Exponent The factor 8 is repeated 5 times. Exponential notation uses a superscript for the number of times the factor is repeated. The superscript is placed on the repeated factor, 8 5 , in this case. The superscript is called an exponent. The Function of an Exponent An exponent records the number of identical factors that are repeated in a multiplication. Sample Set A Write the following multiplication using exponents. Example 3.1.  3⋅3. Since the factor 3 appears 2 times, we record this as 32 Example 3.2.  62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62. Since the factor 62 appears 9 times, we record this as 629 Expand (write without exponents) each number. Example 3.3.  124 . The exponent 4 is recording 4 factors of 12 in a multiplication. Thus, 124 = 12⋅12⋅12⋅12 Example 3.4.  7063 . The exponent 3 is recording 3 factors of 706 in a multiplication. Thus, 7063 = 706⋅706⋅706 Practice Set A Write the following using exponents. Exercise 3.2.1. (Go to Solution) 37⋅37 Exercise 3.2.2. (Go to Solution) 16⋅16⋅16⋅16⋅16 Exercise 3.2.3. (Go to Solution) 9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9 Write each number without exponents. Exercise 3.2.4. (Go to Solution) 853 Exercise 3.2.5. (Go to Solution) 47 Exercise 3.2.6. (Go to Solution) 1,7392 Exponential Notation Exponential Notation We have noted that multiplication is a description of repeated addition. Exponen­tial notation is a description of repeated multiplication. Suppose we have the repeated multiplication 8 ⋅ 8 ⋅ 8 ⋅ 8 ⋅ 8 Exponent The factor 8 is repeated 5 times. Exponential notation uses a superscript for the number of times the factor is repeated. The superscript is placed on the repeated factor, 8 5 , in this case. The superscript is called an exponent. The Function of an Exponent An exponent records the number of identical factors that are repeated in a multiplication. Sample Set A Write the following multiplication using exponents. Example 3.1.  3⋅3. Since the factor 3 appears 2 times, we record this as 32 Example 3.2.  62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62⋅62. Since the factor 62 appears 9 times, we record this as 629 Expand (write without exponents) each number. Example 3.3.  124 . The exponent 4 is recording 4 factors of 12 in a multiplication. Thus, 124 = 12⋅12⋅12⋅12 Example 3.4.  7063 . The exponent 3 is recording 3 factors of 706 in a multiplication. Thus, 7063 = 706⋅706⋅706 Practice Set A Write the following using exponents. Exercise 3.2.1. (Go to Solution) 37⋅37 Exercise 3.2.2. (Go to Solution) 16⋅16⋅16⋅16⋅16 Exercise 3.2.3. (Go to Solution) 9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9⋅9 Write each number without exponents. Exercise 3.2.4. (Go to Solution) 853 Exercise 3.2.5. (Go to Solution) 47 Exercise 3.2.6. (Go to Solution) 1,7392  || 
book4_ch03_2_5	Reading Exponential Notation In a number such as 85 , Base 8 is called the base. Exponent, Power 5 is called the exponent, or power. 85 is read as "eight to the fifth power," or more simply as "eight to the fifth," or "the fifth power of eight." Squared When a whole number is raised to the second power, it is said to be squared. The number 52 can be read as 5 to the second power, or 5 to the second, or 5 squared. Cubed When a whole number is raised to the third power, it is said to be cubed. The number 53 can be read as 5 to the third power, or 5 to the third, or 5 cubed. When a whole number is raised to the power of 4 or higher, we simply say that that number is raised to that particular power. The number 58 can be read as 5 to the eighth power, or just 5 to the eighth. Reading Exponential Notation In a number such as 85 , Base 8 is called the base. Exponent, Power 5 is called the exponent, or power. 85 is read as "eight to the fifth power," or more simply as "eight to the fifth," or "the fifth power of eight." Squared When a whole number is raised to the second power, it is said to be squared. The number 52 can be read as 5 to the second power, or 5 to the second, or 5 squared. Cubed When a whole number is raised to the third power, it is said to be cubed. The number 53 can be read as 5 to the third power, or 5 to the third, or 5 cubed. When a whole number is raised to the power of 4 or higher, we simply say that that number is raised to that particular power. The number 58 can be read as 5 to the eighth power, or just 5 to the eighth.  || 
book4_ch03_2_6	Roots In the English language, the word "root" can mean a source of something. In mathematical terms, the word "root" is used to indicate that one number is the source of another number through repeated multiplication. Square Root We know that 49 = 72 , that is, 49 = 7⋅7. Through repeated multiplication, 7 is the source of 49. Thus, 7 is a root of 49. Since two 7's must be multiplied together to produce 49, the 7 is called the second or square root of 49. Cube Root We know that 8 = 23 , that is, 8 = 2⋅2⋅2. Through repeated multiplication, 2 is the source of 8. Thus, 2 is a root of 8. Since three 2's must be multiplied together to produce 8, 2 is called the third or cube root of 8. We can continue this way to see such roots as fourth roots, fifth roots, sixth roots, and so on. Roots In the English language, the word "root" can mean a source of something. In mathematical terms, the word "root" is used to indicate that one number is the source of another number through repeated multiplication. Square Root We know that 49 = 72 , that is, 49 = 7⋅7. Through repeated multiplication, 7 is the source of 49. Thus, 7 is a root of 49. Since two 7's must be multiplied together to produce 49, the 7 is called the second or square root of 49. Cube Root We know that 8 = 23 , that is, 8 = 2⋅2⋅2. Through repeated multiplication, 2 is the source of 8. Thus, 2 is a root of 8. Since three 2's must be multiplied together to produce 8, 2 is called the third or cube root of 8. We can continue this way to see such roots as fourth roots, fifth roots, sixth roots, and so on.  || 
book4_ch03_2_7	Reading Root Notation There is a symbol used to indicate roots of a number. It is called the radical sign The Radical Sign The symbol is called a radical sign and indicates the nth root of a number. We discuss particular roots using the radical sign as follows: Square Root indicates the square root of the number under the radical sign. It is customary to drop the 2 in the radical sign when discussing square roots. The symbol is understood to be the square root radical sign. = 7 since 7⋅7 = 72 = 49 Cube Root indicates the cube root of the number under the radical sign. since 2⋅2⋅2 = 23 = 8 Fourth Root indicates the fourth root of the number under the radical sign. since 3⋅3⋅3⋅3 = 34 = 81 In an expression such as Radical Sign is called the radical sign. Index 5 is called the index. (The index describes the indicated root.) Radicand 32 is called the radicand. Radical is called a radical (or radical expression). Sample Set B Find each root. Example 3.5.  To determine the square root of 25, we ask, "What whole number squared equals 25?" From our experience with multiplication, we know this number to be 5. Thus, Check: 5 ⋅ 5 = 5 2 = 25 Example 3.6.  To determine the fifth root of 32, we ask, "What whole number raised to the fifth power equals 32?" This number is 2. Check: 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = 2 5 = 32 Practice Set B Find the following roots using only a knowledge of multiplication. Exercise 3.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.10. (Go to Solution) Reading Root Notation There is a symbol used to indicate roots of a number. It is called the radical sign The Radical Sign The symbol is called a radical sign and indicates the nth root of a number. We discuss particular roots using the radical sign as follows: Square Root indicates the square root of the number under the radical sign. It is customary to drop the 2 in the radical sign when discussing square roots. The symbol is understood to be the square root radical sign. = 7 since 7⋅7 = 72 = 49 Cube Root indicates the cube root of the number under the radical sign. since 2⋅2⋅2 = 23 = 8 Fourth Root indicates the fourth root of the number under the radical sign. since 3⋅3⋅3⋅3 = 34 = 81 In an expression such as Radical Sign is called the radical sign. Index 5 is called the index. (The index describes the indicated root.) Radicand 32 is called the radicand. Radical is called a radical (or radical expression). Sample Set B Find each root. Example 3.5.  To determine the square root of 25, we ask, "What whole number squared equals 25?" From our experience with multiplication, we know this number to be 5. Thus, Check: 5 ⋅ 5 = 5 2 = 25 Example 3.6.  To determine the fifth root of 32, we ask, "What whole number raised to the fifth power equals 32?" This number is 2. Check: 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 = 2 5 = 32 Practice Set B Find the following roots using only a knowledge of multiplication. Exercise 3.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.10. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch03_2_10	Calculators Calculators with the , y x , and 1 / x keys can be used to find or approximate roots. Sample Set C Example 3.7.  Use the calculator to find Table 3.1.     Display Reads Type 121 121 Press 11 Example 3.8.  Find . Table 3.2.     Display Reads Type 2187 2187 Press y x 2187 Type 7 7 Press 1 / x .14285714 Press = 3 (Which means that 37 = 2187 .) Practice Set C Use a calculator to find the following roots. Exercise 3.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.14. (Go to Solution) Calculators Calculators with the , y x , and 1 / x keys can be used to find or approximate roots. Sample Set C Example 3.7.  Use the calculator to find Table 3.1.     Display Reads Type 121 121 Press 11 Example 3.8.  Find . Table 3.2.     Display Reads Type 2187 2187 Press y x 2187 Type 7 7 Press 1 / x .14285714 Press = 3 (Which means that 37 = 2187 .) Practice Set C Use a calculator to find the following roots. Exercise 3.2.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.12. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 3.2.14. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch03_3	 || Grouping Symbols Grouping symbols are used to indicate that a particular collection of numbers and meaningful operations are to be grouped together and considered as one number. The grouping symbols commonly used in mathematics are the following: ( ), [ ], { }, ___ Parentheses: ( ) Brackets: [ ] Braces: { } Bar: ___ In a computation in which more than one operation is involved, grouping symbols indicate which operation to perform first. If possible, we perform operations inside grouping symbols first. Sample Set A If possible, determine the value of each of the following. Example 3.9.  9 + ( 3 ⋅ 8 ) Since 3 and 8 are within parentheses, they are to be combined first. Thus, 9 + ( 3 ⋅ 8 ) = 33 Example 3.10.  ( 10 ÷ 0 ) ⋅ 6 Since 10÷0 is undefined, this operation is meaningless, and we attach no value to it. We write, "undefined." Practice Set A If possible, determine the value of each of the following. Exercise 3.3.1. (Go to Solution) 16 − (3⋅2) Exercise 3.3.2. (Go to Solution) 5 + (7⋅9) Exercise 3.3.3. (Go to Solution) (4 + 8)⋅2 Exercise 3.3.4. (Go to Solution) 28÷(18 − 11) Exercise 3.3.5. (Go to Solution) (33÷3) − 11 Exercise 3.3.6. (Go to Solution) 4 + (0÷0)  || Multiple Grouping Symbols When a set of grouping symbols occurs inside another set of grouping symbols, we perform the operations within the innermost set first. Sample Set B Determine the value of each of the following. Example 3.11.  2 + ( 8 ⋅ 3 ) − ( 5 + 6 ) Combine 8 and 3 first, then combine 5 and 6. Example 3.12.  10 + [ 30 − ( 2 ⋅ 9 ) ] Combine 2 and 9 since they occur in the innermost set of parentheses. Practice Set B Determine the value of each of the following. Exercise 3.3.7. (Go to Solution) (17 + 8) + (9 + 20) Exercise 3.3.8. (Go to Solution) (55 − 6) − (13⋅2) Exercise 3.3.9. (Go to Solution) 23 + (12÷4) − (11⋅2) Exercise 3.3.10. (Go to Solution) 86 + [14÷(10 − 8)] Exercise 3.3.11. (Go to Solution) 31 + {9 + [1 + (35 − 2)]} Exercise 3.3.12. (Go to Solution) {6 − [24÷(4⋅2)]}3  || The Order of Operations Sometimes there are no grouping symbols indicating which operations to perform first. For example, suppose we wish to find the value of 3 + 5⋅2. We could do either of two things: Add 3 and 5, then multiply this sum by 2. Multiply 5 and 2, then add 3 to this product. We now have two values for one number. To determine the correct value, we must use the accepted order of operations. Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols, beginning with the innermost set, in the order 2, 3, 4 described below, Perform all exponential and root operations. Perform all multiplications and divisions, moving left to right. Perform all additions and subtractions, moving left to right. Sample Set C Determine the value of each of the following. Example 3.13.  Example 3.14.  Example 3.15.  Example 3.16.  Example 3.17.  Example 3.18.  Practice Set C Determine the value of each of the following. Exercise 3.3.13. (Go to Solution) 8 + (32 − 7) Exercise 3.3.14. (Go to Solution) (34 + 18 − 2⋅3) + 11 Exercise 3.3.15. (Go to Solution) 8(10) + 4(2 + 3) − (20 + 3⋅15 + 40 − 5) Exercise 3.3.16. (Go to Solution) 5⋅8 + 42 − 22 Exercise 3.3.17. (Go to Solution) 4(62 − 33)÷(42 − 4) Exercise 3.3.18. (Go to Solution) (8 + 9⋅3)÷7 + 5⋅(8÷4 + 7 + 3⋅5) Exercise 3.3.19. (Go to Solution)  || Calculators Using a calculator is helpful for simplifying computations that involve large num­bers. Sample Set D Use a calculator to determine each value. Example 3.19.  9, 842 + 56 ⋅ 85 Table 3.3.   Key   Display Reads Perform the multiplication first. Type 56 56   Press × 56   Type 85 85 Now perform the addition. Press + 4760   Type 9842 9842   Press = 14602 The display now reads 14,602. Example 3.20.  42 ( 27 + 18 ) + 105 ( 810 ÷ 18 ) Table 3.4.   Key   Display Reads Operate inside the parentheses Type 27 27   Press + 27   Type 18 18   Press = 45 Multiply by 42. Press × 45   Type 42 42   Press = 1890 Place this result into memory by pressing the memory key. Table 3.5.   Key   Display Reads Now operate in the other parentheses. Type 810 810   Press ÷ 810   Type 18 18   Press = 45 Now multiply by 105. Press × 45   Type 105 105   Press = 4725 We are now ready to add these two quantities together. Press + 4725 Press the memory recall key.     1890   Press = 6615 Thus, 42(27 + 18) + 105(810÷18) = 6,615 Example 3.21.  16 4 + 37 3 Table 3.6. Nonscientific Calculators Key   Display Reads Type 16 16 Press × 16 Type 16 16 Press × 256 Type 16 16 Press × 4096 Type 16 16 Press = 65536 Press the memory key     Type 37 37 Press × 37 Type 37 37 Press × 1396 Type 37 37 Press × 50653 Press + 50653 Press memory recall key   65536 Press = 116189 Table 3.7. Calculators with yx Key Key   Display Reads Type 16 16 Press y x 16 Type 4 4 Press = 4096 Press + 4096 Type 37 37 Press y x 37 Type 3 3 Press = 116189 Thus, 164 + 373 = 116,189 We can certainly see that the more powerful calculator simplifies computations. Example 3.22.  Nonscientific calculators are unable to handle calculations involving very large numbers. 85612 ⋅ 21065 Table 3.8. Key   Display Reads Type 85612 85612 Press × 85612 Type 21065 21065 Press =   This number is too big for the display of some calculators and we'll probably get some kind of error message. On some scientific calculators such large numbers are coped with by placing them in a form called "scientific notation." Others can do the multiplication directly. (1803416780) Practice Set D Use a calculator to find each value. Exercise 3.3.20. (Go to Solution) 9,285 + 86(49) Exercise 3.3.21. (Go to Solution) 55(84 − 26) + 120(512 − 488) Exercise 3.3.22. (Go to Solution) 1063 − 174 Exercise 3.3.23. (Go to Solution) 6,0533  || 
book4_ch03_3_2	Grouping Symbols Grouping symbols are used to indicate that a particular collection of numbers and meaningful operations are to be grouped together and considered as one number. The grouping symbols commonly used in mathematics are the following: ( ), [ ], { }, ___ Parentheses: ( ) Brackets: [ ] Braces: { } Bar: ___ In a computation in which more than one operation is involved, grouping symbols indicate which operation to perform first. If possible, we perform operations inside grouping symbols first. Sample Set A If possible, determine the value of each of the following. Example 3.9.  9 + ( 3 ⋅ 8 ) Since 3 and 8 are within parentheses, they are to be combined first. Thus, 9 + ( 3 ⋅ 8 ) = 33 Example 3.10.  ( 10 ÷ 0 ) ⋅ 6 Since 10÷0 is undefined, this operation is meaningless, and we attach no value to it. We write, "undefined." Practice Set A If possible, determine the value of each of the following. Exercise 3.3.1. (Go to Solution) 16 − (3⋅2) Exercise 3.3.2. (Go to Solution) 5 + (7⋅9) Exercise 3.3.3. (Go to Solution) (4 + 8)⋅2 Exercise 3.3.4. (Go to Solution) 28÷(18 − 11) Exercise 3.3.5. (Go to Solution) (33÷3) − 11 Exercise 3.3.6. (Go to Solution) 4 + (0÷0) Grouping Symbols Grouping symbols are used to indicate that a particular collection of numbers and meaningful operations are to be grouped together and considered as one number. The grouping symbols commonly used in mathematics are the following: ( ), [ ], { }, ___ Parentheses: ( ) Brackets: [ ] Braces: { } Bar: ___ In a computation in which more than one operation is involved, grouping symbols indicate which operation to perform first. If possible, we perform operations inside grouping symbols first. Sample Set A If possible, determine the value of each of the following. Example 3.9.  9 + ( 3 ⋅ 8 ) Since 3 and 8 are within parentheses, they are to be combined first. Thus, 9 + ( 3 ⋅ 8 ) = 33 Example 3.10.  ( 10 ÷ 0 ) ⋅ 6 Since 10÷0 is undefined, this operation is meaningless, and we attach no value to it. We write, "undefined." Practice Set A If possible, determine the value of each of the following. Exercise 3.3.1. (Go to Solution) 16 − (3⋅2) Exercise 3.3.2. (Go to Solution) 5 + (7⋅9) Exercise 3.3.3. (Go to Solution) (4 + 8)⋅2 Exercise 3.3.4. (Go to Solution) 28÷(18 − 11) Exercise 3.3.5. (Go to Solution) (33÷3) − 11 Exercise 3.3.6. (Go to Solution) 4 + (0÷0)  || 
book4_ch03_3_5	Multiple Grouping Symbols When a set of grouping symbols occurs inside another set of grouping symbols, we perform the operations within the innermost set first. Sample Set B Determine the value of each of the following. Example 3.11.  2 + ( 8 ⋅ 3 ) − ( 5 + 6 ) Combine 8 and 3 first, then combine 5 and 6. Example 3.12.  10 + [ 30 − ( 2 ⋅ 9 ) ] Combine 2 and 9 since they occur in the innermost set of parentheses. Practice Set B Determine the value of each of the following. Exercise 3.3.7. (Go to Solution) (17 + 8) + (9 + 20) Exercise 3.3.8. (Go to Solution) (55 − 6) − (13⋅2) Exercise 3.3.9. (Go to Solution) 23 + (12÷4) − (11⋅2) Exercise 3.3.10. (Go to Solution) 86 + [14÷(10 − 8)] Exercise 3.3.11. (Go to Solution) 31 + {9 + [1 + (35 − 2)]} Exercise 3.3.12. (Go to Solution) {6 − [24÷(4⋅2)]}3 Multiple Grouping Symbols When a set of grouping symbols occurs inside another set of grouping symbols, we perform the operations within the innermost set first. Sample Set B Determine the value of each of the following. Example 3.11.  2 + ( 8 ⋅ 3 ) − ( 5 + 6 ) Combine 8 and 3 first, then combine 5 and 6. Example 3.12.  10 + [ 30 − ( 2 ⋅ 9 ) ] Combine 2 and 9 since they occur in the innermost set of parentheses. Practice Set B Determine the value of each of the following. Exercise 3.3.7. (Go to Solution) (17 + 8) + (9 + 20) Exercise 3.3.8. (Go to Solution) (55 − 6) − (13⋅2) Exercise 3.3.9. (Go to Solution) 23 + (12÷4) − (11⋅2) Exercise 3.3.10. (Go to Solution) 86 + [14÷(10 − 8)] Exercise 3.3.11. (Go to Solution) 31 + {9 + [1 + (35 − 2)]} Exercise 3.3.12. (Go to Solution) {6 − [24÷(4⋅2)]}3  || 
book4_ch03_3_8	The Order of Operations Sometimes there are no grouping symbols indicating which operations to perform first. For example, suppose we wish to find the value of 3 + 5⋅2. We could do either of two things: Add 3 and 5, then multiply this sum by 2. Multiply 5 and 2, then add 3 to this product. We now have two values for one number. To determine the correct value, we must use the accepted order of operations. Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols, beginning with the innermost set, in the order 2, 3, 4 described below, Perform all exponential and root operations. Perform all multiplications and divisions, moving left to right. Perform all additions and subtractions, moving left to right. Sample Set C Determine the value of each of the following. Example 3.13.  Example 3.14.  Example 3.15.  Example 3.16.  Example 3.17.  Example 3.18.  Practice Set C Determine the value of each of the following. Exercise 3.3.13. (Go to Solution) 8 + (32 − 7) Exercise 3.3.14. (Go to Solution) (34 + 18 − 2⋅3) + 11 Exercise 3.3.15. (Go to Solution) 8(10) + 4(2 + 3) − (20 + 3⋅15 + 40 − 5) Exercise 3.3.16. (Go to Solution) 5⋅8 + 42 − 22 Exercise 3.3.17. (Go to Solution) 4(62 − 33)÷(42 − 4) Exercise 3.3.18. (Go to Solution) (8 + 9⋅3)÷7 + 5⋅(8÷4 + 7 + 3⋅5) Exercise 3.3.19. (Go to Solution) The Order of Operations Sometimes there are no grouping symbols indicating which operations to perform first. For example, suppose we wish to find the value of 3 + 5⋅2. We could do either of two things: Add 3 and 5, then multiply this sum by 2. Multiply 5 and 2, then add 3 to this product. We now have two values for one number. To determine the correct value, we must use the accepted order of operations. Order of Operations Perform all operations inside grouping symbols, beginning with the innermost set, in the order 2, 3, 4 described below, Perform all exponential and root operations. Perform all multiplications and divisions, moving left to right. Perform all additions and subtractions, moving left to right. Sample Set C Determine the value of each of the following. Example 3.13.  Example 3.14.  Example 3.15.  Example 3.16.  Example 3.17.  Example 3.18.  Practice Set C Determine the value of each of the following. Exercise 3.3.13. (Go to Solution) 8 + (32 − 7) Exercise 3.3.14. (Go to Solution) (34 + 18 − 2⋅3) + 11 Exercise 3.3.15. (Go to Solution) 8(10) + 4(2 + 3) − (20 + 3⋅15 + 40 − 5) Exercise 3.3.16. (Go to Solution) 5⋅8 + 42 − 22 Exercise 3.3.17. (Go to Solution) 4(62 − 33)÷(42 − 4) Exercise 3.3.18. (Go to Solution) (8 + 9⋅3)÷7 + 5⋅(8÷4 + 7 + 3⋅5) Exercise 3.3.19. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch03_3_11	Calculators Using a calculator is helpful for simplifying computations that involve large num­bers. Sample Set D Use a calculator to determine each value. Example 3.19.  9, 842 + 56 ⋅ 85 Table 3.3.   Key   Display Reads Perform the multiplication first. Type 56 56   Press × 56   Type 85 85 Now perform the addition. Press + 4760   Type 9842 9842   Press = 14602 The display now reads 14,602. Example 3.20.  42 ( 27 + 18 ) + 105 ( 810 ÷ 18 ) Table 3.4.   Key   Display Reads Operate inside the parentheses Type 27 27   Press + 27   Type 18 18   Press = 45 Multiply by 42. Press × 45   Type 42 42   Press = 1890 Place this result into memory by pressing the memory key. Table 3.5.   Key   Display Reads Now operate in the other parentheses. Type 810 810   Press ÷ 810   Type 18 18   Press = 45 Now multiply by 105. Press × 45   Type 105 105   Press = 4725 We are now ready to add these two quantities together. Press + 4725 Press the memory recall key.     1890   Press = 6615 Thus, 42(27 + 18) + 105(810÷18) = 6,615 Example 3.21.  16 4 + 37 3 Table 3.6. Nonscientific Calculators Key   Display Reads Type 16 16 Press × 16 Type 16 16 Press × 256 Type 16 16 Press × 4096 Type 16 16 Press = 65536 Press the memory key     Type 37 37 Press × 37 Type 37 37 Press × 1396 Type 37 37 Press × 50653 Press + 50653 Press memory recall key   65536 Press = 116189 Table 3.7. Calculators with yx Key Key   Display Reads Type 16 16 Press y x 16 Type 4 4 Press = 4096 Press + 4096 Type 37 37 Press y x 37 Type 3 3 Press = 116189 Thus, 164 + 373 = 116,189 We can certainly see that the more powerful calculator simplifies computations. Example 3.22.  Nonscientific calculators are unable to handle calculations involving very large numbers. 85612 ⋅ 21065 Table 3.8. Key   Display Reads Type 85612 85612 Press × 85612 Type 21065 21065 Press =   This number is too big for the display of some calculators and we'll probably get some kind of error message. On some scientific calculators such large numbers are coped with by placing them in a form called "scientific notation." Others can do the multiplication directly. (1803416780) Practice Set D Use a calculator to find each value. Exercise 3.3.20. (Go to Solution) 9,285 + 86(49) Exercise 3.3.21. (Go to Solution) 55(84 − 26) + 120(512 − 488) Exercise 3.3.22. (Go to Solution) 1063 − 174 Exercise 3.3.23. (Go to Solution) 6,0533 Calculators Using a calculator is helpful for simplifying computations that involve large num­bers. Sample Set D Use a calculator to determine each value. Example 3.19.  9, 842 + 56 ⋅ 85 Table 3.3.   Key   Display Reads Perform the multiplication first. Type 56 56   Press × 56   Type 85 85 Now perform the addition. Press + 4760   Type 9842 9842   Press = 14602 The display now reads 14,602. Example 3.20.  42 ( 27 + 18 ) + 105 ( 810 ÷ 18 ) Table 3.4.   Key   Display Reads Operate inside the parentheses Type 27 27   Press + 27   Type 18 18   Press = 45 Multiply by 42. Press × 45   Type 42 42   Press = 1890 Place this result into memory by pressing the memory key. Table 3.5.   Key   Display Reads Now operate in the other parentheses. Type 810 810   Press ÷ 810   Type 18 18   Press = 45 Now multiply by 105. Press × 45   Type 105 105   Press = 4725 We are now ready to add these two quantities together. Press + 4725 Press the memory recall key.     1890   Press = 6615 Thus, 42(27 + 18) + 105(810÷18) = 6,615 Example 3.21.  16 4 + 37 3 Table 3.6. Nonscientific Calculators Key   Display Reads Type 16 16 Press × 16 Type 16 16 Press × 256 Type 16 16 Press × 4096 Type 16 16 Press = 65536 Press the memory key     Type 37 37 Press × 37 Type 37 37 Press × 1396 Type 37 37 Press × 50653 Press + 50653 Press memory recall key   65536 Press = 116189 Table 3.7. Calculators with yx Key Key   Display Reads Type 16 16 Press y x 16 Type 4 4 Press = 4096 Press + 4096 Type 37 37 Press y x 37 Type 3 3 Press = 116189 Thus, 164 + 373 = 116,189 We can certainly see that the more powerful calculator simplifies computations. Example 3.22.  Nonscientific calculators are unable to handle calculations involving very large numbers. 85612 ⋅ 21065 Table 3.8. Key   Display Reads Type 85612 85612 Press × 85612 Type 21065 21065 Press =   This number is too big for the display of some calculators and we'll probably get some kind of error message. On some scientific calculators such large numbers are coped with by placing them in a form called "scientific notation." Others can do the multiplication directly. (1803416780) Practice Set D Use a calculator to find each value. Exercise 3.3.20. (Go to Solution) 9,285 + 86(49) Exercise 3.3.21. (Go to Solution) 55(84 − 26) + 120(512 − 488) Exercise 3.3.22. (Go to Solution) 1063 − 174 Exercise 3.3.23. (Go to Solution) 6,0533  || 
book4_ch03_4	 || Factors From observations made in the process of multiplication, we have seen that ( factor ) ⋅ ( factor ) = product Factors, Product The two numbers being multiplied are the factors and the result of the multiplication is the product. Now, using our knowledge of division, we can see that a first number is a factor of a second number if the first number divides into the second number a whole number of times (without a remainder). One Number as a Factor of Another A first number is a factor of a second number if the first number divides into the second number a whole number of times (without a remainder). We show this in the following examples: Example 3.23.  3 is a factor of 27, since 27÷3 = 9, or 3⋅9 = 27. Example 3.24.  7 is a factor of 56, since 56÷7 = 8, or 7⋅8 = 56. Example 3.25.  4 is not a factor of 10, since 10÷4 = 2R2. (There is a remainder.)  || Determining the Factors of a Whole Number We can use the tests for divisibility from Section 2.5 to determine all the factors of a whole number. Sample Set A Example 3.26.  Find all the factors of 24. The next number to try is 6, but we already have that 6 is a factor. Once we come upon a factor that we already have discovered, we can stop. All the whole number factors of 24 are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, and 24. Practice Set A Find all the factors of each of the following numbers. Exercise 3.4.1. (Go to Solution) 6 Exercise 3.4.2. (Go to Solution) 12 Exercise 3.4.3. (Go to Solution) 18 Exercise 3.4.4. (Go to Solution) 5 Exercise 3.4.5. (Go to Solution) 10 Exercise 3.4.6. (Go to Solution) 33 Exercise 3.4.7. (Go to Solution) 19  || Prime and Composite Numbers Notice that the only factors of 7 are 1 and 7 itself, and that the only factors of 3 are 1 and 3 itself. However, the number 8 has the factors 1, 2, 4, and 8, and the number 10 has the factors 1, 2, 5, and 10. Thus, we can see that a whole number can have only two factors (itself and 1) and another whole number can have several factors. We can use this observation to make a useful classification for whole numbers: prime numbers and composite numbers. Prime Number A whole number (greater than one) whose only factors are itself and 1 is called a prime number. The Number 1 is Not a Prime Number The first seven prime numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and 17. Notice that the whole number 1 is not considered to be a prime number, and the whole number 2 is the first prime and the only even prime number. Composite Number A whole number composed of factors other than itself and 1 is called a compos­ite number. Composite numbers are not prime numbers. Some composite numbers are 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, and 15. Sample Set B Determine which whole numbers are prime and which are composite. Example 3.27.  39. Since 3 divides into 39, the number 39 is composite: 39÷3 = 13 Example 3.28.  47. A few division trials will assure us that 47 is only divisible by 1 and 47. Therefore, 47 is prime. Practice Set B Determine which of the following whole numbers are prime and which are composite. Exercise 3.4.8. (Go to Solution) 3 Exercise 3.4.9. (Go to Solution) 16 Exercise 3.4.10. (Go to Solution) 21 Exercise 3.4.11. (Go to Solution) 35 Exercise 3.4.12. (Go to Solution) 47 Exercise 3.4.13. (Go to Solution) 29 Exercise 3.4.14. (Go to Solution) 101 Exercise 3.4.15. (Go to Solution) 51  || The Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic Prime numbers are very useful in the study of mathematics. We will see how they are used in subsequent sections. We now state the Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic. Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic Except for the order of the factors, every natural number other than 1 can be factored in one and only one way as a product of prime numbers. Prime Factorization When a number is factored so that all its factors are prime numbers. the factori­zation is called the prime factorization of the number. The technique of prime factorization is illustrated in the following three examples. 10 = 5⋅2. Both 2 and 5 are primes. Therefore, 2⋅5 is the prime factorization of 10. 11. The number 11 is a prime number. Prime factorization applies only to composite numbers. Thus, 11 has no prime factorization. 60 = 2⋅30. The number 30 is not prime: 30 = 2⋅15. 60 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 15 The number 15 is not prime: 15 = 3⋅5 60 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 We'll use exponents. 60 = 2 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 The numbers 2, 3, and 5 are each prime. Therefore, 22⋅3⋅5 is the prime factorization of 60.  || The Prime Factorization of a Natural Number The following method provides a way of finding the prime factorization of a natural number. The Method of Finding the Prime Factorization of a Natural Number Divide the number repeatedly by the smallest prime number that will divide into it a whole number of times (without a remainder). When the prime number used in step 1 no longer divides into the given number without a remainder, repeat the division process with the next largest prime that divides the given number. Continue this process until the quotient is smaller than the divisor. The prime factorization of the given number is the product of all these prime divisors. If the number has no prime divisors, it is a prime number. We may be able to use some of the tests for divisibility we studied in Section 2.5 to help find the primes that divide the given number. Sample Set C Example 3.29.  Find the prime factorization of 60. Since the last digit of 60 is 0, which is even, 60 is divisible by 2. We will repeatedly divide by 2 until we no longer can. We shall divide as follows: The quotient 1 is finally smaller than the divisor 5, and the prime factorization of 60 is the product of these prime divisors. 60 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 We use exponents when possible. 60 = 2 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 Example 3.30.  Find the prime factorization of 441. 441 is not divisible by 2 since its last digit is not divisible by 2. 441 is divisible by 3 since 4 + 4 + 1 = 9 and 9 is divisible by 3. The quotient 1 is finally smaller than the divisor 7, and the prime factorization of 441 is the product of these prime divisors. 441 = 3 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 7 ⋅ 7 Use exponents. 441 = 3 2 ⋅ 7 2 Example 3.31.  Find the prime factorization of 31. The number 31 is a prime number Practice Set C Find the prime factorization of each whole number. Exercise 3.4.16. (Go to Solution) 22 Exercise 3.4.17. (Go to Solution) 40 Exercise 3.4.18. (Go to Solution) 48 Exercise 3.4.19. (Go to Solution) 63 Exercise 3.4.20. (Go to Solution) 945 Exercise 3.4.21. (Go to Solution) 1,617 Exercise 3.4.22. (Go to Solution) 17 Exercise 3.4.23. (Go to Solution) 61  || 
book4_ch03_4_2	Factors From observations made in the process of multiplication, we have seen that ( factor ) ⋅ ( factor ) = product Factors, Product The two numbers being multiplied are the factors and the result of the multiplication is the product. Now, using our knowledge of division, we can see that a first number is a factor of a second number if the first number divides into the second number a whole number of times (without a remainder). One Number as a Factor of Another A first number is a factor of a second number if the first number divides into the second number a whole number of times (without a remainder). We show this in the following examples: Example 3.23.  3 is a factor of 27, since 27÷3 = 9, or 3⋅9 = 27. Example 3.24.  7 is a factor of 56, since 56÷7 = 8, or 7⋅8 = 56. Example 3.25.  4 is not a factor of 10, since 10÷4 = 2R2. (There is a remainder.) Factors From observations made in the process of multiplication, we have seen that ( factor ) ⋅ ( factor ) = product Factors, Product The two numbers being multiplied are the factors and the result of the multiplication is the product. Now, using our knowledge of division, we can see that a first number is a factor of a second number if the first number divides into the second number a whole number of times (without a remainder). One Number as a Factor of Another A first number is a factor of a second number if the first number divides into the second number a whole number of times (without a remainder). We show this in the following examples: Example 3.23.  3 is a factor of 27, since 27÷3 = 9, or 3⋅9 = 27. Example 3.24.  7 is a factor of 56, since 56÷7 = 8, or 7⋅8 = 56. Example 3.25.  4 is not a factor of 10, since 10÷4 = 2R2. (There is a remainder.)  || 
book4_ch03_4_3	Determining the Factors of a Whole Number We can use the tests for divisibility from Section 2.5 to determine all the factors of a whole number. Sample Set A Example 3.26.  Find all the factors of 24. The next number to try is 6, but we already have that 6 is a factor. Once we come upon a factor that we already have discovered, we can stop. All the whole number factors of 24 are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, and 24. Practice Set A Find all the factors of each of the following numbers. Exercise 3.4.1. (Go to Solution) 6 Exercise 3.4.2. (Go to Solution) 12 Exercise 3.4.3. (Go to Solution) 18 Exercise 3.4.4. (Go to Solution) 5 Exercise 3.4.5. (Go to Solution) 10 Exercise 3.4.6. (Go to Solution) 33 Exercise 3.4.7. (Go to Solution) 19 Determining the Factors of a Whole Number We can use the tests for divisibility from Section 2.5 to determine all the factors of a whole number. Sample Set A Example 3.26.  Find all the factors of 24. The next number to try is 6, but we already have that 6 is a factor. Once we come upon a factor that we already have discovered, we can stop. All the whole number factors of 24 are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, and 24. Practice Set A Find all the factors of each of the following numbers. Exercise 3.4.1. (Go to Solution) 6 Exercise 3.4.2. (Go to Solution) 12 Exercise 3.4.3. (Go to Solution) 18 Exercise 3.4.4. (Go to Solution) 5 Exercise 3.4.5. (Go to Solution) 10 Exercise 3.4.6. (Go to Solution) 33 Exercise 3.4.7. (Go to Solution) 19  || 
book4_ch03_4_6	Prime and Composite Numbers Notice that the only factors of 7 are 1 and 7 itself, and that the only factors of 3 are 1 and 3 itself. However, the number 8 has the factors 1, 2, 4, and 8, and the number 10 has the factors 1, 2, 5, and 10. Thus, we can see that a whole number can have only two factors (itself and 1) and another whole number can have several factors. We can use this observation to make a useful classification for whole numbers: prime numbers and composite numbers. Prime Number A whole number (greater than one) whose only factors are itself and 1 is called a prime number. The Number 1 is Not a Prime Number The first seven prime numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and 17. Notice that the whole number 1 is not considered to be a prime number, and the whole number 2 is the first prime and the only even prime number. Composite Number A whole number composed of factors other than itself and 1 is called a compos­ite number. Composite numbers are not prime numbers. Some composite numbers are 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, and 15. Sample Set B Determine which whole numbers are prime and which are composite. Example 3.27.  39. Since 3 divides into 39, the number 39 is composite: 39÷3 = 13 Example 3.28.  47. A few division trials will assure us that 47 is only divisible by 1 and 47. Therefore, 47 is prime. Practice Set B Determine which of the following whole numbers are prime and which are composite. Exercise 3.4.8. (Go to Solution) 3 Exercise 3.4.9. (Go to Solution) 16 Exercise 3.4.10. (Go to Solution) 21 Exercise 3.4.11. (Go to Solution) 35 Exercise 3.4.12. (Go to Solution) 47 Exercise 3.4.13. (Go to Solution) 29 Exercise 3.4.14. (Go to Solution) 101 Exercise 3.4.15. (Go to Solution) 51 Prime and Composite Numbers Notice that the only factors of 7 are 1 and 7 itself, and that the only factors of 3 are 1 and 3 itself. However, the number 8 has the factors 1, 2, 4, and 8, and the number 10 has the factors 1, 2, 5, and 10. Thus, we can see that a whole number can have only two factors (itself and 1) and another whole number can have several factors. We can use this observation to make a useful classification for whole numbers: prime numbers and composite numbers. Prime Number A whole number (greater than one) whose only factors are itself and 1 is called a prime number. The Number 1 is Not a Prime Number The first seven prime numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and 17. Notice that the whole number 1 is not considered to be a prime number, and the whole number 2 is the first prime and the only even prime number. Composite Number A whole number composed of factors other than itself and 1 is called a compos­ite number. Composite numbers are not prime numbers. Some composite numbers are 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, and 15. Sample Set B Determine which whole numbers are prime and which are composite. Example 3.27.  39. Since 3 divides into 39, the number 39 is composite: 39÷3 = 13 Example 3.28.  47. A few division trials will assure us that 47 is only divisible by 1 and 47. Therefore, 47 is prime. Practice Set B Determine which of the following whole numbers are prime and which are composite. Exercise 3.4.8. (Go to Solution) 3 Exercise 3.4.9. (Go to Solution) 16 Exercise 3.4.10. (Go to Solution) 21 Exercise 3.4.11. (Go to Solution) 35 Exercise 3.4.12. (Go to Solution) 47 Exercise 3.4.13. (Go to Solution) 29 Exercise 3.4.14. (Go to Solution) 101 Exercise 3.4.15. (Go to Solution) 51  || 
book4_ch03_4_9	The Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic Prime numbers are very useful in the study of mathematics. We will see how they are used in subsequent sections. We now state the Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic. Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic Except for the order of the factors, every natural number other than 1 can be factored in one and only one way as a product of prime numbers. Prime Factorization When a number is factored so that all its factors are prime numbers. the factori­zation is called the prime factorization of the number. The technique of prime factorization is illustrated in the following three examples. 10 = 5⋅2. Both 2 and 5 are primes. Therefore, 2⋅5 is the prime factorization of 10. 11. The number 11 is a prime number. Prime factorization applies only to composite numbers. Thus, 11 has no prime factorization. 60 = 2⋅30. The number 30 is not prime: 30 = 2⋅15. 60 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 15 The number 15 is not prime: 15 = 3⋅5 60 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 We'll use exponents. 60 = 2 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 The numbers 2, 3, and 5 are each prime. Therefore, 22⋅3⋅5 is the prime factorization of 60. The Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic Prime numbers are very useful in the study of mathematics. We will see how they are used in subsequent sections. We now state the Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic. Fundamental Principle of Arithmetic Except for the order of the factors, every natural number other than 1 can be factored in one and only one way as a product of prime numbers. Prime Factorization When a number is factored so that all its factors are prime numbers. the factori­zation is called the prime factorization of the number. The technique of prime factorization is illustrated in the following three examples. 10 = 5⋅2. Both 2 and 5 are primes. Therefore, 2⋅5 is the prime factorization of 10. 11. The number 11 is a prime number. Prime factorization applies only to composite numbers. Thus, 11 has no prime factorization. 60 = 2⋅30. The number 30 is not prime: 30 = 2⋅15. 60 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 15 The number 15 is not prime: 15 = 3⋅5 60 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 We'll use exponents. 60 = 2 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 The numbers 2, 3, and 5 are each prime. Therefore, 22⋅3⋅5 is the prime factorization of 60.  || 
book4_ch03_4_10	The Prime Factorization of a Natural Number The following method provides a way of finding the prime factorization of a natural number. The Method of Finding the Prime Factorization of a Natural Number Divide the number repeatedly by the smallest prime number that will divide into it a whole number of times (without a remainder). When the prime number used in step 1 no longer divides into the given number without a remainder, repeat the division process with the next largest prime that divides the given number. Continue this process until the quotient is smaller than the divisor. The prime factorization of the given number is the product of all these prime divisors. If the number has no prime divisors, it is a prime number. We may be able to use some of the tests for divisibility we studied in Section 2.5 to help find the primes that divide the given number. Sample Set C Example 3.29.  Find the prime factorization of 60. Since the last digit of 60 is 0, which is even, 60 is divisible by 2. We will repeatedly divide by 2 until we no longer can. We shall divide as follows: The quotient 1 is finally smaller than the divisor 5, and the prime factorization of 60 is the product of these prime divisors. 60 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 We use exponents when possible. 60 = 2 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 Example 3.30.  Find the prime factorization of 441. 441 is not divisible by 2 since its last digit is not divisible by 2. 441 is divisible by 3 since 4 + 4 + 1 = 9 and 9 is divisible by 3. The quotient 1 is finally smaller than the divisor 7, and the prime factorization of 441 is the product of these prime divisors. 441 = 3 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 7 ⋅ 7 Use exponents. 441 = 3 2 ⋅ 7 2 Example 3.31.  Find the prime factorization of 31. The number 31 is a prime number Practice Set C Find the prime factorization of each whole number. Exercise 3.4.16. (Go to Solution) 22 Exercise 3.4.17. (Go to Solution) 40 Exercise 3.4.18. (Go to Solution) 48 Exercise 3.4.19. (Go to Solution) 63 Exercise 3.4.20. (Go to Solution) 945 Exercise 3.4.21. (Go to Solution) 1,617 Exercise 3.4.22. (Go to Solution) 17 Exercise 3.4.23. (Go to Solution) 61 The Prime Factorization of a Natural Number The following method provides a way of finding the prime factorization of a natural number. The Method of Finding the Prime Factorization of a Natural Number Divide the number repeatedly by the smallest prime number that will divide into it a whole number of times (without a remainder). When the prime number used in step 1 no longer divides into the given number without a remainder, repeat the division process with the next largest prime that divides the given number. Continue this process until the quotient is smaller than the divisor. The prime factorization of the given number is the product of all these prime divisors. If the number has no prime divisors, it is a prime number. We may be able to use some of the tests for divisibility we studied in Section 2.5 to help find the primes that divide the given number. Sample Set C Example 3.29.  Find the prime factorization of 60. Since the last digit of 60 is 0, which is even, 60 is divisible by 2. We will repeatedly divide by 2 until we no longer can. We shall divide as follows: The quotient 1 is finally smaller than the divisor 5, and the prime factorization of 60 is the product of these prime divisors. 60 = 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 We use exponents when possible. 60 = 2 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 Example 3.30.  Find the prime factorization of 441. 441 is not divisible by 2 since its last digit is not divisible by 2. 441 is divisible by 3 since 4 + 4 + 1 = 9 and 9 is divisible by 3. The quotient 1 is finally smaller than the divisor 7, and the prime factorization of 441 is the product of these prime divisors. 441 = 3 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 7 ⋅ 7 Use exponents. 441 = 3 2 ⋅ 7 2 Example 3.31.  Find the prime factorization of 31. The number 31 is a prime number Practice Set C Find the prime factorization of each whole number. Exercise 3.4.16. (Go to Solution) 22 Exercise 3.4.17. (Go to Solution) 40 Exercise 3.4.18. (Go to Solution) 48 Exercise 3.4.19. (Go to Solution) 63 Exercise 3.4.20. (Go to Solution) 945 Exercise 3.4.21. (Go to Solution) 1,617 Exercise 3.4.22. (Go to Solution) 17 Exercise 3.4.23. (Go to Solution) 61  || 
book4_ch03_5	 || The Greatest Common Factor (GCF) Using the method we studied in Section 3.4, we could obtain the prime factoriza­tions of 30 and 42. 30 = 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 42 = 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 7 Common Factor We notice that 2 appears as a factor in both numbers, that is, 2 is a common factor of 30 and 42. We also notice that 3 appears as a factor in both numbers. Three is also a common factor of 30 and 42. Greatest Common Factor (GCF) When considering two or more numbers, it is often useful to know if there is a largest common factor of the numbers, and if so, what that number is. The largest common factor of two or more whole numbers is called the greatest common factor, and is abbreviated by GCF. The greatest common factor of a collection of whole numbers is useful in working with fractions (which we will do in Section 4.1).  || A Method for Determining the Greatest Common Factor A straightforward method for determining the GCF of two or more whole numbers makes use of both the prime factorization of the numbers and exponents. Finding the GCF To find the greatest common factor (GCF) of two or more whole numbers: Write the prime factorization of each number, using exponents on repeated factors. Write each base that is common to each of the numbers. To each base listed in step 2, attach the smallest exponent that appears on it in either of the prime factorizations. The GCF is the product of the numbers found in step 3. Sample Set A Find the GCF of the following numbers. Example 3.32.  12 and 18 The common bases are 2 and 3. The smallest exponents appearing on 2 and 3 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 1 and 1 ( 21 and 31 ), or 2 and 3. The GCF is the product of these numbers. 2 ⋅ 3 = 6 The GCF of 30 and 42 is 6 because 6 is the largest number that divides both 30 and 42 without a remainder. Example 3.33.  18, 60, and 72 The common bases are 2 and 3. The smallest exponents appearing on 2 and 3 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 1 and 1: 21 from 18 31 from 60 The GCF is the product of these numbers. GCF is 2⋅3 = 6 Thus, 6 is the largest number that divides 18, 60, and 72 without a remainder. Example 3.34.  700, 1,880, and 6,160 The common bases are 2 and 5 The smallest exponents appearing on 2 and 5 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 2 and 1. 22 from 700. 51 from either 1,880 or 6,160. The GCF is the product of these numbers. GCF is 22⋅5 = 4⋅5 = 20 Thus, 20 is the largest number that divides 700, 1,880, and 6,160 without a remainder. Practice Set A Find the GCF of the following numbers. Exercise 3.5.1. (Go to Solution) 24 and 36 Exercise 3.5.2. (Go to Solution) 48 and 72 Exercise 3.5.3. (Go to Solution) 50 and 140 Exercise 3.5.4. (Go to Solution) 21 and 225 Exercise 3.5.5. (Go to Solution) 450, 600, and 540  || 
book4_ch03_5_2	The Greatest Common Factor (GCF) Using the method we studied in Section 3.4, we could obtain the prime factoriza­tions of 30 and 42. 30 = 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 42 = 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 7 Common Factor We notice that 2 appears as a factor in both numbers, that is, 2 is a common factor of 30 and 42. We also notice that 3 appears as a factor in both numbers. Three is also a common factor of 30 and 42. Greatest Common Factor (GCF) When considering two or more numbers, it is often useful to know if there is a largest common factor of the numbers, and if so, what that number is. The largest common factor of two or more whole numbers is called the greatest common factor, and is abbreviated by GCF. The greatest common factor of a collection of whole numbers is useful in working with fractions (which we will do in Section 4.1). The Greatest Common Factor (GCF) Using the method we studied in Section 3.4, we could obtain the prime factoriza­tions of 30 and 42. 30 = 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 5 42 = 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 7 Common Factor We notice that 2 appears as a factor in both numbers, that is, 2 is a common factor of 30 and 42. We also notice that 3 appears as a factor in both numbers. Three is also a common factor of 30 and 42. Greatest Common Factor (GCF) When considering two or more numbers, it is often useful to know if there is a largest common factor of the numbers, and if so, what that number is. The largest common factor of two or more whole numbers is called the greatest common factor, and is abbreviated by GCF. The greatest common factor of a collection of whole numbers is useful in working with fractions (which we will do in Section 4.1).  || 
book4_ch03_5_3	A Method for Determining the Greatest Common Factor A straightforward method for determining the GCF of two or more whole numbers makes use of both the prime factorization of the numbers and exponents. Finding the GCF To find the greatest common factor (GCF) of two or more whole numbers: Write the prime factorization of each number, using exponents on repeated factors. Write each base that is common to each of the numbers. To each base listed in step 2, attach the smallest exponent that appears on it in either of the prime factorizations. The GCF is the product of the numbers found in step 3. Sample Set A Find the GCF of the following numbers. Example 3.32.  12 and 18 The common bases are 2 and 3. The smallest exponents appearing on 2 and 3 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 1 and 1 ( 21 and 31 ), or 2 and 3. The GCF is the product of these numbers. 2 ⋅ 3 = 6 The GCF of 30 and 42 is 6 because 6 is the largest number that divides both 30 and 42 without a remainder. Example 3.33.  18, 60, and 72 The common bases are 2 and 3. The smallest exponents appearing on 2 and 3 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 1 and 1: 21 from 18 31 from 60 The GCF is the product of these numbers. GCF is 2⋅3 = 6 Thus, 6 is the largest number that divides 18, 60, and 72 without a remainder. Example 3.34.  700, 1,880, and 6,160 The common bases are 2 and 5 The smallest exponents appearing on 2 and 5 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 2 and 1. 22 from 700. 51 from either 1,880 or 6,160. The GCF is the product of these numbers. GCF is 22⋅5 = 4⋅5 = 20 Thus, 20 is the largest number that divides 700, 1,880, and 6,160 without a remainder. Practice Set A Find the GCF of the following numbers. Exercise 3.5.1. (Go to Solution) 24 and 36 Exercise 3.5.2. (Go to Solution) 48 and 72 Exercise 3.5.3. (Go to Solution) 50 and 140 Exercise 3.5.4. (Go to Solution) 21 and 225 Exercise 3.5.5. (Go to Solution) 450, 600, and 540 A Method for Determining the Greatest Common Factor A straightforward method for determining the GCF of two or more whole numbers makes use of both the prime factorization of the numbers and exponents. Finding the GCF To find the greatest common factor (GCF) of two or more whole numbers: Write the prime factorization of each number, using exponents on repeated factors. Write each base that is common to each of the numbers. To each base listed in step 2, attach the smallest exponent that appears on it in either of the prime factorizations. The GCF is the product of the numbers found in step 3. Sample Set A Find the GCF of the following numbers. Example 3.32.  12 and 18 The common bases are 2 and 3. The smallest exponents appearing on 2 and 3 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 1 and 1 ( 21 and 31 ), or 2 and 3. The GCF is the product of these numbers. 2 ⋅ 3 = 6 The GCF of 30 and 42 is 6 because 6 is the largest number that divides both 30 and 42 without a remainder. Example 3.33.  18, 60, and 72 The common bases are 2 and 3. The smallest exponents appearing on 2 and 3 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 1 and 1: 21 from 18 31 from 60 The GCF is the product of these numbers. GCF is 2⋅3 = 6 Thus, 6 is the largest number that divides 18, 60, and 72 without a remainder. Example 3.34.  700, 1,880, and 6,160 The common bases are 2 and 5 The smallest exponents appearing on 2 and 5 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 2 and 1. 22 from 700. 51 from either 1,880 or 6,160. The GCF is the product of these numbers. GCF is 22⋅5 = 4⋅5 = 20 Thus, 20 is the largest number that divides 700, 1,880, and 6,160 without a remainder. Practice Set A Find the GCF of the following numbers. Exercise 3.5.1. (Go to Solution) 24 and 36 Exercise 3.5.2. (Go to Solution) 48 and 72 Exercise 3.5.3. (Go to Solution) 50 and 140 Exercise 3.5.4. (Go to Solution) 21 and 225 Exercise 3.5.5. (Go to Solution) 450, 600, and 540  || 
book4_ch03_6	 || Multiples When a whole number is multiplied by other whole numbers, with the exception of zero, the resulting products are called multiples of the given whole number. Note that any whole number is a multiple of itself. Sample Set A Table 3.9. Multiples of 2 Multiples of 3 Multiples of 8 Multiples of 10 2 × 1 = 2 3 × 1 = 3 8 × 1 = 8 10 × 1 = 10 2 × 2 = 4 3 × 2 = 6 8 × 2 = 16 10 × 2 = 20 2 × 3 = 6 3 × 3 = 9 8 × 3 = 24 10 × 3 = 30 2 × 4 = 8 3 × 4 = 12 8 × 4 = 32 10 × 4 = 40 2 × 5 = 10 3 × 5 = 15 8 × 5 = 40 10 × 5 = 50 ⋮ ⋮ ⋮ ⋮ Practice Set A Find the first five multiples of the following numbers. Exercise 3.6.1. (Go to Solution) 4 Exercise 3.6.2. (Go to Solution) 5 Exercise 3.6.3. (Go to Solution) 6 Exercise 3.6.4. (Go to Solution) 7 Exercise 3.6.5. (Go to Solution) 9  || Common Multiples There will be times when we are given two or more whole numbers and we will need to know if there are any multiples that are common to each of them. If there are, we will need to know what they are. For example, some of the multiples that are common to 2 and 3 are 6, 12, and 18. Sample Set B Example 3.35.  We can visualize common multiples using the number line. Notice that the common multiples can be divided by both whole numbers. Practice Set B Find the first five common multiples of the following numbers. Exercise 3.6.6. (Go to Solution) 2 and 4 Exercise 3.6.7. (Go to Solution) 3 and 4 Exercise 3.6.8. (Go to Solution) 2 and 5 Exercise 3.6.9. (Go to Solution) 3 and 6 Exercise 3.6.10. (Go to Solution) 4 and 5  || The Least Common Multiple (LCM) Notice that in our number line visualization of common multiples (above), the first common multiple is also the smallest, or least common multiple, abbreviated by LCM. Least Common Multiple The least common multiple, LCM, of two or more whole numbers is the smallest whole number that each of the given numbers will divide into without a remainder. The least common multiple will be extremely useful in working with fractions (Section 4.1).  || Finding the Least Common Multiple Finding the LCM To find the LCM of two or more numbers: Write the prime factorization of each number, using exponents on repeated factors. Write each base that appears in each of the prime factorizations. To each base, attach the largest exponent that appears on it in the prime factorizations. The LCM is the product of the numbers found in step 3. There are some major differences between using the processes for obtaining the GCF and the LCM that we must note carefully: The Difference Between the Processes for Obtaining the GCF and the LCM Notice the difference between step 2 for the LCM and step 2 for the GCF. For the GCF, we use only the bases that are common in the prime factorizations, whereas for the LCM, we use each base that appears in the prime factorizations. Notice the difference between step 3 for the LCM and step 3 for the GCF. For the GCF, we attach the smallest exponents to the common bases, whereas for the LCM, we attach the largest exponents to the bases. Sample Set C Find the LCM of the following numbers. Example 3.36.  9 and 12 The bases that appear in the prime factorizations are 2 and 3. The largest exponents appearing on 2 and 3 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 2 and 2: 22 from 12. 32 from 9. The LCM is the product of these numbers. LCM = 22⋅32 = 4⋅9 = 36 Thus, 36 is the smallest number that both 9 and 12 divide into without remainders. Example 3.37.  90 and 630 The bases that appear in the prime factorizations are 2, 3, 5, and 7. The largest exponents that appear on 2, 3, 5, and 7 are, respectively, 1, 2, 1, and 1: 21 from either 90 or 630. 32 from either 90 or 630. 51 from either 90 or 630. 71 from 630. The LCM is the product of these numbers. LCM = 2⋅32⋅5⋅7 = 2⋅9⋅5⋅7 = 630 Thus, 630 is the smallest number that both 90 and 630 divide into with no remainders. Example 3.38.  33, 110, and 484 The bases that appear in the prime factorizations are 2, 3, 5, and 11. The largest exponents that appear on 2, 3, 5, and 11 are, respectively, 2, 1, 1, and 2: 22 from 484. 31 from 33. 51 from 110 112 from 484. The LCM is the product of these numbers. Thus, 7260 is the smallest number that 33, 110, and 484 divide into without remainders. Practice Set C Find the LCM of the following numbers. Exercise 3.6.11. (Go to Solution) 20 and 54 Exercise 3.6.12. (Go to Solution) 14 and 28 Exercise 3.6.13. (Go to Solution) 6 and 63 Exercise 3.6.14. (Go to Solution) 28, 40, and 98 Exercise 3.6.15. (Go to Solution) 16, 27, 125, and 363  || 
book4_ch03_6_2	Multiples When a whole number is multiplied by other whole numbers, with the exception of zero, the resulting products are called multiples of the given whole number. Note that any whole number is a multiple of itself. Sample Set A Table 3.9. Multiples of 2 Multiples of 3 Multiples of 8 Multiples of 10 2 × 1 = 2 3 × 1 = 3 8 × 1 = 8 10 × 1 = 10 2 × 2 = 4 3 × 2 = 6 8 × 2 = 16 10 × 2 = 20 2 × 3 = 6 3 × 3 = 9 8 × 3 = 24 10 × 3 = 30 2 × 4 = 8 3 × 4 = 12 8 × 4 = 32 10 × 4 = 40 2 × 5 = 10 3 × 5 = 15 8 × 5 = 40 10 × 5 = 50 ⋮ ⋮ ⋮ ⋮ Practice Set A Find the first five multiples of the following numbers. Exercise 3.6.1. (Go to Solution) 4 Exercise 3.6.2. (Go to Solution) 5 Exercise 3.6.3. (Go to Solution) 6 Exercise 3.6.4. (Go to Solution) 7 Exercise 3.6.5. (Go to Solution) 9 Multiples When a whole number is multiplied by other whole numbers, with the exception of zero, the resulting products are called multiples of the given whole number. Note that any whole number is a multiple of itself. Sample Set A Table 3.9. Multiples of 2 Multiples of 3 Multiples of 8 Multiples of 10 2 × 1 = 2 3 × 1 = 3 8 × 1 = 8 10 × 1 = 10 2 × 2 = 4 3 × 2 = 6 8 × 2 = 16 10 × 2 = 20 2 × 3 = 6 3 × 3 = 9 8 × 3 = 24 10 × 3 = 30 2 × 4 = 8 3 × 4 = 12 8 × 4 = 32 10 × 4 = 40 2 × 5 = 10 3 × 5 = 15 8 × 5 = 40 10 × 5 = 50 ⋮ ⋮ ⋮ ⋮ Practice Set A Find the first five multiples of the following numbers. Exercise 3.6.1. (Go to Solution) 4 Exercise 3.6.2. (Go to Solution) 5 Exercise 3.6.3. (Go to Solution) 6 Exercise 3.6.4. (Go to Solution) 7 Exercise 3.6.5. (Go to Solution) 9  || 
book4_ch03_6_5	Common Multiples There will be times when we are given two or more whole numbers and we will need to know if there are any multiples that are common to each of them. If there are, we will need to know what they are. For example, some of the multiples that are common to 2 and 3 are 6, 12, and 18. Sample Set B Example 3.35.  We can visualize common multiples using the number line. Notice that the common multiples can be divided by both whole numbers. Practice Set B Find the first five common multiples of the following numbers. Exercise 3.6.6. (Go to Solution) 2 and 4 Exercise 3.6.7. (Go to Solution) 3 and 4 Exercise 3.6.8. (Go to Solution) 2 and 5 Exercise 3.6.9. (Go to Solution) 3 and 6 Exercise 3.6.10. (Go to Solution) 4 and 5 Common Multiples There will be times when we are given two or more whole numbers and we will need to know if there are any multiples that are common to each of them. If there are, we will need to know what they are. For example, some of the multiples that are common to 2 and 3 are 6, 12, and 18. Sample Set B Example 3.35.  We can visualize common multiples using the number line. Notice that the common multiples can be divided by both whole numbers. Practice Set B Find the first five common multiples of the following numbers. Exercise 3.6.6. (Go to Solution) 2 and 4 Exercise 3.6.7. (Go to Solution) 3 and 4 Exercise 3.6.8. (Go to Solution) 2 and 5 Exercise 3.6.9. (Go to Solution) 3 and 6 Exercise 3.6.10. (Go to Solution) 4 and 5  || 
book4_ch03_6_8	The Least Common Multiple (LCM) Notice that in our number line visualization of common multiples (above), the first common multiple is also the smallest, or least common multiple, abbreviated by LCM. Least Common Multiple The least common multiple, LCM, of two or more whole numbers is the smallest whole number that each of the given numbers will divide into without a remainder. The least common multiple will be extremely useful in working with fractions (Section 4.1). The Least Common Multiple (LCM) Notice that in our number line visualization of common multiples (above), the first common multiple is also the smallest, or least common multiple, abbreviated by LCM. Least Common Multiple The least common multiple, LCM, of two or more whole numbers is the smallest whole number that each of the given numbers will divide into without a remainder. The least common multiple will be extremely useful in working with fractions (Section 4.1).  || 
book4_ch03_6_9	Finding the Least Common Multiple Finding the LCM To find the LCM of two or more numbers: Write the prime factorization of each number, using exponents on repeated factors. Write each base that appears in each of the prime factorizations. To each base, attach the largest exponent that appears on it in the prime factorizations. The LCM is the product of the numbers found in step 3. There are some major differences between using the processes for obtaining the GCF and the LCM that we must note carefully: The Difference Between the Processes for Obtaining the GCF and the LCM Notice the difference between step 2 for the LCM and step 2 for the GCF. For the GCF, we use only the bases that are common in the prime factorizations, whereas for the LCM, we use each base that appears in the prime factorizations. Notice the difference between step 3 for the LCM and step 3 for the GCF. For the GCF, we attach the smallest exponents to the common bases, whereas for the LCM, we attach the largest exponents to the bases. Sample Set C Find the LCM of the following numbers. Example 3.36.  9 and 12 The bases that appear in the prime factorizations are 2 and 3. The largest exponents appearing on 2 and 3 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 2 and 2: 22 from 12. 32 from 9. The LCM is the product of these numbers. LCM = 22⋅32 = 4⋅9 = 36 Thus, 36 is the smallest number that both 9 and 12 divide into without remainders. Example 3.37.  90 and 630 The bases that appear in the prime factorizations are 2, 3, 5, and 7. The largest exponents that appear on 2, 3, 5, and 7 are, respectively, 1, 2, 1, and 1: 21 from either 90 or 630. 32 from either 90 or 630. 51 from either 90 or 630. 71 from 630. The LCM is the product of these numbers. LCM = 2⋅32⋅5⋅7 = 2⋅9⋅5⋅7 = 630 Thus, 630 is the smallest number that both 90 and 630 divide into with no remainders. Example 3.38.  33, 110, and 484 The bases that appear in the prime factorizations are 2, 3, 5, and 11. The largest exponents that appear on 2, 3, 5, and 11 are, respectively, 2, 1, 1, and 2: 22 from 484. 31 from 33. 51 from 110 112 from 484. The LCM is the product of these numbers. Thus, 7260 is the smallest number that 33, 110, and 484 divide into without remainders. Practice Set C Find the LCM of the following numbers. Exercise 3.6.11. (Go to Solution) 20 and 54 Exercise 3.6.12. (Go to Solution) 14 and 28 Exercise 3.6.13. (Go to Solution) 6 and 63 Exercise 3.6.14. (Go to Solution) 28, 40, and 98 Exercise 3.6.15. (Go to Solution) 16, 27, 125, and 363 Finding the Least Common Multiple Finding the LCM To find the LCM of two or more numbers: Write the prime factorization of each number, using exponents on repeated factors. Write each base that appears in each of the prime factorizations. To each base, attach the largest exponent that appears on it in the prime factorizations. The LCM is the product of the numbers found in step 3. There are some major differences between using the processes for obtaining the GCF and the LCM that we must note carefully: The Difference Between the Processes for Obtaining the GCF and the LCM Notice the difference between step 2 for the LCM and step 2 for the GCF. For the GCF, we use only the bases that are common in the prime factorizations, whereas for the LCM, we use each base that appears in the prime factorizations. Notice the difference between step 3 for the LCM and step 3 for the GCF. For the GCF, we attach the smallest exponents to the common bases, whereas for the LCM, we attach the largest exponents to the bases. Sample Set C Find the LCM of the following numbers. Example 3.36.  9 and 12 The bases that appear in the prime factorizations are 2 and 3. The largest exponents appearing on 2 and 3 in the prime factorizations are, respectively, 2 and 2: 22 from 12. 32 from 9. The LCM is the product of these numbers. LCM = 22⋅32 = 4⋅9 = 36 Thus, 36 is the smallest number that both 9 and 12 divide into without remainders. Example 3.37.  90 and 630 The bases that appear in the prime factorizations are 2, 3, 5, and 7. The largest exponents that appear on 2, 3, 5, and 7 are, respectively, 1, 2, 1, and 1: 21 from either 90 or 630. 32 from either 90 or 630. 51 from either 90 or 630. 71 from 630. The LCM is the product of these numbers. LCM = 2⋅32⋅5⋅7 = 2⋅9⋅5⋅7 = 630 Thus, 630 is the smallest number that both 90 and 630 divide into with no remainders. Example 3.38.  33, 110, and 484 The bases that appear in the prime factorizations are 2, 3, 5, and 11. The largest exponents that appear on 2, 3, 5, and 11 are, respectively, 2, 1, 1, and 2: 22 from 484. 31 from 33. 51 from 110 112 from 484. The LCM is the product of these numbers. Thus, 7260 is the smallest number that 33, 110, and 484 divide into without remainders. Practice Set C Find the LCM of the following numbers. Exercise 3.6.11. (Go to Solution) 20 and 54 Exercise 3.6.12. (Go to Solution) 14 and 28 Exercise 3.6.13. (Go to Solution) 6 and 63 Exercise 3.6.14. (Go to Solution) 28, 40, and 98 Exercise 3.6.15. (Go to Solution) 16, 27, 125, and 363  || 
book4_ch02	 ||  || Multiplication Multiplication is a description of repeated addition. In the addition of 5 + 5 + 5 the number 5 is repeated 3 times. Therefore, we say we have three times five and describe it by writing 3 × 5 Thus, 3 × 5 = 5 + 5 + 5 Multiplicand In a multiplication, the repeated addend (number being added) is called the multi­plicand. In 3 × 5, the 5 is the multiplicand. Multiplier Also, in a multiplication, the number that records the number of times the multiplicand is used is called the multiplier. In 3 × 5, the 3 is the multiplier. Sample Set A Express each repeated addition as a multiplication. In each case, specify the multiplier and the multiplicand. Example 2.1.  7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 6 × 7. Multiplier is 6. Multiplicand is 7. Example 2.2.  18 + 18 + 18 3 × 18. Multiplier is 3. Multiplicand is 18. Practice Set A Express each repeated addition as a multiplication. In each case, specify the multiplier and the multiplicand. Exercise 2.2.1. (Go to Solution) 12 + 12 + 12 + 12 __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Exercise 2.2.2. (Go to Solution) 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Exercise 2.2.3. (Go to Solution) 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Exercise 2.2.4. (Go to Solution) __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Factors In a multiplication, the numbers being multiplied are also called factors. Products The result of a multiplication is called the product. In 3 × 5 = 15, the 3 and 5 are not only called the multiplier and multiplicand, but they are also called factors. The product is 15. Indicators of Multiplication × ,⋅,( ) The multiplication symbol ( × ) is not the only symbol used to indicate multiplication. Other symbols include the dot ( ⋅ ) and pairs of parentheses ( ). The expressions 3 × 5, 3⋅5, 3(5), (3)5, (3)(5) all represent the same product.  || The Multiplication Process With a Single Digit Multiplier Since multiplication is repeated addition, we should not be surprised to notice that carrying can occur. Carrying occurs when we find the product of 38 and 7: First, we compute 7 × 8 = 56. Write the 6 in the ones column. Carry the 5. Then take 7 × 3 = 21. Add to 21 the 5 that was carried: 21 + 5 = 26. The product is 266. Sample Set B Find the following products. Example 2.3.  The product is 192. Example 2.4.  The product is 2,630. Example 2.5.  The product is 16,236. Practice Set B Find the following products. Exercise 2.2.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.9. (Go to Solution)  || The Multiplication Process With a Multiple Digit Multiplier In a multiplication in which the multiplier is composed of two or more digits, the multiplication must take place in parts. The process is as follows: Part 1: First Partial Product Multiply the multiplicand by the ones digit of the multiplier. This product is called the first partial product. Part 2: Second Partial Product Multiply the multiplicand by the tens digit of the multiplier. This product is called the second partial product. Since the tens digit is used as a factor, the second partial product is written below the first partial product so that its rightmost digit appears in the tens column. Part 3: If necessary, continue this way finding partial products. Write each one below the previous one so that the rightmost digit appears in the column directly below the digit that was used as a factor. Part 4: Total Product Add the partial products to obtain the total product. Note It may be necessary to carry when finding each partial product. Sample Set C Example 2.6.  Multiply 326 by 48. Part 1: Part 2: Part 3: This step is unnecessary since all of the digits in the multiplier have been used. Part 4: Add the partial products to obtain the total product. The product is 15,648. Example 2.7.  Multiply 5,369 by 842. Part 1: Part 2: Part 3: The product is 4,520,698. Example 2.8.  Multiply 1,508 by 206. Part 1: Part 2: Since 0 times 1508 is 0, the partial product will not change the identity of the total product (which is obtained by addition). Go to the next partial product. Part 3: The product is 310,648 Practice Set C Exercise 2.2.10. (Go to Solution) Multiply 73 by 14. Exercise 2.2.11. (Go to Solution) Multiply 86 by 52. Exercise 2.2.12. (Go to Solution) Multiply 419 by 85. Exercise 2.2.13. (Go to Solution) Multiply 2,376 by 613. Exercise 2.2.14. (Go to Solution) Multiply 8,107 by 304. Exercise 2.2.15. (Go to Solution) Multiply 66,260 by 1,008. Exercise 2.2.16. (Go to Solution) Multiply 209 by 501. Exercise 2.2.17. (Go to Solution) Multiply 24 by 10. Exercise 2.2.18. (Go to Solution) Multiply 3,809 by 1,000. Exercise 2.2.19. (Go to Solution) Multiply 813 by 10,000.  || Multiplications With Numbers Ending in Zero Often, when performing a multiplication, one or both of the factors will end in zeros. Such multiplications can be done quickly by aligning the numbers so that the rightmost nonzero digits are in the same column. Sample Set D Perform the multiplication (49,000)(1,200). Since 9 and 2 are the rightmost nonzero digits, put them in the same column. Draw (perhaps mentally) a vertical line to separate the zeros from the nonzeros. Multiply the numbers to the left of the vertical line as usual, then attach to the right end of this product the total number of zeros. The product is 58,800,000 Practice Set D Exercise 2.2.20. (Go to Solution) Multiply 1,800 by 90. Exercise 2.2.21. (Go to Solution) Multiply 420,000 by 300. Exercise 2.2.22. (Go to Solution) Multiply 20,500,000 by 140,000.  || Calculators Most multiplications are performed using a calculator. Sample Set E Example 2.9.  Multiply 75,891 by 263. Table 2.1. Display Reads Type 75891 75891 Press × 75891 Type 263 263 Press = 19959333 The product is 19,959,333. Example 2.10.  Multiply 4,510,000,000,000 by 1,700. Table 2.2. Display Reads Type 451 451 Press × 451 Type 17 17 Press = 7667 The display now reads 7667. We'll have to add the zeros ourselves. There are a total of 12 zeros. Attaching 12 zeros to 7667, we get 7,667,000,000,000,000. The product is 7,667,000,000,000,000. Example 2.11.  Multiply 57,847,298 by 38,976. Table 2.3. Display Reads Type 57847298 57847298 Press × 57847298 Type 38976 38976 Press = 2.2546563 12 The display now reads 2.2546563 12. What kind of number is this? This is an example of a whole number written in scientific notation. We'll study this concept when we get to decimal numbers. Practice Set E Use a calculator to perform each multiplication. Exercise 2.2.23. (Go to Solution) 52 × 27 Exercise 2.2.24. (Go to Solution) 1,448 × 6,155 Exercise 2.2.25. (Go to Solution) 8,940,000 × 205,000  ||  || Division Division is a description of repeated subtraction. In the process of division, the concern is how many times one number is contained in another number. For example, we might be interested in how many 5's are contained in 15. The word times is significant because it implies a relationship between division and multiplication. There are several notations used to indicate division. Suppose Q records the number of times 5 is contained in 15. We can indicate this by writing Each of these division notations describes the same number, represented here by the symbol . Each notation also converts to the same multiplication form. It is In division, Dividend the number being divided into is called the dividend. Divisor the number dividing into the dividend is the divisor. Quotient the result of the division is called the quotient. Sample Set A Find the following quotients using multiplication facts. Example 2.12.  Since , Notice also that Thus, 6 is contained in 18 three times. Example 2.13.  Since , Notice also that 3 could be subtracted exactly 8 times from 24. This implies that 3 is contained in 24 eight times. Example 2.14.  Since , Thus, there are 6 sixes in 36. Example 2.15.  Since , Thus, there are 8 nines in 72. Practice Set A Use multiplication facts to determine the following quotients. Exercise 2.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.6. (Go to Solution)  || Division into Zero (Zero as a Dividend: , a ≠ 0) Let's look at what happens when the dividend (the number being divided into) is zero, and the divisor (the number doing the dividing) is any whole number except zero. The question is What number, if any, is ? Let's represent this unknown quotient by . Then, Converting this division problem to its corresponding multiplication problem, we get From our knowledge of multiplication, we can understand that if the product of two whole numbers is zero, then one or both of the whole numbers must be zero. Since any nonzero whole number is certainly not zero, must represent zero. Then, Zero Divided By Any Nonzero Whole Number Is Zero Zero divided any nonzero whole number is zero.  || Division by Zero (Zero as a Divisor: , a ≠ 0) Now we ask, What number, if any, is ? Letting represent a possible quotient, we get Converting to the corresponding multiplication form, we have Since , . But this is absurd. This would mean that , or . A nonzero whole number cannot equal 0! Thus, does not name a number Division by Zero is Undefined Division by zero does not name a number. It is, therefore, undefined.  || Division by and Into Zero (Zero as a Dividend and Divisor:) We are now curious about zero divided by zero . If we let represent a potential quotient, we get Converting to the multiplication form, This results in This is a statement that is true regardless of the number used in place of . For example, , since . , since . , since . A unique quotient cannot be determined. Indeterminant Since the result of the division is inconclusive, we say that is indeterminant. is Indeterminant The division is indeterminant. Sample Set B Perform, if possible, each division. Example 2.16.  . Since division by 0 does not name a whole number, no quotient exists, and we state is undefined Example 2.17.  . Since division by 0 does not name a defined number, no quotient exists, and we state is undefined Example 2.18.  . Since division into 0 by any nonzero whole number results in 0, we have Example 2.19.  . Since division into 0 by any nonzero whole number results in 0, we have Practice Set B Perform, if possible, the following divisions. Exercise 2.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.12. (Go to Solution)  || Calculators Divisions can also be performed using a calculator. Sample Set C Example 2.20.  Divide 24 by 3. Table 2.4. Display Reads Type 24 24 Press ÷ 24 Type 3 3 Press = 8 The display now reads 8, and we conclude that . Example 2.21.  Divide 0 by 7. Table 2.5. Display Reads Type 0 0 Press ÷ 0 Type 7 7 Press = 0 The display now reads 0, and we conclude that . Example 2.22.  Divide 7 by 0. Since division by zero is undefined, the calculator should register some kind of error message. Table 2.6. Display Reads Type 7 7 Press ÷ 7 Type 0 0 Press = Error The error message indicates an undefined operation was attempted, in this case, division by zero. Practice Set C Use a calculator to perform each division. Exercise 2.3.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.17. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Division with a Single Digit Divisor Our experience with multiplication of whole numbers allows us to perform such divisions as 75÷5. We perform the division by performing the corresponding multiplication, 5 × Q = 75. Each division we considered in Section 2.3 had a one-digit quotient. Now we will consider divisions in which the quotient may consist of two or more digits. For example, 75÷5. Let's examine the division 75÷5. We are asked to determine how many 5's are contained in 75. We'll approach the problem in the following way. Make an educated guess based on experience with multiplication. Find how close the estimate is by multiplying the estimate by 5. If the product obtained in step 2 is less than 75, find out how much less by subtracting it from 75. If the product obtained in step 2 is greater than 75, decrease the estimate until the product is less than 75. Decreasing the estimate makes sense because we do not wish to exceed 75. We can suggest from this discussion that the process of division consists of The Four Steps in Division an educated guess a multiplication a subtraction bringing down the next digit (if necessary) The educated guess can be made by determining how many times the divisor is contained in the dividend by using only one or two digits of the dividend. Sample Set A Example 2.23.  Find 75÷5. Rewrite the problem using a division bracket. Make an educated guess by noting that one 5 is contained in 75 at most 10 times.Since 7 is the tens digit, we estimate that 5 goes into 75 at most 10 times. Now determine how close the estimate is. 10 fives is 10 × 5 = 50. Subtract 50 from 75. Estimate the number of 5's in 25. There are exactly 5 fives in 25. Check: Thus, 75÷5 = 15. The notation in this division can be shortened by writing. Example 2.24.  Find 4,944÷8. Rewrite the problem using a division bracket. 8 goes into 49 at most 6 times, and 9 is in the hundreds column. We'll guess 600. Then, 8 × 600 = 4800. 8 goes into 14 at most 1 time, and 4 is in the tens column. We'll guess 10. 8 goes into 64 exactly 8 times. 600 eights + 10 eights + 8 eights = 618 eights. Check: Thus, 4,944÷8 = 618. As in the first problem, the notation in this division can be shortened by eliminating the subtraction signs and the zeros in each educated guess. Note Not all divisions end in zero. We will examine such divisions in a subsequent subsection. Practice Set A Perform the following divisions. Exercise 2.4.1. (Go to Solution) 126÷7 Exercise 2.4.2. (Go to Solution) 324÷4 Exercise 2.4.3. (Go to Solution) 2,559÷3 Exercise 2.4.4. (Go to Solution) 5,645÷5 Exercise 2.4.5. (Go to Solution) 757,125÷9  || Division with a Multiple Digit Divisor The process of division also works when the divisor consists of two or more digits. We now make educated guesses using the first digit of the divisor and one or two digits of the dividend. Sample Set B Example 2.25.  Find 2,232÷36. Use the first digit of the divisor and the first two digits of the dividend to make the educated guess. 3 goes into 22 at most 7 times. Try 7: 7 × 36 = 252 which is greater than 223. Reduce the estimate. Try 6: 6 × 36 = 216 which is less than 223. Divide 3 into 7 to estimate the number of times 36 goes into 72. The 3 goes into 7 at most 2 times. Try 2: 2 × 36 = 72. Check: Thus, 2,232÷36 = 62. Example 2.26.  Find 2,417,228÷802. First, the educated guess: 24÷8 = 3. Then 3 × 802 = 2406, which is less than 2417. Use 3 as the guess. Since 3 × 802 = 2406, and 2406 has four digits, place the 3 above the fourth digit of the dividend. Subtract: 2417 - 2406 = 11. Bring down the 2. The divisor 802 goes into 112 at most 0 times. Use 0. The 8 goes into 11 at most 1 time, and 1 × 802 = 802, which is less than 1122. Try 1. Subtract 1122 – 802 = 320 Bring down the 8. 8 goes into 32 at most 4 times. 4 × 802 = 3208. Use 4. Check: Thus, 2,417,228÷802 = 3,014. Practice Set B Perform the following divisions. Exercise 2.4.6. (Go to Solution) 1,376÷32 Exercise 2.4.7. (Go to Solution) 6,160÷55 Exercise 2.4.8. (Go to Solution) 18,605÷61 Exercise 2.4.9. (Go to Solution) 144,768÷48  || Division with a Remainder We might wonder how many times 4 is contained in 10. Repeated subtraction yields Since the remainder is less than 4, we stop the subtraction. Thus, 4 goes into 10 two times with 2 remaining. We can write this as a division as follows. Since 4 does not divide into 2 (the remainder is less than the divisor) and there are no digits to bring down to continue the process, we are done. We write or Sample Set C Example 2.27.  Find 85÷3. There are no more digits to bring down to continue the process. We are done. One is the remainder. Check: Multiply 28 and 3, then add 1. Thus, . Example 2.28.  Find 726÷23. Check: Multiply 31 by 23, then add 13. Thus, 726÷23 = 31R13. Practice Set C Perform the following divisions. Exercise 2.4.10. (Go to Solution) 75÷4 Exercise 2.4.11. (Go to Solution) 346÷8 Exercise 2.4.12. (Go to Solution) 489÷21 Exercise 2.4.13. (Go to Solution) 5,016÷82 Exercise 2.4.14. (Go to Solution) 41,196÷67  || Calculators The calculator can be useful for finding quotients with single and multiple digit divisors. If, however, the division should result in a remainder, the calculator is unable to provide us with the particular value of the remainder. Also, some calculators (most nonscientific) are unable to perform divisions in which one of the numbers has more than eight digits. Sample Set D Use a calculator to perform each division. Example 2.29.  328 ÷ 8 Table 2.7. Type 328 Press ÷ Type 8 Press = The display now reads 41. Example 2.30.  53 , 136 ÷ 82 Table 2.8. Type 53136 Press ÷ Type 82 Press = The display now reads 648. Example 2.31.  730 , 019 , 001 ÷ 326 We first try to enter 730,019,001 but find that we can only enter 73001900. If our calculator has only an eight-digit display (as most nonscientific calculators do), we will be unable to use the calculator to perform this division. Example 2.32.  3727 ÷ 49 Table 2.9. Type 3727 Press ÷ Type 49 Press = The display now reads 76.061224. This number is an example of a decimal number (see Section 6.1). When a decimal number results in a calculator division, we can conclude that the division produces a remainder. Practice Set D Use a calculator to perform each division. Exercise 2.4.15. (Go to Solution) 3,330÷74 Exercise 2.4.16. (Go to Solution) 63,365÷115 Exercise 2.4.17. (Go to Solution) 21,996,385,287÷53 Exercise 2.4.18. (Go to Solution) 4,558÷67  ||  || Division by 2, 3, 4, and 5 Division by 2 A whole number is divisible by 2 if its last digit is 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8. The numbers 80, 112, 64, 326, and 1,008 are all divisible by 2 since the last digit of each is 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8, respectively. The numbers 85 and 731 are not divisible by 2. Division by 3 A whole number is divisible by 3 if the sum of its digits is divisible by 3. The number 432 is divisible by 3 since 4 + 3 + 2 = 9 and 9 is divisible by 3. 432 ÷ 3 = 144 The number 25 is not divisible by 3 since 2 + 5 = 7, and 7 is not divisible by 3. Division by 4 A whole number is divisible by 4 if its last two digits form a number that is divisible by 4. The number 31,048 is divisible by 4 since the last two digits, 4 and 8, form a number, 48, that is divisible by 4. 31048 ÷ 4 = 7262 The number 137 is not divisible by 4 since 37 is not divisible by 4. Division by 5 A whole number is divisible by 5 if its last digit is 0 or 5. Sample Set A Example 2.33.  The numbers 65, 110, 8,030, and 16,955 are each divisible by 5 since the last digit of each is 0 or 5. Practice Set A State which of the following whole numbers are divisible by 2, 3, 4, or 5. A number may be divisible by more than one number. Exercise 2.5.1. (Go to Solution) 26 Exercise 2.5.2. (Go to Solution) 81 Exercise 2.5.3. (Go to Solution) 51 Exercise 2.5.4. (Go to Solution) 385 Exercise 2.5.5. (Go to Solution) 6,112 Exercise 2.5.6. (Go to Solution) 470 Exercise 2.5.7. (Go to Solution) 113,154  || Division by 6, 8, 9, 10 Division by 6 A number is divisible by 6 if it is divisible by both 2 and 3. The number 234 is divisible by 2 since its last digit is 4. It is also divisible by 3 since 2 + 3 + 4 = 9 and 9 is divisible by 3. Therefore, 234 is divisible by 6. The number 6,532 is not divisible by 6. Although its last digit is 2, making it divisible by 2, the sum of its digits, 6 + 5 + 3 + 2 = 16, and 16 is not divisible by 3. Division by 8 A whole number is divisible by 8 if its last three digits form a number that is divisible by 8. The number 4,000 is divisible by 8 since 000 is divisible by 8. The number 13,128 is divisible by 8 since 128 is divisible by 8. The number 1,170 is not divisible by 8 since 170 is not divisible by 8. Division by 9 A whole number is divisible by 9 if the sum of its digits is divisible by 9. The number 702 is divisible by 9 since 7 + 0 + 2 is divisible by 9. The number 6588 is divisible by 9 since 6 + 5 + 8 + 8 = 27 is divisible by 9. The number 14,123 is not divisible by 9 since 1 + 4 + 1 + 2 + 3 = 11 is not divisi­ble by 9. Division by 10 A Whole number is divisible by 10 if its last digit is 0. Sample Set B Example 2.34.  The numbers 30, 170, 16,240, and 865,000 are all divisible by 10. Practice Set B State which of the following whole numbers are divisible 6, 8, 9, or 10. Some numbers may be divisible by more than one number. Exercise 2.5.8. (Go to Solution) 900 Exercise 2.5.9. (Go to Solution) 6,402 Exercise 2.5.10. (Go to Solution) 6,660 Exercise 2.5.11. (Go to Solution) 55,116  ||  || The Commutative Property of Multiplication Commutative Property of Multiplication The product of two whole numbers is the same regardless of the order of the factors. Sample Set A Example 2.35.  Multiply the two whole numbers. 6 ⋅ 7 = 42 7 ⋅ 6 = 42 The numbers 6 and 7 can be multiplied in any order. Regardless of the order they are multiplied, the product is 42. Practice Set A Use the commutative property of multiplication to find the products in two ways. Exercise 2.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.6.2. (Go to Solution)  || The Associative Property of Multiplication Associative Property of Multiplication If three whole numbers are multiplied, the product will be the same if the first two are multiplied first and then that product is multiplied by the third, or if the second two are multiplied first and that product is multiplied by the first. Note that the order of the factors is maintained. It is a common mathematical practice to use parentheses to show which pair of numbers is to be combined first. Sample Set B Example 2.36.  Multiply the whole numbers. ( 8 ⋅ 3 ) ⋅ 14 = 24 ⋅ 14 = 336 8 ⋅ ( 3 ⋅ 14 ) = 8 ⋅ 42 = 336 Practice Set B Use the associative property of multiplication to find the products in two ways. Exercise 2.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.6.4. (Go to Solution)  || The Multiplicative Identity The Multiplicative Identity is 1 The whole number 1 is called the multiplicative identity, since any whole num­ber multiplied by 1 is not changed. Sample Set C Example 2.37.  Multiply the whole numbers. 12 ⋅ 1 = 12 1 ⋅ 12 = 12 Practice Set C Multiply the whole numbers. Exercise 2.6.5. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch02_2	 || Multiplication Multiplication is a description of repeated addition. In the addition of 5 + 5 + 5 the number 5 is repeated 3 times. Therefore, we say we have three times five and describe it by writing 3 × 5 Thus, 3 × 5 = 5 + 5 + 5 Multiplicand In a multiplication, the repeated addend (number being added) is called the multi­plicand. In 3 × 5, the 5 is the multiplicand. Multiplier Also, in a multiplication, the number that records the number of times the multiplicand is used is called the multiplier. In 3 × 5, the 3 is the multiplier. Sample Set A Express each repeated addition as a multiplication. In each case, specify the multiplier and the multiplicand. Example 2.1.  7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 6 × 7. Multiplier is 6. Multiplicand is 7. Example 2.2.  18 + 18 + 18 3 × 18. Multiplier is 3. Multiplicand is 18. Practice Set A Express each repeated addition as a multiplication. In each case, specify the multiplier and the multiplicand. Exercise 2.2.1. (Go to Solution) 12 + 12 + 12 + 12 __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Exercise 2.2.2. (Go to Solution) 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Exercise 2.2.3. (Go to Solution) 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Exercise 2.2.4. (Go to Solution) __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Factors In a multiplication, the numbers being multiplied are also called factors. Products The result of a multiplication is called the product. In 3 × 5 = 15, the 3 and 5 are not only called the multiplier and multiplicand, but they are also called factors. The product is 15. Indicators of Multiplication × ,⋅,( ) The multiplication symbol ( × ) is not the only symbol used to indicate multiplication. Other symbols include the dot ( ⋅ ) and pairs of parentheses ( ). The expressions 3 × 5, 3⋅5, 3(5), (3)5, (3)(5) all represent the same product.  || The Multiplication Process With a Single Digit Multiplier Since multiplication is repeated addition, we should not be surprised to notice that carrying can occur. Carrying occurs when we find the product of 38 and 7: First, we compute 7 × 8 = 56. Write the 6 in the ones column. Carry the 5. Then take 7 × 3 = 21. Add to 21 the 5 that was carried: 21 + 5 = 26. The product is 266. Sample Set B Find the following products. Example 2.3.  The product is 192. Example 2.4.  The product is 2,630. Example 2.5.  The product is 16,236. Practice Set B Find the following products. Exercise 2.2.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.9. (Go to Solution)  || The Multiplication Process With a Multiple Digit Multiplier In a multiplication in which the multiplier is composed of two or more digits, the multiplication must take place in parts. The process is as follows: Part 1: First Partial Product Multiply the multiplicand by the ones digit of the multiplier. This product is called the first partial product. Part 2: Second Partial Product Multiply the multiplicand by the tens digit of the multiplier. This product is called the second partial product. Since the tens digit is used as a factor, the second partial product is written below the first partial product so that its rightmost digit appears in the tens column. Part 3: If necessary, continue this way finding partial products. Write each one below the previous one so that the rightmost digit appears in the column directly below the digit that was used as a factor. Part 4: Total Product Add the partial products to obtain the total product. Note It may be necessary to carry when finding each partial product. Sample Set C Example 2.6.  Multiply 326 by 48. Part 1: Part 2: Part 3: This step is unnecessary since all of the digits in the multiplier have been used. Part 4: Add the partial products to obtain the total product. The product is 15,648. Example 2.7.  Multiply 5,369 by 842. Part 1: Part 2: Part 3: The product is 4,520,698. Example 2.8.  Multiply 1,508 by 206. Part 1: Part 2: Since 0 times 1508 is 0, the partial product will not change the identity of the total product (which is obtained by addition). Go to the next partial product. Part 3: The product is 310,648 Practice Set C Exercise 2.2.10. (Go to Solution) Multiply 73 by 14. Exercise 2.2.11. (Go to Solution) Multiply 86 by 52. Exercise 2.2.12. (Go to Solution) Multiply 419 by 85. Exercise 2.2.13. (Go to Solution) Multiply 2,376 by 613. Exercise 2.2.14. (Go to Solution) Multiply 8,107 by 304. Exercise 2.2.15. (Go to Solution) Multiply 66,260 by 1,008. Exercise 2.2.16. (Go to Solution) Multiply 209 by 501. Exercise 2.2.17. (Go to Solution) Multiply 24 by 10. Exercise 2.2.18. (Go to Solution) Multiply 3,809 by 1,000. Exercise 2.2.19. (Go to Solution) Multiply 813 by 10,000.  || Multiplications With Numbers Ending in Zero Often, when performing a multiplication, one or both of the factors will end in zeros. Such multiplications can be done quickly by aligning the numbers so that the rightmost nonzero digits are in the same column. Sample Set D Perform the multiplication (49,000)(1,200). Since 9 and 2 are the rightmost nonzero digits, put them in the same column. Draw (perhaps mentally) a vertical line to separate the zeros from the nonzeros. Multiply the numbers to the left of the vertical line as usual, then attach to the right end of this product the total number of zeros. The product is 58,800,000 Practice Set D Exercise 2.2.20. (Go to Solution) Multiply 1,800 by 90. Exercise 2.2.21. (Go to Solution) Multiply 420,000 by 300. Exercise 2.2.22. (Go to Solution) Multiply 20,500,000 by 140,000.  || Calculators Most multiplications are performed using a calculator. Sample Set E Example 2.9.  Multiply 75,891 by 263. Table 2.1. Display Reads Type 75891 75891 Press × 75891 Type 263 263 Press = 19959333 The product is 19,959,333. Example 2.10.  Multiply 4,510,000,000,000 by 1,700. Table 2.2. Display Reads Type 451 451 Press × 451 Type 17 17 Press = 7667 The display now reads 7667. We'll have to add the zeros ourselves. There are a total of 12 zeros. Attaching 12 zeros to 7667, we get 7,667,000,000,000,000. The product is 7,667,000,000,000,000. Example 2.11.  Multiply 57,847,298 by 38,976. Table 2.3. Display Reads Type 57847298 57847298 Press × 57847298 Type 38976 38976 Press = 2.2546563 12 The display now reads 2.2546563 12. What kind of number is this? This is an example of a whole number written in scientific notation. We'll study this concept when we get to decimal numbers. Practice Set E Use a calculator to perform each multiplication. Exercise 2.2.23. (Go to Solution) 52 × 27 Exercise 2.2.24. (Go to Solution) 1,448 × 6,155 Exercise 2.2.25. (Go to Solution) 8,940,000 × 205,000  || 
book4_ch02_2_2	Multiplication Multiplication is a description of repeated addition. In the addition of 5 + 5 + 5 the number 5 is repeated 3 times. Therefore, we say we have three times five and describe it by writing 3 × 5 Thus, 3 × 5 = 5 + 5 + 5 Multiplicand In a multiplication, the repeated addend (number being added) is called the multi­plicand. In 3 × 5, the 5 is the multiplicand. Multiplier Also, in a multiplication, the number that records the number of times the multiplicand is used is called the multiplier. In 3 × 5, the 3 is the multiplier. Sample Set A Express each repeated addition as a multiplication. In each case, specify the multiplier and the multiplicand. Example 2.1.  7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 6 × 7. Multiplier is 6. Multiplicand is 7. Example 2.2.  18 + 18 + 18 3 × 18. Multiplier is 3. Multiplicand is 18. Practice Set A Express each repeated addition as a multiplication. In each case, specify the multiplier and the multiplicand. Exercise 2.2.1. (Go to Solution) 12 + 12 + 12 + 12 __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Exercise 2.2.2. (Go to Solution) 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Exercise 2.2.3. (Go to Solution) 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Exercise 2.2.4. (Go to Solution) __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Factors In a multiplication, the numbers being multiplied are also called factors. Products The result of a multiplication is called the product. In 3 × 5 = 15, the 3 and 5 are not only called the multiplier and multiplicand, but they are also called factors. The product is 15. Indicators of Multiplication × ,⋅,( ) The multiplication symbol ( × ) is not the only symbol used to indicate multiplication. Other symbols include the dot ( ⋅ ) and pairs of parentheses ( ). The expressions 3 × 5, 3⋅5, 3(5), (3)5, (3)(5) all represent the same product. Multiplication Multiplication is a description of repeated addition. In the addition of 5 + 5 + 5 the number 5 is repeated 3 times. Therefore, we say we have three times five and describe it by writing 3 × 5 Thus, 3 × 5 = 5 + 5 + 5 Multiplicand In a multiplication, the repeated addend (number being added) is called the multi­plicand. In 3 × 5, the 5 is the multiplicand. Multiplier Also, in a multiplication, the number that records the number of times the multiplicand is used is called the multiplier. In 3 × 5, the 3 is the multiplier. Sample Set A Express each repeated addition as a multiplication. In each case, specify the multiplier and the multiplicand. Example 2.1.  7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 6 × 7. Multiplier is 6. Multiplicand is 7. Example 2.2.  18 + 18 + 18 3 × 18. Multiplier is 3. Multiplicand is 18. Practice Set A Express each repeated addition as a multiplication. In each case, specify the multiplier and the multiplicand. Exercise 2.2.1. (Go to Solution) 12 + 12 + 12 + 12 __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Exercise 2.2.2. (Go to Solution) 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 + 36 __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Exercise 2.2.3. (Go to Solution) 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Exercise 2.2.4. (Go to Solution) __________. Multiplier is __________. Multiplicand is __________. Factors In a multiplication, the numbers being multiplied are also called factors. Products The result of a multiplication is called the product. In 3 × 5 = 15, the 3 and 5 are not only called the multiplier and multiplicand, but they are also called factors. The product is 15. Indicators of Multiplication × ,⋅,( ) The multiplication symbol ( × ) is not the only symbol used to indicate multiplication. Other symbols include the dot ( ⋅ ) and pairs of parentheses ( ). The expressions 3 × 5, 3⋅5, 3(5), (3)5, (3)(5) all represent the same product.  || 
book4_ch02_2_5	The Multiplication Process With a Single Digit Multiplier Since multiplication is repeated addition, we should not be surprised to notice that carrying can occur. Carrying occurs when we find the product of 38 and 7: First, we compute 7 × 8 = 56. Write the 6 in the ones column. Carry the 5. Then take 7 × 3 = 21. Add to 21 the 5 that was carried: 21 + 5 = 26. The product is 266. Sample Set B Find the following products. Example 2.3.  The product is 192. Example 2.4.  The product is 2,630. Example 2.5.  The product is 16,236. Practice Set B Find the following products. Exercise 2.2.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.9. (Go to Solution) The Multiplication Process With a Single Digit Multiplier Since multiplication is repeated addition, we should not be surprised to notice that carrying can occur. Carrying occurs when we find the product of 38 and 7: First, we compute 7 × 8 = 56. Write the 6 in the ones column. Carry the 5. Then take 7 × 3 = 21. Add to 21 the 5 that was carried: 21 + 5 = 26. The product is 266. Sample Set B Find the following products. Example 2.3.  The product is 192. Example 2.4.  The product is 2,630. Example 2.5.  The product is 16,236. Practice Set B Find the following products. Exercise 2.2.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.2.9. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch02_2_8	The Multiplication Process With a Multiple Digit Multiplier In a multiplication in which the multiplier is composed of two or more digits, the multiplication must take place in parts. The process is as follows: Part 1: First Partial Product Multiply the multiplicand by the ones digit of the multiplier. This product is called the first partial product. Part 2: Second Partial Product Multiply the multiplicand by the tens digit of the multiplier. This product is called the second partial product. Since the tens digit is used as a factor, the second partial product is written below the first partial product so that its rightmost digit appears in the tens column. Part 3: If necessary, continue this way finding partial products. Write each one below the previous one so that the rightmost digit appears in the column directly below the digit that was used as a factor. Part 4: Total Product Add the partial products to obtain the total product. Note It may be necessary to carry when finding each partial product. Sample Set C Example 2.6.  Multiply 326 by 48. Part 1: Part 2: Part 3: This step is unnecessary since all of the digits in the multiplier have been used. Part 4: Add the partial products to obtain the total product. The product is 15,648. Example 2.7.  Multiply 5,369 by 842. Part 1: Part 2: Part 3: The product is 4,520,698. Example 2.8.  Multiply 1,508 by 206. Part 1: Part 2: Since 0 times 1508 is 0, the partial product will not change the identity of the total product (which is obtained by addition). Go to the next partial product. Part 3: The product is 310,648 Practice Set C Exercise 2.2.10. (Go to Solution) Multiply 73 by 14. Exercise 2.2.11. (Go to Solution) Multiply 86 by 52. Exercise 2.2.12. (Go to Solution) Multiply 419 by 85. Exercise 2.2.13. (Go to Solution) Multiply 2,376 by 613. Exercise 2.2.14. (Go to Solution) Multiply 8,107 by 304. Exercise 2.2.15. (Go to Solution) Multiply 66,260 by 1,008. Exercise 2.2.16. (Go to Solution) Multiply 209 by 501. Exercise 2.2.17. (Go to Solution) Multiply 24 by 10. Exercise 2.2.18. (Go to Solution) Multiply 3,809 by 1,000. Exercise 2.2.19. (Go to Solution) Multiply 813 by 10,000. The Multiplication Process With a Multiple Digit Multiplier In a multiplication in which the multiplier is composed of two or more digits, the multiplication must take place in parts. The process is as follows: Part 1: First Partial Product Multiply the multiplicand by the ones digit of the multiplier. This product is called the first partial product. Part 2: Second Partial Product Multiply the multiplicand by the tens digit of the multiplier. This product is called the second partial product. Since the tens digit is used as a factor, the second partial product is written below the first partial product so that its rightmost digit appears in the tens column. Part 3: If necessary, continue this way finding partial products. Write each one below the previous one so that the rightmost digit appears in the column directly below the digit that was used as a factor. Part 4: Total Product Add the partial products to obtain the total product. Note It may be necessary to carry when finding each partial product. Sample Set C Example 2.6.  Multiply 326 by 48. Part 1: Part 2: Part 3: This step is unnecessary since all of the digits in the multiplier have been used. Part 4: Add the partial products to obtain the total product. The product is 15,648. Example 2.7.  Multiply 5,369 by 842. Part 1: Part 2: Part 3: The product is 4,520,698. Example 2.8.  Multiply 1,508 by 206. Part 1: Part 2: Since 0 times 1508 is 0, the partial product will not change the identity of the total product (which is obtained by addition). Go to the next partial product. Part 3: The product is 310,648 Practice Set C Exercise 2.2.10. (Go to Solution) Multiply 73 by 14. Exercise 2.2.11. (Go to Solution) Multiply 86 by 52. Exercise 2.2.12. (Go to Solution) Multiply 419 by 85. Exercise 2.2.13. (Go to Solution) Multiply 2,376 by 613. Exercise 2.2.14. (Go to Solution) Multiply 8,107 by 304. Exercise 2.2.15. (Go to Solution) Multiply 66,260 by 1,008. Exercise 2.2.16. (Go to Solution) Multiply 209 by 501. Exercise 2.2.17. (Go to Solution) Multiply 24 by 10. Exercise 2.2.18. (Go to Solution) Multiply 3,809 by 1,000. Exercise 2.2.19. (Go to Solution) Multiply 813 by 10,000.  || 
book4_ch02_2_11	Multiplications With Numbers Ending in Zero Often, when performing a multiplication, one or both of the factors will end in zeros. Such multiplications can be done quickly by aligning the numbers so that the rightmost nonzero digits are in the same column. Sample Set D Perform the multiplication (49,000)(1,200). Since 9 and 2 are the rightmost nonzero digits, put them in the same column. Draw (perhaps mentally) a vertical line to separate the zeros from the nonzeros. Multiply the numbers to the left of the vertical line as usual, then attach to the right end of this product the total number of zeros. The product is 58,800,000 Practice Set D Exercise 2.2.20. (Go to Solution) Multiply 1,800 by 90. Exercise 2.2.21. (Go to Solution) Multiply 420,000 by 300. Exercise 2.2.22. (Go to Solution) Multiply 20,500,000 by 140,000. Multiplications With Numbers Ending in Zero Often, when performing a multiplication, one or both of the factors will end in zeros. Such multiplications can be done quickly by aligning the numbers so that the rightmost nonzero digits are in the same column. Sample Set D Perform the multiplication (49,000)(1,200). Since 9 and 2 are the rightmost nonzero digits, put them in the same column. Draw (perhaps mentally) a vertical line to separate the zeros from the nonzeros. Multiply the numbers to the left of the vertical line as usual, then attach to the right end of this product the total number of zeros. The product is 58,800,000 Practice Set D Exercise 2.2.20. (Go to Solution) Multiply 1,800 by 90. Exercise 2.2.21. (Go to Solution) Multiply 420,000 by 300. Exercise 2.2.22. (Go to Solution) Multiply 20,500,000 by 140,000.  || 
book4_ch02_2_14	Calculators Most multiplications are performed using a calculator. Sample Set E Example 2.9.  Multiply 75,891 by 263. Table 2.1. Display Reads Type 75891 75891 Press × 75891 Type 263 263 Press = 19959333 The product is 19,959,333. Example 2.10.  Multiply 4,510,000,000,000 by 1,700. Table 2.2. Display Reads Type 451 451 Press × 451 Type 17 17 Press = 7667 The display now reads 7667. We'll have to add the zeros ourselves. There are a total of 12 zeros. Attaching 12 zeros to 7667, we get 7,667,000,000,000,000. The product is 7,667,000,000,000,000. Example 2.11.  Multiply 57,847,298 by 38,976. Table 2.3. Display Reads Type 57847298 57847298 Press × 57847298 Type 38976 38976 Press = 2.2546563 12 The display now reads 2.2546563 12. What kind of number is this? This is an example of a whole number written in scientific notation. We'll study this concept when we get to decimal numbers. Practice Set E Use a calculator to perform each multiplication. Exercise 2.2.23. (Go to Solution) 52 × 27 Exercise 2.2.24. (Go to Solution) 1,448 × 6,155 Exercise 2.2.25. (Go to Solution) 8,940,000 × 205,000 Calculators Most multiplications are performed using a calculator. Sample Set E Example 2.9.  Multiply 75,891 by 263. Table 2.1. Display Reads Type 75891 75891 Press × 75891 Type 263 263 Press = 19959333 The product is 19,959,333. Example 2.10.  Multiply 4,510,000,000,000 by 1,700. Table 2.2. Display Reads Type 451 451 Press × 451 Type 17 17 Press = 7667 The display now reads 7667. We'll have to add the zeros ourselves. There are a total of 12 zeros. Attaching 12 zeros to 7667, we get 7,667,000,000,000,000. The product is 7,667,000,000,000,000. Example 2.11.  Multiply 57,847,298 by 38,976. Table 2.3. Display Reads Type 57847298 57847298 Press × 57847298 Type 38976 38976 Press = 2.2546563 12 The display now reads 2.2546563 12. What kind of number is this? This is an example of a whole number written in scientific notation. We'll study this concept when we get to decimal numbers. Practice Set E Use a calculator to perform each multiplication. Exercise 2.2.23. (Go to Solution) 52 × 27 Exercise 2.2.24. (Go to Solution) 1,448 × 6,155 Exercise 2.2.25. (Go to Solution) 8,940,000 × 205,000  || 
book4_ch02_3	 || Division Division is a description of repeated subtraction. In the process of division, the concern is how many times one number is contained in another number. For example, we might be interested in how many 5's are contained in 15. The word times is significant because it implies a relationship between division and multiplication. There are several notations used to indicate division. Suppose Q records the number of times 5 is contained in 15. We can indicate this by writing Each of these division notations describes the same number, represented here by the symbol . Each notation also converts to the same multiplication form. It is In division, Dividend the number being divided into is called the dividend. Divisor the number dividing into the dividend is the divisor. Quotient the result of the division is called the quotient. Sample Set A Find the following quotients using multiplication facts. Example 2.12.  Since , Notice also that Thus, 6 is contained in 18 three times. Example 2.13.  Since , Notice also that 3 could be subtracted exactly 8 times from 24. This implies that 3 is contained in 24 eight times. Example 2.14.  Since , Thus, there are 6 sixes in 36. Example 2.15.  Since , Thus, there are 8 nines in 72. Practice Set A Use multiplication facts to determine the following quotients. Exercise 2.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.6. (Go to Solution)  || Division into Zero (Zero as a Dividend: , a ≠ 0) Let's look at what happens when the dividend (the number being divided into) is zero, and the divisor (the number doing the dividing) is any whole number except zero. The question is What number, if any, is ? Let's represent this unknown quotient by . Then, Converting this division problem to its corresponding multiplication problem, we get From our knowledge of multiplication, we can understand that if the product of two whole numbers is zero, then one or both of the whole numbers must be zero. Since any nonzero whole number is certainly not zero, must represent zero. Then, Zero Divided By Any Nonzero Whole Number Is Zero Zero divided any nonzero whole number is zero.  || Division by Zero (Zero as a Divisor: , a ≠ 0) Now we ask, What number, if any, is ? Letting represent a possible quotient, we get Converting to the corresponding multiplication form, we have Since , . But this is absurd. This would mean that , or . A nonzero whole number cannot equal 0! Thus, does not name a number Division by Zero is Undefined Division by zero does not name a number. It is, therefore, undefined.  || Division by and Into Zero (Zero as a Dividend and Divisor:) We are now curious about zero divided by zero . If we let represent a potential quotient, we get Converting to the multiplication form, This results in This is a statement that is true regardless of the number used in place of . For example, , since . , since . , since . A unique quotient cannot be determined. Indeterminant Since the result of the division is inconclusive, we say that is indeterminant. is Indeterminant The division is indeterminant. Sample Set B Perform, if possible, each division. Example 2.16.  . Since division by 0 does not name a whole number, no quotient exists, and we state is undefined Example 2.17.  . Since division by 0 does not name a defined number, no quotient exists, and we state is undefined Example 2.18.  . Since division into 0 by any nonzero whole number results in 0, we have Example 2.19.  . Since division into 0 by any nonzero whole number results in 0, we have Practice Set B Perform, if possible, the following divisions. Exercise 2.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.12. (Go to Solution)  || Calculators Divisions can also be performed using a calculator. Sample Set C Example 2.20.  Divide 24 by 3. Table 2.4. Display Reads Type 24 24 Press ÷ 24 Type 3 3 Press = 8 The display now reads 8, and we conclude that . Example 2.21.  Divide 0 by 7. Table 2.5. Display Reads Type 0 0 Press ÷ 0 Type 7 7 Press = 0 The display now reads 0, and we conclude that . Example 2.22.  Divide 7 by 0. Since division by zero is undefined, the calculator should register some kind of error message. Table 2.6. Display Reads Type 7 7 Press ÷ 7 Type 0 0 Press = Error The error message indicates an undefined operation was attempted, in this case, division by zero. Practice Set C Use a calculator to perform each division. Exercise 2.3.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.17. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch02_3_2	Division Division is a description of repeated subtraction. In the process of division, the concern is how many times one number is contained in another number. For example, we might be interested in how many 5's are contained in 15. The word times is significant because it implies a relationship between division and multiplication. There are several notations used to indicate division. Suppose Q records the number of times 5 is contained in 15. We can indicate this by writing Each of these division notations describes the same number, represented here by the symbol . Each notation also converts to the same multiplication form. It is In division, Dividend the number being divided into is called the dividend. Divisor the number dividing into the dividend is the divisor. Quotient the result of the division is called the quotient. Sample Set A Find the following quotients using multiplication facts. Example 2.12.  Since , Notice also that Thus, 6 is contained in 18 three times. Example 2.13.  Since , Notice also that 3 could be subtracted exactly 8 times from 24. This implies that 3 is contained in 24 eight times. Example 2.14.  Since , Thus, there are 6 sixes in 36. Example 2.15.  Since , Thus, there are 8 nines in 72. Practice Set A Use multiplication facts to determine the following quotients. Exercise 2.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.6. (Go to Solution) Division Division is a description of repeated subtraction. In the process of division, the concern is how many times one number is contained in another number. For example, we might be interested in how many 5's are contained in 15. The word times is significant because it implies a relationship between division and multiplication. There are several notations used to indicate division. Suppose Q records the number of times 5 is contained in 15. We can indicate this by writing Each of these division notations describes the same number, represented here by the symbol . Each notation also converts to the same multiplication form. It is In division, Dividend the number being divided into is called the dividend. Divisor the number dividing into the dividend is the divisor. Quotient the result of the division is called the quotient. Sample Set A Find the following quotients using multiplication facts. Example 2.12.  Since , Notice also that Thus, 6 is contained in 18 three times. Example 2.13.  Since , Notice also that 3 could be subtracted exactly 8 times from 24. This implies that 3 is contained in 24 eight times. Example 2.14.  Since , Thus, there are 6 sixes in 36. Example 2.15.  Since , Thus, there are 8 nines in 72. Practice Set A Use multiplication facts to determine the following quotients. Exercise 2.3.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.6. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch02_3_5	Division into Zero (Zero as a Dividend: , a ≠ 0) Let's look at what happens when the dividend (the number being divided into) is zero, and the divisor (the number doing the dividing) is any whole number except zero. The question is What number, if any, is ? Let's represent this unknown quotient by . Then, Converting this division problem to its corresponding multiplication problem, we get From our knowledge of multiplication, we can understand that if the product of two whole numbers is zero, then one or both of the whole numbers must be zero. Since any nonzero whole number is certainly not zero, must represent zero. Then, Zero Divided By Any Nonzero Whole Number Is Zero Zero divided any nonzero whole number is zero. Division into Zero (Zero as a Dividend: , a ≠ 0) Let's look at what happens when the dividend (the number being divided into) is zero, and the divisor (the number doing the dividing) is any whole number except zero. The question is What number, if any, is ? Let's represent this unknown quotient by . Then, Converting this division problem to its corresponding multiplication problem, we get From our knowledge of multiplication, we can understand that if the product of two whole numbers is zero, then one or both of the whole numbers must be zero. Since any nonzero whole number is certainly not zero, must represent zero. Then, Zero Divided By Any Nonzero Whole Number Is Zero Zero divided any nonzero whole number is zero.  || 
book4_ch02_3_6	Division by Zero (Zero as a Divisor: , a ≠ 0) Now we ask, What number, if any, is ? Letting represent a possible quotient, we get Converting to the corresponding multiplication form, we have Since , . But this is absurd. This would mean that , or . A nonzero whole number cannot equal 0! Thus, does not name a number Division by Zero is Undefined Division by zero does not name a number. It is, therefore, undefined. Division by Zero (Zero as a Divisor: , a ≠ 0) Now we ask, What number, if any, is ? Letting represent a possible quotient, we get Converting to the corresponding multiplication form, we have Since , . But this is absurd. This would mean that , or . A nonzero whole number cannot equal 0! Thus, does not name a number Division by Zero is Undefined Division by zero does not name a number. It is, therefore, undefined.  || 
book4_ch02_3_7	Division by and Into Zero (Zero as a Dividend and Divisor:) We are now curious about zero divided by zero . If we let represent a potential quotient, we get Converting to the multiplication form, This results in This is a statement that is true regardless of the number used in place of . For example, , since . , since . , since . A unique quotient cannot be determined. Indeterminant Since the result of the division is inconclusive, we say that is indeterminant. is Indeterminant The division is indeterminant. Sample Set B Perform, if possible, each division. Example 2.16.  . Since division by 0 does not name a whole number, no quotient exists, and we state is undefined Example 2.17.  . Since division by 0 does not name a defined number, no quotient exists, and we state is undefined Example 2.18.  . Since division into 0 by any nonzero whole number results in 0, we have Example 2.19.  . Since division into 0 by any nonzero whole number results in 0, we have Practice Set B Perform, if possible, the following divisions. Exercise 2.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.12. (Go to Solution) Division by and Into Zero (Zero as a Dividend and Divisor:) We are now curious about zero divided by zero . If we let represent a potential quotient, we get Converting to the multiplication form, This results in This is a statement that is true regardless of the number used in place of . For example, , since . , since . , since . A unique quotient cannot be determined. Indeterminant Since the result of the division is inconclusive, we say that is indeterminant. is Indeterminant The division is indeterminant. Sample Set B Perform, if possible, each division. Example 2.16.  . Since division by 0 does not name a whole number, no quotient exists, and we state is undefined Example 2.17.  . Since division by 0 does not name a defined number, no quotient exists, and we state is undefined Example 2.18.  . Since division into 0 by any nonzero whole number results in 0, we have Example 2.19.  . Since division into 0 by any nonzero whole number results in 0, we have Practice Set B Perform, if possible, the following divisions. Exercise 2.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.10. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.11. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.12. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch02_3_10	Calculators Divisions can also be performed using a calculator. Sample Set C Example 2.20.  Divide 24 by 3. Table 2.4. Display Reads Type 24 24 Press ÷ 24 Type 3 3 Press = 8 The display now reads 8, and we conclude that . Example 2.21.  Divide 0 by 7. Table 2.5. Display Reads Type 0 0 Press ÷ 0 Type 7 7 Press = 0 The display now reads 0, and we conclude that . Example 2.22.  Divide 7 by 0. Since division by zero is undefined, the calculator should register some kind of error message. Table 2.6. Display Reads Type 7 7 Press ÷ 7 Type 0 0 Press = Error The error message indicates an undefined operation was attempted, in this case, division by zero. Practice Set C Use a calculator to perform each division. Exercise 2.3.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.17. (Go to Solution) Calculators Divisions can also be performed using a calculator. Sample Set C Example 2.20.  Divide 24 by 3. Table 2.4. Display Reads Type 24 24 Press ÷ 24 Type 3 3 Press = 8 The display now reads 8, and we conclude that . Example 2.21.  Divide 0 by 7. Table 2.5. Display Reads Type 0 0 Press ÷ 0 Type 7 7 Press = 0 The display now reads 0, and we conclude that . Example 2.22.  Divide 7 by 0. Since division by zero is undefined, the calculator should register some kind of error message. Table 2.6. Display Reads Type 7 7 Press ÷ 7 Type 0 0 Press = Error The error message indicates an undefined operation was attempted, in this case, division by zero. Practice Set C Use a calculator to perform each division. Exercise 2.3.13. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.14. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.15. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.16. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.3.17. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch02_4	 || Division with a Single Digit Divisor Our experience with multiplication of whole numbers allows us to perform such divisions as 75÷5. We perform the division by performing the corresponding multiplication, 5 × Q = 75. Each division we considered in Section 2.3 had a one-digit quotient. Now we will consider divisions in which the quotient may consist of two or more digits. For example, 75÷5. Let's examine the division 75÷5. We are asked to determine how many 5's are contained in 75. We'll approach the problem in the following way. Make an educated guess based on experience with multiplication. Find how close the estimate is by multiplying the estimate by 5. If the product obtained in step 2 is less than 75, find out how much less by subtracting it from 75. If the product obtained in step 2 is greater than 75, decrease the estimate until the product is less than 75. Decreasing the estimate makes sense because we do not wish to exceed 75. We can suggest from this discussion that the process of division consists of The Four Steps in Division an educated guess a multiplication a subtraction bringing down the next digit (if necessary) The educated guess can be made by determining how many times the divisor is contained in the dividend by using only one or two digits of the dividend. Sample Set A Example 2.23.  Find 75÷5. Rewrite the problem using a division bracket. Make an educated guess by noting that one 5 is contained in 75 at most 10 times.Since 7 is the tens digit, we estimate that 5 goes into 75 at most 10 times. Now determine how close the estimate is. 10 fives is 10 × 5 = 50. Subtract 50 from 75. Estimate the number of 5's in 25. There are exactly 5 fives in 25. Check: Thus, 75÷5 = 15. The notation in this division can be shortened by writing. Example 2.24.  Find 4,944÷8. Rewrite the problem using a division bracket. 8 goes into 49 at most 6 times, and 9 is in the hundreds column. We'll guess 600. Then, 8 × 600 = 4800. 8 goes into 14 at most 1 time, and 4 is in the tens column. We'll guess 10. 8 goes into 64 exactly 8 times. 600 eights + 10 eights + 8 eights = 618 eights. Check: Thus, 4,944÷8 = 618. As in the first problem, the notation in this division can be shortened by eliminating the subtraction signs and the zeros in each educated guess. Note Not all divisions end in zero. We will examine such divisions in a subsequent subsection. Practice Set A Perform the following divisions. Exercise 2.4.1. (Go to Solution) 126÷7 Exercise 2.4.2. (Go to Solution) 324÷4 Exercise 2.4.3. (Go to Solution) 2,559÷3 Exercise 2.4.4. (Go to Solution) 5,645÷5 Exercise 2.4.5. (Go to Solution) 757,125÷9  || Division with a Multiple Digit Divisor The process of division also works when the divisor consists of two or more digits. We now make educated guesses using the first digit of the divisor and one or two digits of the dividend. Sample Set B Example 2.25.  Find 2,232÷36. Use the first digit of the divisor and the first two digits of the dividend to make the educated guess. 3 goes into 22 at most 7 times. Try 7: 7 × 36 = 252 which is greater than 223. Reduce the estimate. Try 6: 6 × 36 = 216 which is less than 223. Divide 3 into 7 to estimate the number of times 36 goes into 72. The 3 goes into 7 at most 2 times. Try 2: 2 × 36 = 72. Check: Thus, 2,232÷36 = 62. Example 2.26.  Find 2,417,228÷802. First, the educated guess: 24÷8 = 3. Then 3 × 802 = 2406, which is less than 2417. Use 3 as the guess. Since 3 × 802 = 2406, and 2406 has four digits, place the 3 above the fourth digit of the dividend. Subtract: 2417 - 2406 = 11. Bring down the 2. The divisor 802 goes into 112 at most 0 times. Use 0. The 8 goes into 11 at most 1 time, and 1 × 802 = 802, which is less than 1122. Try 1. Subtract 1122 – 802 = 320 Bring down the 8. 8 goes into 32 at most 4 times. 4 × 802 = 3208. Use 4. Check: Thus, 2,417,228÷802 = 3,014. Practice Set B Perform the following divisions. Exercise 2.4.6. (Go to Solution) 1,376÷32 Exercise 2.4.7. (Go to Solution) 6,160÷55 Exercise 2.4.8. (Go to Solution) 18,605÷61 Exercise 2.4.9. (Go to Solution) 144,768÷48  || Division with a Remainder We might wonder how many times 4 is contained in 10. Repeated subtraction yields Since the remainder is less than 4, we stop the subtraction. Thus, 4 goes into 10 two times with 2 remaining. We can write this as a division as follows. Since 4 does not divide into 2 (the remainder is less than the divisor) and there are no digits to bring down to continue the process, we are done. We write or Sample Set C Example 2.27.  Find 85÷3. There are no more digits to bring down to continue the process. We are done. One is the remainder. Check: Multiply 28 and 3, then add 1. Thus, . Example 2.28.  Find 726÷23. Check: Multiply 31 by 23, then add 13. Thus, 726÷23 = 31R13. Practice Set C Perform the following divisions. Exercise 2.4.10. (Go to Solution) 75÷4 Exercise 2.4.11. (Go to Solution) 346÷8 Exercise 2.4.12. (Go to Solution) 489÷21 Exercise 2.4.13. (Go to Solution) 5,016÷82 Exercise 2.4.14. (Go to Solution) 41,196÷67  || Calculators The calculator can be useful for finding quotients with single and multiple digit divisors. If, however, the division should result in a remainder, the calculator is unable to provide us with the particular value of the remainder. Also, some calculators (most nonscientific) are unable to perform divisions in which one of the numbers has more than eight digits. Sample Set D Use a calculator to perform each division. Example 2.29.  328 ÷ 8 Table 2.7. Type 328 Press ÷ Type 8 Press = The display now reads 41. Example 2.30.  53 , 136 ÷ 82 Table 2.8. Type 53136 Press ÷ Type 82 Press = The display now reads 648. Example 2.31.  730 , 019 , 001 ÷ 326 We first try to enter 730,019,001 but find that we can only enter 73001900. If our calculator has only an eight-digit display (as most nonscientific calculators do), we will be unable to use the calculator to perform this division. Example 2.32.  3727 ÷ 49 Table 2.9. Type 3727 Press ÷ Type 49 Press = The display now reads 76.061224. This number is an example of a decimal number (see Section 6.1). When a decimal number results in a calculator division, we can conclude that the division produces a remainder. Practice Set D Use a calculator to perform each division. Exercise 2.4.15. (Go to Solution) 3,330÷74 Exercise 2.4.16. (Go to Solution) 63,365÷115 Exercise 2.4.17. (Go to Solution) 21,996,385,287÷53 Exercise 2.4.18. (Go to Solution) 4,558÷67  || 
book4_ch02_4_2	Division with a Single Digit Divisor Our experience with multiplication of whole numbers allows us to perform such divisions as 75÷5. We perform the division by performing the corresponding multiplication, 5 × Q = 75. Each division we considered in Section 2.3 had a one-digit quotient. Now we will consider divisions in which the quotient may consist of two or more digits. For example, 75÷5. Let's examine the division 75÷5. We are asked to determine how many 5's are contained in 75. We'll approach the problem in the following way. Make an educated guess based on experience with multiplication. Find how close the estimate is by multiplying the estimate by 5. If the product obtained in step 2 is less than 75, find out how much less by subtracting it from 75. If the product obtained in step 2 is greater than 75, decrease the estimate until the product is less than 75. Decreasing the estimate makes sense because we do not wish to exceed 75. We can suggest from this discussion that the process of division consists of The Four Steps in Division an educated guess a multiplication a subtraction bringing down the next digit (if necessary) The educated guess can be made by determining how many times the divisor is contained in the dividend by using only one or two digits of the dividend. Sample Set A Example 2.23.  Find 75÷5. Rewrite the problem using a division bracket. Make an educated guess by noting that one 5 is contained in 75 at most 10 times.Since 7 is the tens digit, we estimate that 5 goes into 75 at most 10 times. Now determine how close the estimate is. 10 fives is 10 × 5 = 50. Subtract 50 from 75. Estimate the number of 5's in 25. There are exactly 5 fives in 25. Check: Thus, 75÷5 = 15. The notation in this division can be shortened by writing. Example 2.24.  Find 4,944÷8. Rewrite the problem using a division bracket. 8 goes into 49 at most 6 times, and 9 is in the hundreds column. We'll guess 600. Then, 8 × 600 = 4800. 8 goes into 14 at most 1 time, and 4 is in the tens column. We'll guess 10. 8 goes into 64 exactly 8 times. 600 eights + 10 eights + 8 eights = 618 eights. Check: Thus, 4,944÷8 = 618. As in the first problem, the notation in this division can be shortened by eliminating the subtraction signs and the zeros in each educated guess. Note Not all divisions end in zero. We will examine such divisions in a subsequent subsection. Practice Set A Perform the following divisions. Exercise 2.4.1. (Go to Solution) 126÷7 Exercise 2.4.2. (Go to Solution) 324÷4 Exercise 2.4.3. (Go to Solution) 2,559÷3 Exercise 2.4.4. (Go to Solution) 5,645÷5 Exercise 2.4.5. (Go to Solution) 757,125÷9 Division with a Single Digit Divisor Our experience with multiplication of whole numbers allows us to perform such divisions as 75÷5. We perform the division by performing the corresponding multiplication, 5 × Q = 75. Each division we considered in Section 2.3 had a one-digit quotient. Now we will consider divisions in which the quotient may consist of two or more digits. For example, 75÷5. Let's examine the division 75÷5. We are asked to determine how many 5's are contained in 75. We'll approach the problem in the following way. Make an educated guess based on experience with multiplication. Find how close the estimate is by multiplying the estimate by 5. If the product obtained in step 2 is less than 75, find out how much less by subtracting it from 75. If the product obtained in step 2 is greater than 75, decrease the estimate until the product is less than 75. Decreasing the estimate makes sense because we do not wish to exceed 75. We can suggest from this discussion that the process of division consists of The Four Steps in Division an educated guess a multiplication a subtraction bringing down the next digit (if necessary) The educated guess can be made by determining how many times the divisor is contained in the dividend by using only one or two digits of the dividend. Sample Set A Example 2.23.  Find 75÷5. Rewrite the problem using a division bracket. Make an educated guess by noting that one 5 is contained in 75 at most 10 times.Since 7 is the tens digit, we estimate that 5 goes into 75 at most 10 times. Now determine how close the estimate is. 10 fives is 10 × 5 = 50. Subtract 50 from 75. Estimate the number of 5's in 25. There are exactly 5 fives in 25. Check: Thus, 75÷5 = 15. The notation in this division can be shortened by writing. Example 2.24.  Find 4,944÷8. Rewrite the problem using a division bracket. 8 goes into 49 at most 6 times, and 9 is in the hundreds column. We'll guess 600. Then, 8 × 600 = 4800. 8 goes into 14 at most 1 time, and 4 is in the tens column. We'll guess 10. 8 goes into 64 exactly 8 times. 600 eights + 10 eights + 8 eights = 618 eights. Check: Thus, 4,944÷8 = 618. As in the first problem, the notation in this division can be shortened by eliminating the subtraction signs and the zeros in each educated guess. Note Not all divisions end in zero. We will examine such divisions in a subsequent subsection. Practice Set A Perform the following divisions. Exercise 2.4.1. (Go to Solution) 126÷7 Exercise 2.4.2. (Go to Solution) 324÷4 Exercise 2.4.3. (Go to Solution) 2,559÷3 Exercise 2.4.4. (Go to Solution) 5,645÷5 Exercise 2.4.5. (Go to Solution) 757,125÷9  || 
book4_ch02_4_5	Division with a Multiple Digit Divisor The process of division also works when the divisor consists of two or more digits. We now make educated guesses using the first digit of the divisor and one or two digits of the dividend. Sample Set B Example 2.25.  Find 2,232÷36. Use the first digit of the divisor and the first two digits of the dividend to make the educated guess. 3 goes into 22 at most 7 times. Try 7: 7 × 36 = 252 which is greater than 223. Reduce the estimate. Try 6: 6 × 36 = 216 which is less than 223. Divide 3 into 7 to estimate the number of times 36 goes into 72. The 3 goes into 7 at most 2 times. Try 2: 2 × 36 = 72. Check: Thus, 2,232÷36 = 62. Example 2.26.  Find 2,417,228÷802. First, the educated guess: 24÷8 = 3. Then 3 × 802 = 2406, which is less than 2417. Use 3 as the guess. Since 3 × 802 = 2406, and 2406 has four digits, place the 3 above the fourth digit of the dividend. Subtract: 2417 - 2406 = 11. Bring down the 2. The divisor 802 goes into 112 at most 0 times. Use 0. The 8 goes into 11 at most 1 time, and 1 × 802 = 802, which is less than 1122. Try 1. Subtract 1122 – 802 = 320 Bring down the 8. 8 goes into 32 at most 4 times. 4 × 802 = 3208. Use 4. Check: Thus, 2,417,228÷802 = 3,014. Practice Set B Perform the following divisions. Exercise 2.4.6. (Go to Solution) 1,376÷32 Exercise 2.4.7. (Go to Solution) 6,160÷55 Exercise 2.4.8. (Go to Solution) 18,605÷61 Exercise 2.4.9. (Go to Solution) 144,768÷48 Division with a Multiple Digit Divisor The process of division also works when the divisor consists of two or more digits. We now make educated guesses using the first digit of the divisor and one or two digits of the dividend. Sample Set B Example 2.25.  Find 2,232÷36. Use the first digit of the divisor and the first two digits of the dividend to make the educated guess. 3 goes into 22 at most 7 times. Try 7: 7 × 36 = 252 which is greater than 223. Reduce the estimate. Try 6: 6 × 36 = 216 which is less than 223. Divide 3 into 7 to estimate the number of times 36 goes into 72. The 3 goes into 7 at most 2 times. Try 2: 2 × 36 = 72. Check: Thus, 2,232÷36 = 62. Example 2.26.  Find 2,417,228÷802. First, the educated guess: 24÷8 = 3. Then 3 × 802 = 2406, which is less than 2417. Use 3 as the guess. Since 3 × 802 = 2406, and 2406 has four digits, place the 3 above the fourth digit of the dividend. Subtract: 2417 - 2406 = 11. Bring down the 2. The divisor 802 goes into 112 at most 0 times. Use 0. The 8 goes into 11 at most 1 time, and 1 × 802 = 802, which is less than 1122. Try 1. Subtract 1122 – 802 = 320 Bring down the 8. 8 goes into 32 at most 4 times. 4 × 802 = 3208. Use 4. Check: Thus, 2,417,228÷802 = 3,014. Practice Set B Perform the following divisions. Exercise 2.4.6. (Go to Solution) 1,376÷32 Exercise 2.4.7. (Go to Solution) 6,160÷55 Exercise 2.4.8. (Go to Solution) 18,605÷61 Exercise 2.4.9. (Go to Solution) 144,768÷48  || 
book4_ch02_4_8	Division with a Remainder We might wonder how many times 4 is contained in 10. Repeated subtraction yields Since the remainder is less than 4, we stop the subtraction. Thus, 4 goes into 10 two times with 2 remaining. We can write this as a division as follows. Since 4 does not divide into 2 (the remainder is less than the divisor) and there are no digits to bring down to continue the process, we are done. We write or Sample Set C Example 2.27.  Find 85÷3. There are no more digits to bring down to continue the process. We are done. One is the remainder. Check: Multiply 28 and 3, then add 1. Thus, . Example 2.28.  Find 726÷23. Check: Multiply 31 by 23, then add 13. Thus, 726÷23 = 31R13. Practice Set C Perform the following divisions. Exercise 2.4.10. (Go to Solution) 75÷4 Exercise 2.4.11. (Go to Solution) 346÷8 Exercise 2.4.12. (Go to Solution) 489÷21 Exercise 2.4.13. (Go to Solution) 5,016÷82 Exercise 2.4.14. (Go to Solution) 41,196÷67 Division with a Remainder We might wonder how many times 4 is contained in 10. Repeated subtraction yields Since the remainder is less than 4, we stop the subtraction. Thus, 4 goes into 10 two times with 2 remaining. We can write this as a division as follows. Since 4 does not divide into 2 (the remainder is less than the divisor) and there are no digits to bring down to continue the process, we are done. We write or Sample Set C Example 2.27.  Find 85÷3. There are no more digits to bring down to continue the process. We are done. One is the remainder. Check: Multiply 28 and 3, then add 1. Thus, . Example 2.28.  Find 726÷23. Check: Multiply 31 by 23, then add 13. Thus, 726÷23 = 31R13. Practice Set C Perform the following divisions. Exercise 2.4.10. (Go to Solution) 75÷4 Exercise 2.4.11. (Go to Solution) 346÷8 Exercise 2.4.12. (Go to Solution) 489÷21 Exercise 2.4.13. (Go to Solution) 5,016÷82 Exercise 2.4.14. (Go to Solution) 41,196÷67  || 
book4_ch02_4_11	Calculators The calculator can be useful for finding quotients with single and multiple digit divisors. If, however, the division should result in a remainder, the calculator is unable to provide us with the particular value of the remainder. Also, some calculators (most nonscientific) are unable to perform divisions in which one of the numbers has more than eight digits. Sample Set D Use a calculator to perform each division. Example 2.29.  328 ÷ 8 Table 2.7. Type 328 Press ÷ Type 8 Press = The display now reads 41. Example 2.30.  53 , 136 ÷ 82 Table 2.8. Type 53136 Press ÷ Type 82 Press = The display now reads 648. Example 2.31.  730 , 019 , 001 ÷ 326 We first try to enter 730,019,001 but find that we can only enter 73001900. If our calculator has only an eight-digit display (as most nonscientific calculators do), we will be unable to use the calculator to perform this division. Example 2.32.  3727 ÷ 49 Table 2.9. Type 3727 Press ÷ Type 49 Press = The display now reads 76.061224. This number is an example of a decimal number (see Section 6.1). When a decimal number results in a calculator division, we can conclude that the division produces a remainder. Practice Set D Use a calculator to perform each division. Exercise 2.4.15. (Go to Solution) 3,330÷74 Exercise 2.4.16. (Go to Solution) 63,365÷115 Exercise 2.4.17. (Go to Solution) 21,996,385,287÷53 Exercise 2.4.18. (Go to Solution) 4,558÷67 Calculators The calculator can be useful for finding quotients with single and multiple digit divisors. If, however, the division should result in a remainder, the calculator is unable to provide us with the particular value of the remainder. Also, some calculators (most nonscientific) are unable to perform divisions in which one of the numbers has more than eight digits. Sample Set D Use a calculator to perform each division. Example 2.29.  328 ÷ 8 Table 2.7. Type 328 Press ÷ Type 8 Press = The display now reads 41. Example 2.30.  53 , 136 ÷ 82 Table 2.8. Type 53136 Press ÷ Type 82 Press = The display now reads 648. Example 2.31.  730 , 019 , 001 ÷ 326 We first try to enter 730,019,001 but find that we can only enter 73001900. If our calculator has only an eight-digit display (as most nonscientific calculators do), we will be unable to use the calculator to perform this division. Example 2.32.  3727 ÷ 49 Table 2.9. Type 3727 Press ÷ Type 49 Press = The display now reads 76.061224. This number is an example of a decimal number (see Section 6.1). When a decimal number results in a calculator division, we can conclude that the division produces a remainder. Practice Set D Use a calculator to perform each division. Exercise 2.4.15. (Go to Solution) 3,330÷74 Exercise 2.4.16. (Go to Solution) 63,365÷115 Exercise 2.4.17. (Go to Solution) 21,996,385,287÷53 Exercise 2.4.18. (Go to Solution) 4,558÷67  || 
book4_ch02_5	 || Division by 2, 3, 4, and 5 Division by 2 A whole number is divisible by 2 if its last digit is 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8. The numbers 80, 112, 64, 326, and 1,008 are all divisible by 2 since the last digit of each is 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8, respectively. The numbers 85 and 731 are not divisible by 2. Division by 3 A whole number is divisible by 3 if the sum of its digits is divisible by 3. The number 432 is divisible by 3 since 4 + 3 + 2 = 9 and 9 is divisible by 3. 432 ÷ 3 = 144 The number 25 is not divisible by 3 since 2 + 5 = 7, and 7 is not divisible by 3. Division by 4 A whole number is divisible by 4 if its last two digits form a number that is divisible by 4. The number 31,048 is divisible by 4 since the last two digits, 4 and 8, form a number, 48, that is divisible by 4. 31048 ÷ 4 = 7262 The number 137 is not divisible by 4 since 37 is not divisible by 4. Division by 5 A whole number is divisible by 5 if its last digit is 0 or 5. Sample Set A Example 2.33.  The numbers 65, 110, 8,030, and 16,955 are each divisible by 5 since the last digit of each is 0 or 5. Practice Set A State which of the following whole numbers are divisible by 2, 3, 4, or 5. A number may be divisible by more than one number. Exercise 2.5.1. (Go to Solution) 26 Exercise 2.5.2. (Go to Solution) 81 Exercise 2.5.3. (Go to Solution) 51 Exercise 2.5.4. (Go to Solution) 385 Exercise 2.5.5. (Go to Solution) 6,112 Exercise 2.5.6. (Go to Solution) 470 Exercise 2.5.7. (Go to Solution) 113,154  || Division by 6, 8, 9, 10 Division by 6 A number is divisible by 6 if it is divisible by both 2 and 3. The number 234 is divisible by 2 since its last digit is 4. It is also divisible by 3 since 2 + 3 + 4 = 9 and 9 is divisible by 3. Therefore, 234 is divisible by 6. The number 6,532 is not divisible by 6. Although its last digit is 2, making it divisible by 2, the sum of its digits, 6 + 5 + 3 + 2 = 16, and 16 is not divisible by 3. Division by 8 A whole number is divisible by 8 if its last three digits form a number that is divisible by 8. The number 4,000 is divisible by 8 since 000 is divisible by 8. The number 13,128 is divisible by 8 since 128 is divisible by 8. The number 1,170 is not divisible by 8 since 170 is not divisible by 8. Division by 9 A whole number is divisible by 9 if the sum of its digits is divisible by 9. The number 702 is divisible by 9 since 7 + 0 + 2 is divisible by 9. The number 6588 is divisible by 9 since 6 + 5 + 8 + 8 = 27 is divisible by 9. The number 14,123 is not divisible by 9 since 1 + 4 + 1 + 2 + 3 = 11 is not divisi­ble by 9. Division by 10 A Whole number is divisible by 10 if its last digit is 0. Sample Set B Example 2.34.  The numbers 30, 170, 16,240, and 865,000 are all divisible by 10. Practice Set B State which of the following whole numbers are divisible 6, 8, 9, or 10. Some numbers may be divisible by more than one number. Exercise 2.5.8. (Go to Solution) 900 Exercise 2.5.9. (Go to Solution) 6,402 Exercise 2.5.10. (Go to Solution) 6,660 Exercise 2.5.11. (Go to Solution) 55,116  || 
book4_ch02_5_2	Division by 2, 3, 4, and 5 Division by 2 A whole number is divisible by 2 if its last digit is 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8. The numbers 80, 112, 64, 326, and 1,008 are all divisible by 2 since the last digit of each is 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8, respectively. The numbers 85 and 731 are not divisible by 2. Division by 3 A whole number is divisible by 3 if the sum of its digits is divisible by 3. The number 432 is divisible by 3 since 4 + 3 + 2 = 9 and 9 is divisible by 3. 432 ÷ 3 = 144 The number 25 is not divisible by 3 since 2 + 5 = 7, and 7 is not divisible by 3. Division by 4 A whole number is divisible by 4 if its last two digits form a number that is divisible by 4. The number 31,048 is divisible by 4 since the last two digits, 4 and 8, form a number, 48, that is divisible by 4. 31048 ÷ 4 = 7262 The number 137 is not divisible by 4 since 37 is not divisible by 4. Division by 5 A whole number is divisible by 5 if its last digit is 0 or 5. Sample Set A Example 2.33.  The numbers 65, 110, 8,030, and 16,955 are each divisible by 5 since the last digit of each is 0 or 5. Practice Set A State which of the following whole numbers are divisible by 2, 3, 4, or 5. A number may be divisible by more than one number. Exercise 2.5.1. (Go to Solution) 26 Exercise 2.5.2. (Go to Solution) 81 Exercise 2.5.3. (Go to Solution) 51 Exercise 2.5.4. (Go to Solution) 385 Exercise 2.5.5. (Go to Solution) 6,112 Exercise 2.5.6. (Go to Solution) 470 Exercise 2.5.7. (Go to Solution) 113,154 Division by 2, 3, 4, and 5 Division by 2 A whole number is divisible by 2 if its last digit is 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8. The numbers 80, 112, 64, 326, and 1,008 are all divisible by 2 since the last digit of each is 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8, respectively. The numbers 85 and 731 are not divisible by 2. Division by 3 A whole number is divisible by 3 if the sum of its digits is divisible by 3. The number 432 is divisible by 3 since 4 + 3 + 2 = 9 and 9 is divisible by 3. 432 ÷ 3 = 144 The number 25 is not divisible by 3 since 2 + 5 = 7, and 7 is not divisible by 3. Division by 4 A whole number is divisible by 4 if its last two digits form a number that is divisible by 4. The number 31,048 is divisible by 4 since the last two digits, 4 and 8, form a number, 48, that is divisible by 4. 31048 ÷ 4 = 7262 The number 137 is not divisible by 4 since 37 is not divisible by 4. Division by 5 A whole number is divisible by 5 if its last digit is 0 or 5. Sample Set A Example 2.33.  The numbers 65, 110, 8,030, and 16,955 are each divisible by 5 since the last digit of each is 0 or 5. Practice Set A State which of the following whole numbers are divisible by 2, 3, 4, or 5. A number may be divisible by more than one number. Exercise 2.5.1. (Go to Solution) 26 Exercise 2.5.2. (Go to Solution) 81 Exercise 2.5.3. (Go to Solution) 51 Exercise 2.5.4. (Go to Solution) 385 Exercise 2.5.5. (Go to Solution) 6,112 Exercise 2.5.6. (Go to Solution) 470 Exercise 2.5.7. (Go to Solution) 113,154  || 
book4_ch02_5_5	Division by 6, 8, 9, 10 Division by 6 A number is divisible by 6 if it is divisible by both 2 and 3. The number 234 is divisible by 2 since its last digit is 4. It is also divisible by 3 since 2 + 3 + 4 = 9 and 9 is divisible by 3. Therefore, 234 is divisible by 6. The number 6,532 is not divisible by 6. Although its last digit is 2, making it divisible by 2, the sum of its digits, 6 + 5 + 3 + 2 = 16, and 16 is not divisible by 3. Division by 8 A whole number is divisible by 8 if its last three digits form a number that is divisible by 8. The number 4,000 is divisible by 8 since 000 is divisible by 8. The number 13,128 is divisible by 8 since 128 is divisible by 8. The number 1,170 is not divisible by 8 since 170 is not divisible by 8. Division by 9 A whole number is divisible by 9 if the sum of its digits is divisible by 9. The number 702 is divisible by 9 since 7 + 0 + 2 is divisible by 9. The number 6588 is divisible by 9 since 6 + 5 + 8 + 8 = 27 is divisible by 9. The number 14,123 is not divisible by 9 since 1 + 4 + 1 + 2 + 3 = 11 is not divisi­ble by 9. Division by 10 A Whole number is divisible by 10 if its last digit is 0. Sample Set B Example 2.34.  The numbers 30, 170, 16,240, and 865,000 are all divisible by 10. Practice Set B State which of the following whole numbers are divisible 6, 8, 9, or 10. Some numbers may be divisible by more than one number. Exercise 2.5.8. (Go to Solution) 900 Exercise 2.5.9. (Go to Solution) 6,402 Exercise 2.5.10. (Go to Solution) 6,660 Exercise 2.5.11. (Go to Solution) 55,116 Division by 6, 8, 9, 10 Division by 6 A number is divisible by 6 if it is divisible by both 2 and 3. The number 234 is divisible by 2 since its last digit is 4. It is also divisible by 3 since 2 + 3 + 4 = 9 and 9 is divisible by 3. Therefore, 234 is divisible by 6. The number 6,532 is not divisible by 6. Although its last digit is 2, making it divisible by 2, the sum of its digits, 6 + 5 + 3 + 2 = 16, and 16 is not divisible by 3. Division by 8 A whole number is divisible by 8 if its last three digits form a number that is divisible by 8. The number 4,000 is divisible by 8 since 000 is divisible by 8. The number 13,128 is divisible by 8 since 128 is divisible by 8. The number 1,170 is not divisible by 8 since 170 is not divisible by 8. Division by 9 A whole number is divisible by 9 if the sum of its digits is divisible by 9. The number 702 is divisible by 9 since 7 + 0 + 2 is divisible by 9. The number 6588 is divisible by 9 since 6 + 5 + 8 + 8 = 27 is divisible by 9. The number 14,123 is not divisible by 9 since 1 + 4 + 1 + 2 + 3 = 11 is not divisi­ble by 9. Division by 10 A Whole number is divisible by 10 if its last digit is 0. Sample Set B Example 2.34.  The numbers 30, 170, 16,240, and 865,000 are all divisible by 10. Practice Set B State which of the following whole numbers are divisible 6, 8, 9, or 10. Some numbers may be divisible by more than one number. Exercise 2.5.8. (Go to Solution) 900 Exercise 2.5.9. (Go to Solution) 6,402 Exercise 2.5.10. (Go to Solution) 6,660 Exercise 2.5.11. (Go to Solution) 55,116  || 
book4_ch02_6	 || The Commutative Property of Multiplication Commutative Property of Multiplication The product of two whole numbers is the same regardless of the order of the factors. Sample Set A Example 2.35.  Multiply the two whole numbers. 6 ⋅ 7 = 42 7 ⋅ 6 = 42 The numbers 6 and 7 can be multiplied in any order. Regardless of the order they are multiplied, the product is 42. Practice Set A Use the commutative property of multiplication to find the products in two ways. Exercise 2.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.6.2. (Go to Solution)  || The Associative Property of Multiplication Associative Property of Multiplication If three whole numbers are multiplied, the product will be the same if the first two are multiplied first and then that product is multiplied by the third, or if the second two are multiplied first and that product is multiplied by the first. Note that the order of the factors is maintained. It is a common mathematical practice to use parentheses to show which pair of numbers is to be combined first. Sample Set B Example 2.36.  Multiply the whole numbers. ( 8 ⋅ 3 ) ⋅ 14 = 24 ⋅ 14 = 336 8 ⋅ ( 3 ⋅ 14 ) = 8 ⋅ 42 = 336 Practice Set B Use the associative property of multiplication to find the products in two ways. Exercise 2.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.6.4. (Go to Solution)  || The Multiplicative Identity The Multiplicative Identity is 1 The whole number 1 is called the multiplicative identity, since any whole num­ber multiplied by 1 is not changed. Sample Set C Example 2.37.  Multiply the whole numbers. 12 ⋅ 1 = 12 1 ⋅ 12 = 12 Practice Set C Multiply the whole numbers. Exercise 2.6.5. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch02_6_2	The Commutative Property of Multiplication Commutative Property of Multiplication The product of two whole numbers is the same regardless of the order of the factors. Sample Set A Example 2.35.  Multiply the two whole numbers. 6 ⋅ 7 = 42 7 ⋅ 6 = 42 The numbers 6 and 7 can be multiplied in any order. Regardless of the order they are multiplied, the product is 42. Practice Set A Use the commutative property of multiplication to find the products in two ways. Exercise 2.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.6.2. (Go to Solution) The Commutative Property of Multiplication Commutative Property of Multiplication The product of two whole numbers is the same regardless of the order of the factors. Sample Set A Example 2.35.  Multiply the two whole numbers. 6 ⋅ 7 = 42 7 ⋅ 6 = 42 The numbers 6 and 7 can be multiplied in any order. Regardless of the order they are multiplied, the product is 42. Practice Set A Use the commutative property of multiplication to find the products in two ways. Exercise 2.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.6.2. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch02_6_5	The Associative Property of Multiplication Associative Property of Multiplication If three whole numbers are multiplied, the product will be the same if the first two are multiplied first and then that product is multiplied by the third, or if the second two are multiplied first and that product is multiplied by the first. Note that the order of the factors is maintained. It is a common mathematical practice to use parentheses to show which pair of numbers is to be combined first. Sample Set B Example 2.36.  Multiply the whole numbers. ( 8 ⋅ 3 ) ⋅ 14 = 24 ⋅ 14 = 336 8 ⋅ ( 3 ⋅ 14 ) = 8 ⋅ 42 = 336 Practice Set B Use the associative property of multiplication to find the products in two ways. Exercise 2.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.6.4. (Go to Solution) The Associative Property of Multiplication Associative Property of Multiplication If three whole numbers are multiplied, the product will be the same if the first two are multiplied first and then that product is multiplied by the third, or if the second two are multiplied first and that product is multiplied by the first. Note that the order of the factors is maintained. It is a common mathematical practice to use parentheses to show which pair of numbers is to be combined first. Sample Set B Example 2.36.  Multiply the whole numbers. ( 8 ⋅ 3 ) ⋅ 14 = 24 ⋅ 14 = 336 8 ⋅ ( 3 ⋅ 14 ) = 8 ⋅ 42 = 336 Practice Set B Use the associative property of multiplication to find the products in two ways. Exercise 2.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 2.6.4. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch02_6_8	The Multiplicative Identity The Multiplicative Identity is 1 The whole number 1 is called the multiplicative identity, since any whole num­ber multiplied by 1 is not changed. Sample Set C Example 2.37.  Multiply the whole numbers. 12 ⋅ 1 = 12 1 ⋅ 12 = 12 Practice Set C Multiply the whole numbers. Exercise 2.6.5. (Go to Solution) The Multiplicative Identity The Multiplicative Identity is 1 The whole number 1 is called the multiplicative identity, since any whole num­ber multiplied by 1 is not changed. Sample Set C Example 2.37.  Multiply the whole numbers. 12 ⋅ 1 = 12 1 ⋅ 12 = 12 Practice Set C Multiply the whole numbers. Exercise 2.6.5. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch06	 ||  || Digits to the Right of the Ones Position We began our study of arithmetic (Section 1.2) by noting that our number system is called a positional number system with base ten. We also noted that each position has a particular value. We observed that each position has ten times the value of the position to its right. This means that each position has the value of the position to its left. Thus, a digit written to the right of the units position must have a value of of 1. Recalling that the word "of" translates to multiplication (⋅), we can see that the value of the first position to the right of the units digit is of 1, or The value of the second position to the right of the units digit is of , or The value of the third position to the right of the units digit is of , or This pattern continues. We can now see that if we were to write digits in positions to the right of the units positions, those positions have values that are fractions. Not only do the positions have fractional values, but the fractional values are all powers of 10 (10,102 ,103 ,…).  || Decimal Fractions Decimal Point, Decimal If we are to write numbers with digits appearing to the right of the units digit, we must have a way of denoting where the whole number part ends and the fractional part begins. Mathematicians denote the separation point of the units digit and the tenths digit by writing a decimal point. The word decimal comes from the Latin prefix "deci" which means ten, and we use it because we use a base ten number system. Numbers written in this form are called decimal fractions, or more simply, decimals. Notice that decimal numbers have the suffix "th." Decimal Fraction A decimal fraction is a fraction in which the denominator is a power of 10. The following numbers are examples of decimals. 42.6 The 6 is in the tenths position. 9.8014 The 8 is in the tenths position. The 0 is in the hundredths position. The 1 is in the thousandths position. The 4 is in the ten thousandths position. 0.93 The 9 is in the tenths position. The 3 is in the hundredths position. Note Quite often a zero is inserted in front of a decimal point (in the units position) of a decimal fraction that has a value less than one. This zero helps keep us from overlooking the decimal point. 0.7 The 7 is in the tenths position. Note We can insert zeros to the right of the right-most digit in a decimal fraction without changing the value of the number.  || Reading Decimal Fractions Reading a Decimal Fraction To read a decimal fraction, Read the whole number part as usual. (If the whole number is less than 1, omit steps 1 and 2.) Read the decimal point as the word "and." Read the number to the right of the decimal point as if it were a whole number. Say the name of the position of the last digit. Sample Set A Read the following numbers. Example 6.1.  6.8 Note Some people read this as "six point eight." This phrasing gets the message across, but technically, "six and eight tenths" is the correct phrasing. Example 6.2.  14.116 Example 6.3.  0.0019 Example 6.4.  81 Eighty-one In this problem, the indication is that any whole number is a decimal fraction. Whole numbers are often called decimal numbers. 81 = 81 . 0 Practice Set A Read the following decimal fractions. Exercise 6.2.1. (Go to Solution) 12.9 Exercise 6.2.2. (Go to Solution) 4.86 Exercise 6.2.3. (Go to Solution) 7.00002 Exercise 6.2.4. (Go to Solution) 0.030405  || Writing Decimal Fractions Writing a Decimal Fraction To write a decimal fraction, Write the whole number part. Write a decimal point for the word "and." Write the decimal part of the number so that the right-most digit appears in the position indicated in the word name. If necessary, insert zeros to the right of the decimal point in order that the right-most digit appears in the correct position. Sample Set B Write each number. Example 6.5.  Thirty-one and twelve hundredths. The decimal position indicated is the hundredths position. 31.12 Example 6.6.  Two and three hundred-thousandths. The decimal position indicated is the hundred thousandths. We'll need to insert enough zeros to the immediate right of the decimal point in order to locate the 3 in the correct position. 2.00003 Example 6.7.  Six thousand twenty-seven and one hundred four millionths. The decimal position indicated is the millionths position. We'll need to insert enough zeros to the immediate right of the decimal point in order to locate the 4 in the correct position. 6,027.000104 Example 6.8.  Seventeen hundredths. The decimal position indicated is the hundredths position. 0.17 Practice Set B Write each decimal fraction. Exercise 6.2.5. (Go to Solution) Three hundred six and forty-nine hundredths. Exercise 6.2.6. (Go to Solution) Nine and four thousandths. Exercise 6.2.7. (Go to Solution) Sixty-one millionths.  ||  || Converting an Ordinary Decimal to a Fraction We can convert a decimal fraction to a fraction, essentially, by saying it in words, then writing what we say. We may have to reduce that fraction. Sample Set A Convert each decimal fraction to a proper fraction or a mixed number. Example 6.9.  Reading: six tenths→ . Reduce: . Example 6.10.  Reading: nine hundred three thousands→ . Example 6.11.  Reading: eighteen and sixty-one hundredths→ . Example 6.12.  Reading: five hundred eight and five ten thousandths→ . Reduce: . Practice Set A Convert the following decimals to fractions or mixed numbers. Be sure to reduce. Exercise 6.3.1. (Go to Solution) 16.84 Exercise 6.3.2. (Go to Solution) 0.513 Exercise 6.3.3. (Go to Solution) 6,646.0107 Exercise 6.3.4. (Go to Solution) 1.1  || Converting A Complex Decimal to a Fraction Complex Decimals Numbers such as are called complex decimals. We can also convert com­plex decimals to fractions. Sample Set B Convert the following complex decimals to fractions. Example 6.13.  The appears to occur in the thousands position, but it is referring to of a hundredth. So, we read as "eleven and two-thirds hundredths." Example 6.14.  Note that Practice Set B Convert each complex decimal to a fraction or mixed number. Be sure to reduce. Exercise 6.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 6.3.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 6.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 6.3.8. (Go to Solution)  ||  || Rounding Decimal Numbers We first considered the concept of rounding numbers in Section 1.4 where our concern with rounding was related to whole numbers only. With a few minor changes, we can apply the same rules of rounding to decimals. To round a decimal to a particular position: Mark the position of the round-off digit (with an arrow or check). Note whether the digit to the immediate right of the marked digit is less than 5. If so, leave the round-off digit unchanged. 5 or greater. If so, add 1 to the round-off digit. If the round-off digit is to the right of the decimal point, eliminate all the digits to its right. to the left of the decimal point, replace all the digits between it and the decimal point with zeros and eliminate the decimal point and all the decimal digits. Sample Set A Round each decimal to the specified position. (The numbers in parentheses indicate which step is being used.) Example 6.15.  Round 32.116 to the nearest hundredth. 1) 2b) The digit immediately to the right is 6, and 6 > 5, so we add 1 to the round-off digit: 1 + 1 = 2 3a) The round-off digit is to the right of the decimal point, so we eliminate all digits to its right. 32.12 The number 32.116 rounded to the nearest hundredth is 32.12. Example 6.16.  Round 633.14216 to the nearest hundred. 1) 2a) The digit immediately to the right is 3, and 3 < 5 so we leave the round-off digit unchanged. 3b) The round-off digit is to the left of 0, so we replace all the digits between it and the decimal point with zeros and eliminate the decimal point and all the decimal digits. 600 The number 633.14216 rounded to the nearest hundred is 600. Example 6.17.  1,729.63 rounded to the nearest ten is 1,730. Example 6.18.  1.0144 rounded to the nearest tenth is 1.0. Example 6.19.  60.98 rounded to the nearest one is 61. Sometimes we hear a phrase such as "round to three decimal places." This phrase means that the round-off digit is the third decimal digit (the digit in the thousandths position). Example 6.20.  67.129 rounded to the second decimal place is 67.13. Example 6.21.  67.129558 rounded to 3 decimal places is 67.130. Practice Set A Round each decimal to the specified position. Exercise 6.4.1. (Go to Solution) 4.816 to the nearest hundredth. Exercise 6.4.2. (Go to Solution) 0.35928 to the nearest ten thousandths. Exercise 6.4.3. (Go to Solution) 82.1 to the nearest one. Exercise 6.4.4. (Go to Solution) 753.98 to the nearest hundred. Exercise 6.4.5. (Go to Solution) Round 43.99446 to three decimal places. Exercise 6.4.6. (Go to Solution) Round 105.019997 to four decimal places. Exercise 6.4.7. (Go to Solution) Round 99.9999 to two decimal places.  ||  || The Logic Behind the Method Consider the sum of 4.37 and 3.22. Changing each decimal to a fraction, we have Performing the addition, we get Thus, 4.37 + 3.22 = 7.59.  || The Method of Adding and Subtracting Decimals When writing the previous addition, we could have written the numbers in col­umns. This agrees with our previous result. From this observation, we can suggest a method for adding and subtracting decimal numbers. Method of Adding and Subtracting Decimals To add or subtract decimals: Align the numbers vertically so that the decimal points line up under each other and the corresponding decimal positions are in the same column. Add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Place a decimal point in the resulting sum or difference directly under the other decimal points. Sample Set A Find the following sums and differences. Example 6.22.  9.813 + 2.140 Example 6.23.  841.0056 + 47.016 + 19.058 To insure that the columns align properly, we can write a 0 in the position at the end of the numbers 47.016 and 19.058 without changing their values. Example 6.24.  1.314 – 0.58 Example 6.25.  16.01 – 7.053 Example 6.26.  Find the sum of 6.88106 and 3.5219 and round it to three decimal places. We need to round the sum to the thousandths position. Since the digit in the position immediately to the right is 9, and 9>5, we get 10.403 Example 6.27.  Wendy has $643.12 in her checking account. She writes a check for $16.92. How much is her new account balance? To find the new account balance, we need to find the difference between 643.12 and 16.92. We will subtract 16.92 from 643.12. After writing a check for $16.92, Wendy now has a balance of $626.20 in her checking account. Practice Set A Find the following sums and differences. Exercise 6.5.1. (Go to Solution) 3.187 + 2.992 Exercise 6.5.2. (Go to Solution) 14.987 – 5.341 Exercise 6.5.3. (Go to Solution) 0.5261 + 1.0783 Exercise 6.5.4. (Go to Solution) 1.06 – 1.0535 Exercise 6.5.5. (Go to Solution) 16,521.07 + 9,256.15 Exercise 6.5.6. (Go to Solution) Find the sum of 11.6128 and 14.07353, and round it to two decimal places.  || Calculators The calculator can be useful for finding sums and differences of decimal numbers. However, calculators with an eight-digit display cannot be used when working with decimal numbers that contain more than eight digits, or when the sum results in more than eight digits. In practice, an eight-place decimal will seldom be encoun­tered. There are some inexpensive calculators that can handle 13 decimal places. Sample Set B Use a calculator to find each sum or difference. Example 6.28.  42.0638 + 126.551 Table 6.16.     Display Reads Type 42.0638 42.0638 Press + 42.0638 Type 126.551 126.551 Press = 168.6148 The sum is 168.6148. Example 6.29.  Find the difference between 305.0627 and 14.29667. Table 6.17.     Display Reads Type 305.0627 305.0627 Press — 305.0627 Type 14.29667 14.29667 Press = 290.76603 The difference is 290.76603 Example 6.30.  51.07 + 3,891.001786 Since 3,891.001786 contains more than eight digits, we will be unable to use an eight-digit display calculator to perform this addition. We can, however, find the sum by hand. The sum is 3,942.071786. Practice Set B Use a calculator to perform each operation. Exercise 6.5.7. (Go to Solution) 4.286 + 8.97 Exercise 6.5.8. (Go to Solution) 452.0092 – 392.558 Exercise 6.5.9. (Go to Solution) Find the sum of 0.095 and 0.001862 Exercise 6.5.10. (Go to Solution) Find the difference between 0.5 and 0.025 Exercise 6.5.11. (Go to Solution) Find the sum of 2,776.00019 and 2,009.00012.  ||  || The Logic Behind the Method Consider the product of 3.2 and 1.46. Changing each decimal to a fraction, we have Thus, (3.2)(1.46) = 4.672. Notice that the factor Using this observation, we can suggest that the sum of the number of decimal places in the factors equals the number of decimal places in the product.  || The Method of Multiplying Decimals Method of Multiplying Decimals To multiply decimals, Multiply the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Find the sum of the number of decimal places in the factors. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum found in step 2. Sample Set A Find the following products. Example 6.31.  6.5 ⋅ 4.3 Thus, 6.5⋅4.3 = 27.95. Example 6.32.  23.4⋅1.96 Thus, 23.4⋅1.96 = 45.864. Example 6.33.  Find the product of 0.251 and 0.00113 and round to three decimal places. Now, rounding to three decimal places, we get Practice Set A Find the following products. Exercise 6.6.1. (Go to Solution) 5.3⋅ 8.6 Exercise 6.6.2. (Go to Solution) 2.12⋅ 4.9 Exercise 6.6.3. (Go to Solution) 1.054 ⋅ 0.16 Exercise 6.6.4. (Go to Solution) 0.00031 ⋅ 0.002 Exercise 6.6.5. (Go to Solution) Find the product of 2.33 and 4.01 and round to one decimal place. Exercise 6.6.6. (Go to Solution) 10 ⋅ 5.394 Exercise 6.6.7. (Go to Solution) 100 ⋅ 5.394 Exercise 6.6.8. (Go to Solution) 1000⋅ 5.394 Exercise 6.6.9. (Go to Solution) 10,000 ⋅ 5.394  || Calculators Calculators can be used to find products of decimal numbers. However, a calculator that has only an eight-digit display may not be able to handle numbers or products that result in more than eight digits. But there are plenty of inexpensive ($50 - $75) calculators with more than eight-digit displays. Sample Set B Find the following products, if possible, using a calculator. Example 6.34.  2.58 ⋅ 8.61 Table 6.18.     Display Reads Type 2.58 2.58 Press × 2.58 Type 8.61 8.61 Press = 22.2138 The product is 22.2138. Example 6.35.  0.006 ⋅ 0.0042 Table 6.19.     Display Reads Type .006 .006 Press × .006 Type .0042 0.0042 Press = 0.0000252 We know that there will be seven decimal places in the product (since 3 + 4 = 7). Since the display shows 7 decimal places, we can assume the product is correct. Thus, the product is 0.0000252. Example 6.36.  0.0026 ⋅ 0.11976 Since we expect 4 + 5 = 9 decimal places in the product, we know that an eight-digit display calculator will not be able to provide us with the exact value. To obtain the exact value, we must use "hand technology." Suppose, however, that we agree to round off this product to three decimal places. We then need only four decimal places on the display. Table 6.20.     Display Reads Type .0026 .0026 Press × .0026 Type .11976 0.11976 Press = 0.0003114 Rounding 0.0003114 to three decimal places we get 0.000. Thus, 0.0026 ⋅ 0.11976 = 0.000 to three decimal places. Practice Set B Use a calculator to find each product. If the calculator will not provide the exact product, round the result to four decimal places. Exercise 6.6.10. (Go to Solution) 5.126 ⋅ 4.08 Exercise 6.6.11. (Go to Solution) 0.00165 ⋅ 0.04 Exercise 6.6.12. (Go to Solution) 0.5598 ⋅ 0.4281 Exercise 6.6.13. (Go to Solution) 0.000002 ⋅ 0.06  || Multiplying Decimals by Powers of 10 There is an interesting feature of multiplying decimals by powers of 10. Consider the following multiplications. Table 6.21. Multiplication Number of Zeros in the Power of 10 Number of Positions the Decimal Point Has Been Moved to the Right 10 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 83 . 15274 1 1 100 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 831 . 5274 2 2 1, 000 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 8, 315 . 274 3 3 10 , 000 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 83 , 152 . 74 4 4 Multiplying a Decimal by a Power of 10 To multiply a decimal by a power of 10, move the decimal place to the right of its current position as many places as there are zeros in the power of 10. Add zeros if necessary. Sample Set C Find the following products. Example 6.37.  100⋅34.876. Since there are 2 zeros in 100, Move the decimal point in 34.876 two places to the right. Example 6.38.  1,000⋅4.8058. Since there are 3 zeros in 1,000, move the decimal point in 4.8058 three places to the right. Example 6.39.  10,000⋅56.82. Since there are 4 zeros in 10,000, move the decimal point in 56.82 four places to the right. We will have to add two zeros in order to obtain the four places. Since there is no fractional part, we can drop the decimal point. Example 6.40.  Example 6.41.  Practice Set C Find the following products. Exercise 6.6.14. (Go to Solution) 100 ⋅ 4.27 Exercise 6.6.15. (Go to Solution) 10,000 ⋅ 16.52187 Exercise 6.6.16. (Go to Solution) (10)(0.0188) Exercise 6.6.17. (Go to Solution) (10,000,000,000)(52.7)  || Multiplication in Terms of “Of” Recalling that the word "of" translates to the arithmetic operation of multiplica­tion, let's observe the following multiplications. Sample Set D Example 6.42.  Find 4.1 of 3.8. Translating "of" to "×", we get Thus, 4.1 of 3.8 is 15.58. Example 6.43.  Find 0.95 of the sum of 2.6 and 0.8. We first find the sum of 2.6 and 0.8. Now find 0.95 of 3.4 Thus, 0.95 of (2.6 + 0.8) is 3.230. Practice Set D Exercise 6.6.18. (Go to Solution) Find 2.8 of 6.4. Exercise 6.6.19. (Go to Solution) Find 0.1 of 1.3. Exercise 6.6.20. (Go to Solution) Find 1.01 of 3.6. Exercise 6.6.21. (Go to Solution) Find 0.004 of 0.0009. Exercise 6.6.22. (Go to Solution) Find 0.83 of 12. Exercise 6.6.23. (Go to Solution) Find 1.1 of the sum of 8.6 and 4.2.  ||  || The Logic Behind the Method As we have done with addition, subtraction, and multiplication of decimals, we will study a method of division of decimals by converting them to fractions, then we will make a general rule. We will proceed by using this example: Divide 196.8 by 6. We have, up to this point, divided 196.8 by 6 and have gotten a quotient of 32 with a remainder of 4. If we follow our intuition and bring down the .8, we have the division 4.8÷6. Thus, 4.8÷6 = .8. Now, our intuition and experience with division direct us to place the .8 immedi­ately to the right of 32. From these observations, we suggest the following method of division.  || A Method of Dividing a Decimal by a Nonzero Whole Number Method of Dividing a Decimal by a Nonzero Whole Number To divide a decimal by a nonzero whole number: Write a decimal point above the division line and directly over the decimal point of the dividend. Proceed to divide as if both numbers were whole numbers. If, in the quotient, the first nonzero digit occurs to the right of the decimal point, but not in the tenths position, place a zero in each position between the decimal point and the first nonzero digit of the quotient. Sample Set A Find the decimal representations of the following quotients. Example 6.44.  114.1÷7 = 7 Thus, 114.1÷7 = 16.3. Check: If 114.1÷7 = 16.3, then 7⋅16.3 should equal 114.1. Example 6.45.  0.02068÷4 Place zeros in the tenths and hundredths positions. (See Step 3.) Thus, 0.02068÷4 = 0.00517. Practice Set A Find the following quotients. Exercise 6.7.1. (Go to Solution) 184.5÷3 Exercise 6.7.2. (Go to Solution) 16.956÷9 Exercise 6.7.3. (Go to Solution) 0.2964÷4 Exercise 6.7.4. (Go to Solution) 0.000496÷8  || A Method of Dividing a Decimal By a Nonzero Decimal Now that we can divide decimals by nonzero whole numbers, we are in a position to divide decimals by a nonzero decimal. We will do so by converting a division by a decimal into a division by a whole number, a process with which we are already familiar. We'll illustrate the method using this example: Divide 4.32 by 1.8. Let's look at this problem as . The divisor is . We can convert into a whole number if we multiply it by 10. But, we know from our experience with fractions, that if we multiply the denomina­tor of a fraction by a nonzero whole number, we must multiply the numerator by that same nonzero whole number. Thus, when converting to a whole number by multiplying it by 10, we must also multiply the numerator by 10. We have converted the division 4.32÷1.8 into the division 43.2÷18, that is, Notice what has occurred. If we "move" the decimal point of the divisor one digit to the right, we must also "move" the decimal point of the dividend one place to the right. The word "move" actually indicates the process of multiplication by a power of 10. Method of Dividing a Decimal by a Decimal Number To divide a decimal by a nonzero decimal, Convert the divisor to a whole number by moving the decimal point to the position immediately to the right of the divisor's last digit. Move the decimal point of the dividend to the right the same number of digits it was moved in the divisor. Set the decimal point in the quotient by placing a decimal point directly above the newly located decimal point in the dividend. Divide as usual. Sample Set B Find the following quotients. Example 6.46.  32.66÷7.1 The divisor has one decimal place. Move the decimal point of both the divisor and the dividend 1 place to the right. Set the decimal point. Divide as usual. Thus, 32.66÷7.1 = 4.6. Check: 32.66÷7.1 = 4.6 if 4.6 × 7.1 = 32.66 Example 6.47.  1.0773÷0.513 The divisor has 3 decimal places. Move the decimal point of both the divisor and the dividend 3 places to the right. Set the decimal place and divide. Thus, 1.0773÷0.513 = 2.1. Checking by multiplying 2.1 and 0.513 will convince us that we have obtained the correct result. (Try it.) Example 6.48.  12÷0.00032 The divisor has 5 decimal places. Move the decimal point of both the divisor and the dividend 5 places to the right. We will need to add 5 zeros to 12. Set the decimal place and divide. This is now the same as the division of whole numbers. Checking assures us that 12÷0.00032 = 37,500. Practice Set B Find the decimal representation of each quotient. Exercise 6.7.5. (Go to Solution) 9.176÷3.1 Exercise 6.7.6. (Go to Solution) 5.0838÷1.11 Exercise 6.7.7. (Go to Solution) 16÷0.0004 Exercise 6.7.8. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷10 Exercise 6.7.9. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷100 Exercise 6.7.10. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷1,000 Exercise 6.7.11. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷10,000  || Calculators Calculators can be useful for finding quotients of decimal numbers. As we have seen with the other calculator operations, we can sometimes expect only approximate results. We are alerted to approximate results when the calculator display is filled with digits. We know it is possible that the operation may produce more digits than the calculator has the ability to show. For example, the multiplication produces 5 + 4 = 9 decimal places. An eight-digit display calculator only has the ability to show eight digits, and an approximation results. The way to recognize a possible approximation is illustrated in problem 3 of the next sample set. Sample Set C Find each quotient using a calculator. If the result is an approximation, round to five decimal places. Example 6.49.  12.596÷4.7 Table 6.30.     Display Reads Type 12.596 12.596 Press ÷ 12.596 Type 4.7 4.7 Press = 2.68 Since the display is not filled, we expect this to be an accurate result. Example 6.50.  0.5696376÷0.00123 Table 6.31.     Display Reads Type .5696376 0.5696376 Press ÷ 0.5696376 Type .00123 0.00123 Press = 463.12 Since the display is not filled, we expect this result to be accurate. Example 6.51.  0.8215199÷4.113 Table 6.32.     Display Reads Type .8215199 0.8215199 Press ÷ 0.8215199 Type 4.113 4.113 Press = 0.1997373 There are EIGHT DIGITS — DISPLAY FILLED! BE AWARE OF POSSIBLE APPROXI­MATIONS. We can check for a possible approximation in the following way. Since the division can be checked by multiplying 4 and 3, we can check our division by performing the multiplication This multiplication produces 3 + 7 = 10 decimal digits. But our suspected quotient contains only 8 decimal digits. We conclude that the answer is an approximation. Then, rounding to five decimal places, we get 0.19974. Practice Set C Find each quotient using a calculator. If the result is an approximation, round to four decimal places. Exercise 6.7.12. (Go to Solution) 42.49778÷14.261 Exercise 6.7.13. (Go to Solution) 0.001455÷0.291 Exercise 6.7.14. (Go to Solution) 7.459085÷2.1192  || Dividing Decimals By Powers of 10 In problems 4 and 5 of the section called “Practice Set B”, we found the decimal representations of 8,162.41÷10 and 8,162.41÷100. Let's look at each of these again and then, from these observations, make a general statement regarding division of a decimal num­ber by a power of 10. Thus, 8,162.41÷10 = 816.241. Notice that the divisor 10 is composed of one 0 and that the quotient 816.241 can be obtained from the dividend 8,162.41 by moving the decimal point one place to the left. Thus, 8,162.41÷100 = 81.6241. Notice that the divisor 100 is composed of two 0's and that the quotient 81.6241 can be obtained from the dividend by moving the decimal point two places to the left. Using these observations, we can suggest the following method for dividing decimal numbers by powers of 10. Dividing a Decimal Fraction by a Power of 10 To divide a decimal fraction by a power of 10, move the decimal point of the decimal fraction to the left as many places as there are zeros in the power of 10. Add zeros if necessary. Sample Set D Find each quotient. Example 6.52.  9,248.6÷100 Since there are 2 zeros in this power of 10, we move the decimal point 2 places to the left. Example 6.53.  3.28÷10,000 Since there are 4 zeros in this power of 10, we move the decimal point 4 places to the left. To do so, we need to add three zeros. Practice Set D Find the decimal representation of each quotient. Exercise 6.7.15. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷10 Exercise 6.7.16. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷100 Exercise 6.7.17. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷1,000 Exercise 6.7.18. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷10,000 Exercise 6.7.19. (Go to Solution) 646.18÷100 Exercise 6.7.20. (Go to Solution) 21.926÷1,000  ||  || Nonterminating Divisions Let's consider two divisions: 9.8 ÷ 3.5 4÷ 3 Terminating Divisions Previously, we have considered divisions like example 1, which is an example of a terminating division. A terminating division is a division in which the quotient terminates after several divisions (the remainder is zero). Exact Divisions The quotient in this problem terminates in the tenths position. Terminating divi­sions are also called exact divisions. Nonterminating Division The division in example 2 is an example of a nonterminating division. A non-terminating division is a division that, regardless of how far we carry it out, always has a remainder. Repeating Decimal We can see that the pattern in the brace is repeated endlessly. Such a decimal quotient is called a repeating decimal.  || Denoting Nonterminating Quotients We use three dots at the end of a number to indicate that a pattern repeats itself endlessly. 4 ÷ 3 = 1 . 333 … Another way, aside from using three dots, of denoting an endlessly repeating pattern is to write a bar ( ¯ ) above the repeating sequence of digits. The bar indicates the repeated pattern of 3. Repeating patterns in a division can be discovered in two ways: As the division process progresses, should the remainder ever be the same as the dividend, it can be concluded that the division is nonterminating and that the pattern in the quotient repeats. This fact is illustrated in Example 6.54 of the section called “Sample Set A”. As the division process progresses, should the "product, difference" pattern ever repeat two consecutive times, it can be concluded that the division is nonter­minating and that the pattern in the quotient repeats. This fact is illustrated in Example 6.55 and 4 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Carry out each division until the repeating pattern can be determined. Example 6.54.  100 ÷ 27 When the remainder is identical to the dividend, the division is nonterminating. This implies that the pattern in the quotient repeats. 100÷27 = 3.70370370… The repeating block is 703. Example 6.55.  1 ÷ 9 We see that this “product, difference”pattern repeats. We can conclude that the division is nonterminating and that the quotient repeats. 1÷9 = 0.111… The repeating block is 1. Example 6.56.  Divide 2 by 11 and round to 3 decimal places. Since we wish to round the quotient to three decimal places, we'll carry out the division so that the quotient has four decimal places. The number .1818 rounded to three decimal places is .182. Thus, correct to three decimal places, 2 ÷ 11 = 0 . 182 Example 6.57.  Divide 1 by 6. We see that this “product, difference” pattern repeats. We can conclude that the division is nonterminating and that the quotient repeats at the 6. Practice Set A Carry out the following divisions until the repeating pattern can be determined. Exercise 6.8.1. (Go to Solution) 1÷3 Exercise 6.8.2. (Go to Solution) 5÷6 Exercise 6.8.3. (Go to Solution) 11÷9 Exercise 6.8.4. (Go to Solution) 17÷9 Exercise 6.8.5. (Go to Solution) Divide 7 by 6 and round to 2 decimal places. Exercise 6.8.6. (Go to Solution) Divide 400 by 11 and round to 4 decimal places.  || Exercise for Review Exercise 6.8.37. (Go to Solution) (Section 1.2) In the number 411,105, how many ten thousands are there? Exercise 6.8.38. (Section 2.3) Find the quotient, if it exists. 17÷0. Exercise 6.8.39. (Go to Solution) (Section 3.6) Find the least common multiple of 45, 63, and 98. Exercise 6.8.40. (Section 6.5) Subtract 8.01629 from 9.00187 and round the result to three decimal places. Exercise 6.8.41. (Go to Solution) (Section 6.7) Find the quotient. 104.06÷12.1.  ||  ||  || 
book4_ch06_2	 || Digits to the Right of the Ones Position We began our study of arithmetic (Section 1.2) by noting that our number system is called a positional number system with base ten. We also noted that each position has a particular value. We observed that each position has ten times the value of the position to its right. This means that each position has the value of the position to its left. Thus, a digit written to the right of the units position must have a value of of 1. Recalling that the word "of" translates to multiplication (⋅), we can see that the value of the first position to the right of the units digit is of 1, or The value of the second position to the right of the units digit is of , or The value of the third position to the right of the units digit is of , or This pattern continues. We can now see that if we were to write digits in positions to the right of the units positions, those positions have values that are fractions. Not only do the positions have fractional values, but the fractional values are all powers of 10 (10,102 ,103 ,…).  || Decimal Fractions Decimal Point, Decimal If we are to write numbers with digits appearing to the right of the units digit, we must have a way of denoting where the whole number part ends and the fractional part begins. Mathematicians denote the separation point of the units digit and the tenths digit by writing a decimal point. The word decimal comes from the Latin prefix "deci" which means ten, and we use it because we use a base ten number system. Numbers written in this form are called decimal fractions, or more simply, decimals. Notice that decimal numbers have the suffix "th." Decimal Fraction A decimal fraction is a fraction in which the denominator is a power of 10. The following numbers are examples of decimals. 42.6 The 6 is in the tenths position. 9.8014 The 8 is in the tenths position. The 0 is in the hundredths position. The 1 is in the thousandths position. The 4 is in the ten thousandths position. 0.93 The 9 is in the tenths position. The 3 is in the hundredths position. Note Quite often a zero is inserted in front of a decimal point (in the units position) of a decimal fraction that has a value less than one. This zero helps keep us from overlooking the decimal point. 0.7 The 7 is in the tenths position. Note We can insert zeros to the right of the right-most digit in a decimal fraction without changing the value of the number.  || Reading Decimal Fractions Reading a Decimal Fraction To read a decimal fraction, Read the whole number part as usual. (If the whole number is less than 1, omit steps 1 and 2.) Read the decimal point as the word "and." Read the number to the right of the decimal point as if it were a whole number. Say the name of the position of the last digit. Sample Set A Read the following numbers. Example 6.1.  6.8 Note Some people read this as "six point eight." This phrasing gets the message across, but technically, "six and eight tenths" is the correct phrasing. Example 6.2.  14.116 Example 6.3.  0.0019 Example 6.4.  81 Eighty-one In this problem, the indication is that any whole number is a decimal fraction. Whole numbers are often called decimal numbers. 81 = 81 . 0 Practice Set A Read the following decimal fractions. Exercise 6.2.1. (Go to Solution) 12.9 Exercise 6.2.2. (Go to Solution) 4.86 Exercise 6.2.3. (Go to Solution) 7.00002 Exercise 6.2.4. (Go to Solution) 0.030405  || Writing Decimal Fractions Writing a Decimal Fraction To write a decimal fraction, Write the whole number part. Write a decimal point for the word "and." Write the decimal part of the number so that the right-most digit appears in the position indicated in the word name. If necessary, insert zeros to the right of the decimal point in order that the right-most digit appears in the correct position. Sample Set B Write each number. Example 6.5.  Thirty-one and twelve hundredths. The decimal position indicated is the hundredths position. 31.12 Example 6.6.  Two and three hundred-thousandths. The decimal position indicated is the hundred thousandths. We'll need to insert enough zeros to the immediate right of the decimal point in order to locate the 3 in the correct position. 2.00003 Example 6.7.  Six thousand twenty-seven and one hundred four millionths. The decimal position indicated is the millionths position. We'll need to insert enough zeros to the immediate right of the decimal point in order to locate the 4 in the correct position. 6,027.000104 Example 6.8.  Seventeen hundredths. The decimal position indicated is the hundredths position. 0.17 Practice Set B Write each decimal fraction. Exercise 6.2.5. (Go to Solution) Three hundred six and forty-nine hundredths. Exercise 6.2.6. (Go to Solution) Nine and four thousandths. Exercise 6.2.7. (Go to Solution) Sixty-one millionths.  || 
book4_ch06_2_2	Digits to the Right of the Ones Position We began our study of arithmetic (Section 1.2) by noting that our number system is called a positional number system with base ten. We also noted that each position has a particular value. We observed that each position has ten times the value of the position to its right. This means that each position has the value of the position to its left. Thus, a digit written to the right of the units position must have a value of of 1. Recalling that the word "of" translates to multiplication (⋅), we can see that the value of the first position to the right of the units digit is of 1, or The value of the second position to the right of the units digit is of , or The value of the third position to the right of the units digit is of , or This pattern continues. We can now see that if we were to write digits in positions to the right of the units positions, those positions have values that are fractions. Not only do the positions have fractional values, but the fractional values are all powers of 10 (10,102 ,103 ,…). Digits to the Right of the Ones Position We began our study of arithmetic (Section 1.2) by noting that our number system is called a positional number system with base ten. We also noted that each position has a particular value. We observed that each position has ten times the value of the position to its right. This means that each position has the value of the position to its left. Thus, a digit written to the right of the units position must have a value of of 1. Recalling that the word "of" translates to multiplication (⋅), we can see that the value of the first position to the right of the units digit is of 1, or The value of the second position to the right of the units digit is of , or The value of the third position to the right of the units digit is of , or This pattern continues. We can now see that if we were to write digits in positions to the right of the units positions, those positions have values that are fractions. Not only do the positions have fractional values, but the fractional values are all powers of 10 (10,102 ,103 ,…).  || 
book4_ch06_2_3	Decimal Fractions Decimal Point, Decimal If we are to write numbers with digits appearing to the right of the units digit, we must have a way of denoting where the whole number part ends and the fractional part begins. Mathematicians denote the separation point of the units digit and the tenths digit by writing a decimal point. The word decimal comes from the Latin prefix "deci" which means ten, and we use it because we use a base ten number system. Numbers written in this form are called decimal fractions, or more simply, decimals. Notice that decimal numbers have the suffix "th." Decimal Fraction A decimal fraction is a fraction in which the denominator is a power of 10. The following numbers are examples of decimals. 42.6 The 6 is in the tenths position. 9.8014 The 8 is in the tenths position. The 0 is in the hundredths position. The 1 is in the thousandths position. The 4 is in the ten thousandths position. 0.93 The 9 is in the tenths position. The 3 is in the hundredths position. Note Quite often a zero is inserted in front of a decimal point (in the units position) of a decimal fraction that has a value less than one. This zero helps keep us from overlooking the decimal point. 0.7 The 7 is in the tenths position. Note We can insert zeros to the right of the right-most digit in a decimal fraction without changing the value of the number. Decimal Fractions Decimal Point, Decimal If we are to write numbers with digits appearing to the right of the units digit, we must have a way of denoting where the whole number part ends and the fractional part begins. Mathematicians denote the separation point of the units digit and the tenths digit by writing a decimal point. The word decimal comes from the Latin prefix "deci" which means ten, and we use it because we use a base ten number system. Numbers written in this form are called decimal fractions, or more simply, decimals. Notice that decimal numbers have the suffix "th." Decimal Fraction A decimal fraction is a fraction in which the denominator is a power of 10. The following numbers are examples of decimals. 42.6 The 6 is in the tenths position. 9.8014 The 8 is in the tenths position. The 0 is in the hundredths position. The 1 is in the thousandths position. The 4 is in the ten thousandths position. 0.93 The 9 is in the tenths position. The 3 is in the hundredths position. Note Quite often a zero is inserted in front of a decimal point (in the units position) of a decimal fraction that has a value less than one. This zero helps keep us from overlooking the decimal point. 0.7 The 7 is in the tenths position. Note We can insert zeros to the right of the right-most digit in a decimal fraction without changing the value of the number.  || 
book4_ch06_2_4	Reading Decimal Fractions Reading a Decimal Fraction To read a decimal fraction, Read the whole number part as usual. (If the whole number is less than 1, omit steps 1 and 2.) Read the decimal point as the word "and." Read the number to the right of the decimal point as if it were a whole number. Say the name of the position of the last digit. Sample Set A Read the following numbers. Example 6.1.  6.8 Note Some people read this as "six point eight." This phrasing gets the message across, but technically, "six and eight tenths" is the correct phrasing. Example 6.2.  14.116 Example 6.3.  0.0019 Example 6.4.  81 Eighty-one In this problem, the indication is that any whole number is a decimal fraction. Whole numbers are often called decimal numbers. 81 = 81 . 0 Practice Set A Read the following decimal fractions. Exercise 6.2.1. (Go to Solution) 12.9 Exercise 6.2.2. (Go to Solution) 4.86 Exercise 6.2.3. (Go to Solution) 7.00002 Exercise 6.2.4. (Go to Solution) 0.030405 Reading Decimal Fractions Reading a Decimal Fraction To read a decimal fraction, Read the whole number part as usual. (If the whole number is less than 1, omit steps 1 and 2.) Read the decimal point as the word "and." Read the number to the right of the decimal point as if it were a whole number. Say the name of the position of the last digit. Sample Set A Read the following numbers. Example 6.1.  6.8 Note Some people read this as "six point eight." This phrasing gets the message across, but technically, "six and eight tenths" is the correct phrasing. Example 6.2.  14.116 Example 6.3.  0.0019 Example 6.4.  81 Eighty-one In this problem, the indication is that any whole number is a decimal fraction. Whole numbers are often called decimal numbers. 81 = 81 . 0 Practice Set A Read the following decimal fractions. Exercise 6.2.1. (Go to Solution) 12.9 Exercise 6.2.2. (Go to Solution) 4.86 Exercise 6.2.3. (Go to Solution) 7.00002 Exercise 6.2.4. (Go to Solution) 0.030405  || 
book4_ch06_2_7	Writing Decimal Fractions Writing a Decimal Fraction To write a decimal fraction, Write the whole number part. Write a decimal point for the word "and." Write the decimal part of the number so that the right-most digit appears in the position indicated in the word name. If necessary, insert zeros to the right of the decimal point in order that the right-most digit appears in the correct position. Sample Set B Write each number. Example 6.5.  Thirty-one and twelve hundredths. The decimal position indicated is the hundredths position. 31.12 Example 6.6.  Two and three hundred-thousandths. The decimal position indicated is the hundred thousandths. We'll need to insert enough zeros to the immediate right of the decimal point in order to locate the 3 in the correct position. 2.00003 Example 6.7.  Six thousand twenty-seven and one hundred four millionths. The decimal position indicated is the millionths position. We'll need to insert enough zeros to the immediate right of the decimal point in order to locate the 4 in the correct position. 6,027.000104 Example 6.8.  Seventeen hundredths. The decimal position indicated is the hundredths position. 0.17 Practice Set B Write each decimal fraction. Exercise 6.2.5. (Go to Solution) Three hundred six and forty-nine hundredths. Exercise 6.2.6. (Go to Solution) Nine and four thousandths. Exercise 6.2.7. (Go to Solution) Sixty-one millionths. Writing Decimal Fractions Writing a Decimal Fraction To write a decimal fraction, Write the whole number part. Write a decimal point for the word "and." Write the decimal part of the number so that the right-most digit appears in the position indicated in the word name. If necessary, insert zeros to the right of the decimal point in order that the right-most digit appears in the correct position. Sample Set B Write each number. Example 6.5.  Thirty-one and twelve hundredths. The decimal position indicated is the hundredths position. 31.12 Example 6.6.  Two and three hundred-thousandths. The decimal position indicated is the hundred thousandths. We'll need to insert enough zeros to the immediate right of the decimal point in order to locate the 3 in the correct position. 2.00003 Example 6.7.  Six thousand twenty-seven and one hundred four millionths. The decimal position indicated is the millionths position. We'll need to insert enough zeros to the immediate right of the decimal point in order to locate the 4 in the correct position. 6,027.000104 Example 6.8.  Seventeen hundredths. The decimal position indicated is the hundredths position. 0.17 Practice Set B Write each decimal fraction. Exercise 6.2.5. (Go to Solution) Three hundred six and forty-nine hundredths. Exercise 6.2.6. (Go to Solution) Nine and four thousandths. Exercise 6.2.7. (Go to Solution) Sixty-one millionths.  || 
book4_ch06_3	 || Converting an Ordinary Decimal to a Fraction We can convert a decimal fraction to a fraction, essentially, by saying it in words, then writing what we say. We may have to reduce that fraction. Sample Set A Convert each decimal fraction to a proper fraction or a mixed number. Example 6.9.  Reading: six tenths→ . Reduce: . Example 6.10.  Reading: nine hundred three thousands→ . Example 6.11.  Reading: eighteen and sixty-one hundredths→ . Example 6.12.  Reading: five hundred eight and five ten thousandths→ . Reduce: . Practice Set A Convert the following decimals to fractions or mixed numbers. Be sure to reduce. Exercise 6.3.1. (Go to Solution) 16.84 Exercise 6.3.2. (Go to Solution) 0.513 Exercise 6.3.3. (Go to Solution) 6,646.0107 Exercise 6.3.4. (Go to Solution) 1.1  || Converting A Complex Decimal to a Fraction Complex Decimals Numbers such as are called complex decimals. We can also convert com­plex decimals to fractions. Sample Set B Convert the following complex decimals to fractions. Example 6.13.  The appears to occur in the thousands position, but it is referring to of a hundredth. So, we read as "eleven and two-thirds hundredths." Example 6.14.  Note that Practice Set B Convert each complex decimal to a fraction or mixed number. Be sure to reduce. Exercise 6.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 6.3.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 6.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 6.3.8. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch06_3_2	Converting an Ordinary Decimal to a Fraction We can convert a decimal fraction to a fraction, essentially, by saying it in words, then writing what we say. We may have to reduce that fraction. Sample Set A Convert each decimal fraction to a proper fraction or a mixed number. Example 6.9.  Reading: six tenths→ . Reduce: . Example 6.10.  Reading: nine hundred three thousands→ . Example 6.11.  Reading: eighteen and sixty-one hundredths→ . Example 6.12.  Reading: five hundred eight and five ten thousandths→ . Reduce: . Practice Set A Convert the following decimals to fractions or mixed numbers. Be sure to reduce. Exercise 6.3.1. (Go to Solution) 16.84 Exercise 6.3.2. (Go to Solution) 0.513 Exercise 6.3.3. (Go to Solution) 6,646.0107 Exercise 6.3.4. (Go to Solution) 1.1 Converting an Ordinary Decimal to a Fraction We can convert a decimal fraction to a fraction, essentially, by saying it in words, then writing what we say. We may have to reduce that fraction. Sample Set A Convert each decimal fraction to a proper fraction or a mixed number. Example 6.9.  Reading: six tenths→ . Reduce: . Example 6.10.  Reading: nine hundred three thousands→ . Example 6.11.  Reading: eighteen and sixty-one hundredths→ . Example 6.12.  Reading: five hundred eight and five ten thousandths→ . Reduce: . Practice Set A Convert the following decimals to fractions or mixed numbers. Be sure to reduce. Exercise 6.3.1. (Go to Solution) 16.84 Exercise 6.3.2. (Go to Solution) 0.513 Exercise 6.3.3. (Go to Solution) 6,646.0107 Exercise 6.3.4. (Go to Solution) 1.1  || 
book4_ch06_3_5	Converting A Complex Decimal to a Fraction Complex Decimals Numbers such as are called complex decimals. We can also convert com­plex decimals to fractions. Sample Set B Convert the following complex decimals to fractions. Example 6.13.  The appears to occur in the thousands position, but it is referring to of a hundredth. So, we read as "eleven and two-thirds hundredths." Example 6.14.  Note that Practice Set B Convert each complex decimal to a fraction or mixed number. Be sure to reduce. Exercise 6.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 6.3.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 6.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 6.3.8. (Go to Solution) Converting A Complex Decimal to a Fraction Complex Decimals Numbers such as are called complex decimals. We can also convert com­plex decimals to fractions. Sample Set B Convert the following complex decimals to fractions. Example 6.13.  The appears to occur in the thousands position, but it is referring to of a hundredth. So, we read as "eleven and two-thirds hundredths." Example 6.14.  Note that Practice Set B Convert each complex decimal to a fraction or mixed number. Be sure to reduce. Exercise 6.3.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 6.3.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 6.3.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 6.3.8. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch06_4	 || Rounding Decimal Numbers We first considered the concept of rounding numbers in Section 1.4 where our concern with rounding was related to whole numbers only. With a few minor changes, we can apply the same rules of rounding to decimals. To round a decimal to a particular position: Mark the position of the round-off digit (with an arrow or check). Note whether the digit to the immediate right of the marked digit is less than 5. If so, leave the round-off digit unchanged. 5 or greater. If so, add 1 to the round-off digit. If the round-off digit is to the right of the decimal point, eliminate all the digits to its right. to the left of the decimal point, replace all the digits between it and the decimal point with zeros and eliminate the decimal point and all the decimal digits. Sample Set A Round each decimal to the specified position. (The numbers in parentheses indicate which step is being used.) Example 6.15.  Round 32.116 to the nearest hundredth. 1) 2b) The digit immediately to the right is 6, and 6 > 5, so we add 1 to the round-off digit: 1 + 1 = 2 3a) The round-off digit is to the right of the decimal point, so we eliminate all digits to its right. 32.12 The number 32.116 rounded to the nearest hundredth is 32.12. Example 6.16.  Round 633.14216 to the nearest hundred. 1) 2a) The digit immediately to the right is 3, and 3 < 5 so we leave the round-off digit unchanged. 3b) The round-off digit is to the left of 0, so we replace all the digits between it and the decimal point with zeros and eliminate the decimal point and all the decimal digits. 600 The number 633.14216 rounded to the nearest hundred is 600. Example 6.17.  1,729.63 rounded to the nearest ten is 1,730. Example 6.18.  1.0144 rounded to the nearest tenth is 1.0. Example 6.19.  60.98 rounded to the nearest one is 61. Sometimes we hear a phrase such as "round to three decimal places." This phrase means that the round-off digit is the third decimal digit (the digit in the thousandths position). Example 6.20.  67.129 rounded to the second decimal place is 67.13. Example 6.21.  67.129558 rounded to 3 decimal places is 67.130. Practice Set A Round each decimal to the specified position. Exercise 6.4.1. (Go to Solution) 4.816 to the nearest hundredth. Exercise 6.4.2. (Go to Solution) 0.35928 to the nearest ten thousandths. Exercise 6.4.3. (Go to Solution) 82.1 to the nearest one. Exercise 6.4.4. (Go to Solution) 753.98 to the nearest hundred. Exercise 6.4.5. (Go to Solution) Round 43.99446 to three decimal places. Exercise 6.4.6. (Go to Solution) Round 105.019997 to four decimal places. Exercise 6.4.7. (Go to Solution) Round 99.9999 to two decimal places.  || 
book4_ch06_4_2	Rounding Decimal Numbers We first considered the concept of rounding numbers in Section 1.4 where our concern with rounding was related to whole numbers only. With a few minor changes, we can apply the same rules of rounding to decimals. To round a decimal to a particular position: Mark the position of the round-off digit (with an arrow or check). Note whether the digit to the immediate right of the marked digit is less than 5. If so, leave the round-off digit unchanged. 5 or greater. If so, add 1 to the round-off digit. If the round-off digit is to the right of the decimal point, eliminate all the digits to its right. to the left of the decimal point, replace all the digits between it and the decimal point with zeros and eliminate the decimal point and all the decimal digits. Sample Set A Round each decimal to the specified position. (The numbers in parentheses indicate which step is being used.) Example 6.15.  Round 32.116 to the nearest hundredth. 1) 2b) The digit immediately to the right is 6, and 6 > 5, so we add 1 to the round-off digit: 1 + 1 = 2 3a) The round-off digit is to the right of the decimal point, so we eliminate all digits to its right. 32.12 The number 32.116 rounded to the nearest hundredth is 32.12. Example 6.16.  Round 633.14216 to the nearest hundred. 1) 2a) The digit immediately to the right is 3, and 3 < 5 so we leave the round-off digit unchanged. 3b) The round-off digit is to the left of 0, so we replace all the digits between it and the decimal point with zeros and eliminate the decimal point and all the decimal digits. 600 The number 633.14216 rounded to the nearest hundred is 600. Example 6.17.  1,729.63 rounded to the nearest ten is 1,730. Example 6.18.  1.0144 rounded to the nearest tenth is 1.0. Example 6.19.  60.98 rounded to the nearest one is 61. Sometimes we hear a phrase such as "round to three decimal places." This phrase means that the round-off digit is the third decimal digit (the digit in the thousandths position). Example 6.20.  67.129 rounded to the second decimal place is 67.13. Example 6.21.  67.129558 rounded to 3 decimal places is 67.130. Practice Set A Round each decimal to the specified position. Exercise 6.4.1. (Go to Solution) 4.816 to the nearest hundredth. Exercise 6.4.2. (Go to Solution) 0.35928 to the nearest ten thousandths. Exercise 6.4.3. (Go to Solution) 82.1 to the nearest one. Exercise 6.4.4. (Go to Solution) 753.98 to the nearest hundred. Exercise 6.4.5. (Go to Solution) Round 43.99446 to three decimal places. Exercise 6.4.6. (Go to Solution) Round 105.019997 to four decimal places. Exercise 6.4.7. (Go to Solution) Round 99.9999 to two decimal places. Rounding Decimal Numbers We first considered the concept of rounding numbers in Section 1.4 where our concern with rounding was related to whole numbers only. With a few minor changes, we can apply the same rules of rounding to decimals. To round a decimal to a particular position: Mark the position of the round-off digit (with an arrow or check). Note whether the digit to the immediate right of the marked digit is less than 5. If so, leave the round-off digit unchanged. 5 or greater. If so, add 1 to the round-off digit. If the round-off digit is to the right of the decimal point, eliminate all the digits to its right. to the left of the decimal point, replace all the digits between it and the decimal point with zeros and eliminate the decimal point and all the decimal digits. Sample Set A Round each decimal to the specified position. (The numbers in parentheses indicate which step is being used.) Example 6.15.  Round 32.116 to the nearest hundredth. 1) 2b) The digit immediately to the right is 6, and 6 > 5, so we add 1 to the round-off digit: 1 + 1 = 2 3a) The round-off digit is to the right of the decimal point, so we eliminate all digits to its right. 32.12 The number 32.116 rounded to the nearest hundredth is 32.12. Example 6.16.  Round 633.14216 to the nearest hundred. 1) 2a) The digit immediately to the right is 3, and 3 < 5 so we leave the round-off digit unchanged. 3b) The round-off digit is to the left of 0, so we replace all the digits between it and the decimal point with zeros and eliminate the decimal point and all the decimal digits. 600 The number 633.14216 rounded to the nearest hundred is 600. Example 6.17.  1,729.63 rounded to the nearest ten is 1,730. Example 6.18.  1.0144 rounded to the nearest tenth is 1.0. Example 6.19.  60.98 rounded to the nearest one is 61. Sometimes we hear a phrase such as "round to three decimal places." This phrase means that the round-off digit is the third decimal digit (the digit in the thousandths position). Example 6.20.  67.129 rounded to the second decimal place is 67.13. Example 6.21.  67.129558 rounded to 3 decimal places is 67.130. Practice Set A Round each decimal to the specified position. Exercise 6.4.1. (Go to Solution) 4.816 to the nearest hundredth. Exercise 6.4.2. (Go to Solution) 0.35928 to the nearest ten thousandths. Exercise 6.4.3. (Go to Solution) 82.1 to the nearest one. Exercise 6.4.4. (Go to Solution) 753.98 to the nearest hundred. Exercise 6.4.5. (Go to Solution) Round 43.99446 to three decimal places. Exercise 6.4.6. (Go to Solution) Round 105.019997 to four decimal places. Exercise 6.4.7. (Go to Solution) Round 99.9999 to two decimal places.  || 
book4_ch06_5	 || The Logic Behind the Method Consider the sum of 4.37 and 3.22. Changing each decimal to a fraction, we have Performing the addition, we get Thus, 4.37 + 3.22 = 7.59.  || The Method of Adding and Subtracting Decimals When writing the previous addition, we could have written the numbers in col­umns. This agrees with our previous result. From this observation, we can suggest a method for adding and subtracting decimal numbers. Method of Adding and Subtracting Decimals To add or subtract decimals: Align the numbers vertically so that the decimal points line up under each other and the corresponding decimal positions are in the same column. Add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Place a decimal point in the resulting sum or difference directly under the other decimal points. Sample Set A Find the following sums and differences. Example 6.22.  9.813 + 2.140 Example 6.23.  841.0056 + 47.016 + 19.058 To insure that the columns align properly, we can write a 0 in the position at the end of the numbers 47.016 and 19.058 without changing their values. Example 6.24.  1.314 – 0.58 Example 6.25.  16.01 – 7.053 Example 6.26.  Find the sum of 6.88106 and 3.5219 and round it to three decimal places. We need to round the sum to the thousandths position. Since the digit in the position immediately to the right is 9, and 9>5, we get 10.403 Example 6.27.  Wendy has $643.12 in her checking account. She writes a check for $16.92. How much is her new account balance? To find the new account balance, we need to find the difference between 643.12 and 16.92. We will subtract 16.92 from 643.12. After writing a check for $16.92, Wendy now has a balance of $626.20 in her checking account. Practice Set A Find the following sums and differences. Exercise 6.5.1. (Go to Solution) 3.187 + 2.992 Exercise 6.5.2. (Go to Solution) 14.987 – 5.341 Exercise 6.5.3. (Go to Solution) 0.5261 + 1.0783 Exercise 6.5.4. (Go to Solution) 1.06 – 1.0535 Exercise 6.5.5. (Go to Solution) 16,521.07 + 9,256.15 Exercise 6.5.6. (Go to Solution) Find the sum of 11.6128 and 14.07353, and round it to two decimal places.  || Calculators The calculator can be useful for finding sums and differences of decimal numbers. However, calculators with an eight-digit display cannot be used when working with decimal numbers that contain more than eight digits, or when the sum results in more than eight digits. In practice, an eight-place decimal will seldom be encoun­tered. There are some inexpensive calculators that can handle 13 decimal places. Sample Set B Use a calculator to find each sum or difference. Example 6.28.  42.0638 + 126.551 Table 6.16.     Display Reads Type 42.0638 42.0638 Press + 42.0638 Type 126.551 126.551 Press = 168.6148 The sum is 168.6148. Example 6.29.  Find the difference between 305.0627 and 14.29667. Table 6.17.     Display Reads Type 305.0627 305.0627 Press — 305.0627 Type 14.29667 14.29667 Press = 290.76603 The difference is 290.76603 Example 6.30.  51.07 + 3,891.001786 Since 3,891.001786 contains more than eight digits, we will be unable to use an eight-digit display calculator to perform this addition. We can, however, find the sum by hand. The sum is 3,942.071786. Practice Set B Use a calculator to perform each operation. Exercise 6.5.7. (Go to Solution) 4.286 + 8.97 Exercise 6.5.8. (Go to Solution) 452.0092 – 392.558 Exercise 6.5.9. (Go to Solution) Find the sum of 0.095 and 0.001862 Exercise 6.5.10. (Go to Solution) Find the difference between 0.5 and 0.025 Exercise 6.5.11. (Go to Solution) Find the sum of 2,776.00019 and 2,009.00012.  || 
book4_ch06_5_2	The Logic Behind the Method Consider the sum of 4.37 and 3.22. Changing each decimal to a fraction, we have Performing the addition, we get Thus, 4.37 + 3.22 = 7.59. The Logic Behind the Method Consider the sum of 4.37 and 3.22. Changing each decimal to a fraction, we have Performing the addition, we get Thus, 4.37 + 3.22 = 7.59.  || 
book4_ch06_5_3	The Method of Adding and Subtracting Decimals When writing the previous addition, we could have written the numbers in col­umns. This agrees with our previous result. From this observation, we can suggest a method for adding and subtracting decimal numbers. Method of Adding and Subtracting Decimals To add or subtract decimals: Align the numbers vertically so that the decimal points line up under each other and the corresponding decimal positions are in the same column. Add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Place a decimal point in the resulting sum or difference directly under the other decimal points. Sample Set A Find the following sums and differences. Example 6.22.  9.813 + 2.140 Example 6.23.  841.0056 + 47.016 + 19.058 To insure that the columns align properly, we can write a 0 in the position at the end of the numbers 47.016 and 19.058 without changing their values. Example 6.24.  1.314 – 0.58 Example 6.25.  16.01 – 7.053 Example 6.26.  Find the sum of 6.88106 and 3.5219 and round it to three decimal places. We need to round the sum to the thousandths position. Since the digit in the position immediately to the right is 9, and 9>5, we get 10.403 Example 6.27.  Wendy has $643.12 in her checking account. She writes a check for $16.92. How much is her new account balance? To find the new account balance, we need to find the difference between 643.12 and 16.92. We will subtract 16.92 from 643.12. After writing a check for $16.92, Wendy now has a balance of $626.20 in her checking account. Practice Set A Find the following sums and differences. Exercise 6.5.1. (Go to Solution) 3.187 + 2.992 Exercise 6.5.2. (Go to Solution) 14.987 – 5.341 Exercise 6.5.3. (Go to Solution) 0.5261 + 1.0783 Exercise 6.5.4. (Go to Solution) 1.06 – 1.0535 Exercise 6.5.5. (Go to Solution) 16,521.07 + 9,256.15 Exercise 6.5.6. (Go to Solution) Find the sum of 11.6128 and 14.07353, and round it to two decimal places. The Method of Adding and Subtracting Decimals When writing the previous addition, we could have written the numbers in col­umns. This agrees with our previous result. From this observation, we can suggest a method for adding and subtracting decimal numbers. Method of Adding and Subtracting Decimals To add or subtract decimals: Align the numbers vertically so that the decimal points line up under each other and the corresponding decimal positions are in the same column. Add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Place a decimal point in the resulting sum or difference directly under the other decimal points. Sample Set A Find the following sums and differences. Example 6.22.  9.813 + 2.140 Example 6.23.  841.0056 + 47.016 + 19.058 To insure that the columns align properly, we can write a 0 in the position at the end of the numbers 47.016 and 19.058 without changing their values. Example 6.24.  1.314 – 0.58 Example 6.25.  16.01 – 7.053 Example 6.26.  Find the sum of 6.88106 and 3.5219 and round it to three decimal places. We need to round the sum to the thousandths position. Since the digit in the position immediately to the right is 9, and 9>5, we get 10.403 Example 6.27.  Wendy has $643.12 in her checking account. She writes a check for $16.92. How much is her new account balance? To find the new account balance, we need to find the difference between 643.12 and 16.92. We will subtract 16.92 from 643.12. After writing a check for $16.92, Wendy now has a balance of $626.20 in her checking account. Practice Set A Find the following sums and differences. Exercise 6.5.1. (Go to Solution) 3.187 + 2.992 Exercise 6.5.2. (Go to Solution) 14.987 – 5.341 Exercise 6.5.3. (Go to Solution) 0.5261 + 1.0783 Exercise 6.5.4. (Go to Solution) 1.06 – 1.0535 Exercise 6.5.5. (Go to Solution) 16,521.07 + 9,256.15 Exercise 6.5.6. (Go to Solution) Find the sum of 11.6128 and 14.07353, and round it to two decimal places.  || 
book4_ch06_5_6	Calculators The calculator can be useful for finding sums and differences of decimal numbers. However, calculators with an eight-digit display cannot be used when working with decimal numbers that contain more than eight digits, or when the sum results in more than eight digits. In practice, an eight-place decimal will seldom be encoun­tered. There are some inexpensive calculators that can handle 13 decimal places. Sample Set B Use a calculator to find each sum or difference. Example 6.28.  42.0638 + 126.551 Table 6.16.     Display Reads Type 42.0638 42.0638 Press + 42.0638 Type 126.551 126.551 Press = 168.6148 The sum is 168.6148. Example 6.29.  Find the difference between 305.0627 and 14.29667. Table 6.17.     Display Reads Type 305.0627 305.0627 Press — 305.0627 Type 14.29667 14.29667 Press = 290.76603 The difference is 290.76603 Example 6.30.  51.07 + 3,891.001786 Since 3,891.001786 contains more than eight digits, we will be unable to use an eight-digit display calculator to perform this addition. We can, however, find the sum by hand. The sum is 3,942.071786. Practice Set B Use a calculator to perform each operation. Exercise 6.5.7. (Go to Solution) 4.286 + 8.97 Exercise 6.5.8. (Go to Solution) 452.0092 – 392.558 Exercise 6.5.9. (Go to Solution) Find the sum of 0.095 and 0.001862 Exercise 6.5.10. (Go to Solution) Find the difference between 0.5 and 0.025 Exercise 6.5.11. (Go to Solution) Find the sum of 2,776.00019 and 2,009.00012. Calculators The calculator can be useful for finding sums and differences of decimal numbers. However, calculators with an eight-digit display cannot be used when working with decimal numbers that contain more than eight digits, or when the sum results in more than eight digits. In practice, an eight-place decimal will seldom be encoun­tered. There are some inexpensive calculators that can handle 13 decimal places. Sample Set B Use a calculator to find each sum or difference. Example 6.28.  42.0638 + 126.551 Table 6.16.     Display Reads Type 42.0638 42.0638 Press + 42.0638 Type 126.551 126.551 Press = 168.6148 The sum is 168.6148. Example 6.29.  Find the difference between 305.0627 and 14.29667. Table 6.17.     Display Reads Type 305.0627 305.0627 Press — 305.0627 Type 14.29667 14.29667 Press = 290.76603 The difference is 290.76603 Example 6.30.  51.07 + 3,891.001786 Since 3,891.001786 contains more than eight digits, we will be unable to use an eight-digit display calculator to perform this addition. We can, however, find the sum by hand. The sum is 3,942.071786. Practice Set B Use a calculator to perform each operation. Exercise 6.5.7. (Go to Solution) 4.286 + 8.97 Exercise 6.5.8. (Go to Solution) 452.0092 – 392.558 Exercise 6.5.9. (Go to Solution) Find the sum of 0.095 and 0.001862 Exercise 6.5.10. (Go to Solution) Find the difference between 0.5 and 0.025 Exercise 6.5.11. (Go to Solution) Find the sum of 2,776.00019 and 2,009.00012.  || 
book4_ch06_6	 || The Logic Behind the Method Consider the product of 3.2 and 1.46. Changing each decimal to a fraction, we have Thus, (3.2)(1.46) = 4.672. Notice that the factor Using this observation, we can suggest that the sum of the number of decimal places in the factors equals the number of decimal places in the product.  || The Method of Multiplying Decimals Method of Multiplying Decimals To multiply decimals, Multiply the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Find the sum of the number of decimal places in the factors. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum found in step 2. Sample Set A Find the following products. Example 6.31.  6.5 ⋅ 4.3 Thus, 6.5⋅4.3 = 27.95. Example 6.32.  23.4⋅1.96 Thus, 23.4⋅1.96 = 45.864. Example 6.33.  Find the product of 0.251 and 0.00113 and round to three decimal places. Now, rounding to three decimal places, we get Practice Set A Find the following products. Exercise 6.6.1. (Go to Solution) 5.3⋅ 8.6 Exercise 6.6.2. (Go to Solution) 2.12⋅ 4.9 Exercise 6.6.3. (Go to Solution) 1.054 ⋅ 0.16 Exercise 6.6.4. (Go to Solution) 0.00031 ⋅ 0.002 Exercise 6.6.5. (Go to Solution) Find the product of 2.33 and 4.01 and round to one decimal place. Exercise 6.6.6. (Go to Solution) 10 ⋅ 5.394 Exercise 6.6.7. (Go to Solution) 100 ⋅ 5.394 Exercise 6.6.8. (Go to Solution) 1000⋅ 5.394 Exercise 6.6.9. (Go to Solution) 10,000 ⋅ 5.394  || Calculators Calculators can be used to find products of decimal numbers. However, a calculator that has only an eight-digit display may not be able to handle numbers or products that result in more than eight digits. But there are plenty of inexpensive ($50 - $75) calculators with more than eight-digit displays. Sample Set B Find the following products, if possible, using a calculator. Example 6.34.  2.58 ⋅ 8.61 Table 6.18.     Display Reads Type 2.58 2.58 Press × 2.58 Type 8.61 8.61 Press = 22.2138 The product is 22.2138. Example 6.35.  0.006 ⋅ 0.0042 Table 6.19.     Display Reads Type .006 .006 Press × .006 Type .0042 0.0042 Press = 0.0000252 We know that there will be seven decimal places in the product (since 3 + 4 = 7). Since the display shows 7 decimal places, we can assume the product is correct. Thus, the product is 0.0000252. Example 6.36.  0.0026 ⋅ 0.11976 Since we expect 4 + 5 = 9 decimal places in the product, we know that an eight-digit display calculator will not be able to provide us with the exact value. To obtain the exact value, we must use "hand technology." Suppose, however, that we agree to round off this product to three decimal places. We then need only four decimal places on the display. Table 6.20.     Display Reads Type .0026 .0026 Press × .0026 Type .11976 0.11976 Press = 0.0003114 Rounding 0.0003114 to three decimal places we get 0.000. Thus, 0.0026 ⋅ 0.11976 = 0.000 to three decimal places. Practice Set B Use a calculator to find each product. If the calculator will not provide the exact product, round the result to four decimal places. Exercise 6.6.10. (Go to Solution) 5.126 ⋅ 4.08 Exercise 6.6.11. (Go to Solution) 0.00165 ⋅ 0.04 Exercise 6.6.12. (Go to Solution) 0.5598 ⋅ 0.4281 Exercise 6.6.13. (Go to Solution) 0.000002 ⋅ 0.06  || Multiplying Decimals by Powers of 10 There is an interesting feature of multiplying decimals by powers of 10. Consider the following multiplications. Table 6.21. Multiplication Number of Zeros in the Power of 10 Number of Positions the Decimal Point Has Been Moved to the Right 10 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 83 . 15274 1 1 100 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 831 . 5274 2 2 1, 000 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 8, 315 . 274 3 3 10 , 000 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 83 , 152 . 74 4 4 Multiplying a Decimal by a Power of 10 To multiply a decimal by a power of 10, move the decimal place to the right of its current position as many places as there are zeros in the power of 10. Add zeros if necessary. Sample Set C Find the following products. Example 6.37.  100⋅34.876. Since there are 2 zeros in 100, Move the decimal point in 34.876 two places to the right. Example 6.38.  1,000⋅4.8058. Since there are 3 zeros in 1,000, move the decimal point in 4.8058 three places to the right. Example 6.39.  10,000⋅56.82. Since there are 4 zeros in 10,000, move the decimal point in 56.82 four places to the right. We will have to add two zeros in order to obtain the four places. Since there is no fractional part, we can drop the decimal point. Example 6.40.  Example 6.41.  Practice Set C Find the following products. Exercise 6.6.14. (Go to Solution) 100 ⋅ 4.27 Exercise 6.6.15. (Go to Solution) 10,000 ⋅ 16.52187 Exercise 6.6.16. (Go to Solution) (10)(0.0188) Exercise 6.6.17. (Go to Solution) (10,000,000,000)(52.7)  || Multiplication in Terms of “Of” Recalling that the word "of" translates to the arithmetic operation of multiplica­tion, let's observe the following multiplications. Sample Set D Example 6.42.  Find 4.1 of 3.8. Translating "of" to "×", we get Thus, 4.1 of 3.8 is 15.58. Example 6.43.  Find 0.95 of the sum of 2.6 and 0.8. We first find the sum of 2.6 and 0.8. Now find 0.95 of 3.4 Thus, 0.95 of (2.6 + 0.8) is 3.230. Practice Set D Exercise 6.6.18. (Go to Solution) Find 2.8 of 6.4. Exercise 6.6.19. (Go to Solution) Find 0.1 of 1.3. Exercise 6.6.20. (Go to Solution) Find 1.01 of 3.6. Exercise 6.6.21. (Go to Solution) Find 0.004 of 0.0009. Exercise 6.6.22. (Go to Solution) Find 0.83 of 12. Exercise 6.6.23. (Go to Solution) Find 1.1 of the sum of 8.6 and 4.2.  || 
book4_ch06_6_2	The Logic Behind the Method Consider the product of 3.2 and 1.46. Changing each decimal to a fraction, we have Thus, (3.2)(1.46) = 4.672. Notice that the factor Using this observation, we can suggest that the sum of the number of decimal places in the factors equals the number of decimal places in the product. The Logic Behind the Method Consider the product of 3.2 and 1.46. Changing each decimal to a fraction, we have Thus, (3.2)(1.46) = 4.672. Notice that the factor Using this observation, we can suggest that the sum of the number of decimal places in the factors equals the number of decimal places in the product.  || 
book4_ch06_6_3	The Method of Multiplying Decimals Method of Multiplying Decimals To multiply decimals, Multiply the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Find the sum of the number of decimal places in the factors. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum found in step 2. Sample Set A Find the following products. Example 6.31.  6.5 ⋅ 4.3 Thus, 6.5⋅4.3 = 27.95. Example 6.32.  23.4⋅1.96 Thus, 23.4⋅1.96 = 45.864. Example 6.33.  Find the product of 0.251 and 0.00113 and round to three decimal places. Now, rounding to three decimal places, we get Practice Set A Find the following products. Exercise 6.6.1. (Go to Solution) 5.3⋅ 8.6 Exercise 6.6.2. (Go to Solution) 2.12⋅ 4.9 Exercise 6.6.3. (Go to Solution) 1.054 ⋅ 0.16 Exercise 6.6.4. (Go to Solution) 0.00031 ⋅ 0.002 Exercise 6.6.5. (Go to Solution) Find the product of 2.33 and 4.01 and round to one decimal place. Exercise 6.6.6. (Go to Solution) 10 ⋅ 5.394 Exercise 6.6.7. (Go to Solution) 100 ⋅ 5.394 Exercise 6.6.8. (Go to Solution) 1000⋅ 5.394 Exercise 6.6.9. (Go to Solution) 10,000 ⋅ 5.394 The Method of Multiplying Decimals Method of Multiplying Decimals To multiply decimals, Multiply the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Find the sum of the number of decimal places in the factors. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum found in step 2. Sample Set A Find the following products. Example 6.31.  6.5 ⋅ 4.3 Thus, 6.5⋅4.3 = 27.95. Example 6.32.  23.4⋅1.96 Thus, 23.4⋅1.96 = 45.864. Example 6.33.  Find the product of 0.251 and 0.00113 and round to three decimal places. Now, rounding to three decimal places, we get Practice Set A Find the following products. Exercise 6.6.1. (Go to Solution) 5.3⋅ 8.6 Exercise 6.6.2. (Go to Solution) 2.12⋅ 4.9 Exercise 6.6.3. (Go to Solution) 1.054 ⋅ 0.16 Exercise 6.6.4. (Go to Solution) 0.00031 ⋅ 0.002 Exercise 6.6.5. (Go to Solution) Find the product of 2.33 and 4.01 and round to one decimal place. Exercise 6.6.6. (Go to Solution) 10 ⋅ 5.394 Exercise 6.6.7. (Go to Solution) 100 ⋅ 5.394 Exercise 6.6.8. (Go to Solution) 1000⋅ 5.394 Exercise 6.6.9. (Go to Solution) 10,000 ⋅ 5.394  || 
book4_ch06_6_6	Calculators Calculators can be used to find products of decimal numbers. However, a calculator that has only an eight-digit display may not be able to handle numbers or products that result in more than eight digits. But there are plenty of inexpensive ($50 - $75) calculators with more than eight-digit displays. Sample Set B Find the following products, if possible, using a calculator. Example 6.34.  2.58 ⋅ 8.61 Table 6.18.     Display Reads Type 2.58 2.58 Press × 2.58 Type 8.61 8.61 Press = 22.2138 The product is 22.2138. Example 6.35.  0.006 ⋅ 0.0042 Table 6.19.     Display Reads Type .006 .006 Press × .006 Type .0042 0.0042 Press = 0.0000252 We know that there will be seven decimal places in the product (since 3 + 4 = 7). Since the display shows 7 decimal places, we can assume the product is correct. Thus, the product is 0.0000252. Example 6.36.  0.0026 ⋅ 0.11976 Since we expect 4 + 5 = 9 decimal places in the product, we know that an eight-digit display calculator will not be able to provide us with the exact value. To obtain the exact value, we must use "hand technology." Suppose, however, that we agree to round off this product to three decimal places. We then need only four decimal places on the display. Table 6.20.     Display Reads Type .0026 .0026 Press × .0026 Type .11976 0.11976 Press = 0.0003114 Rounding 0.0003114 to three decimal places we get 0.000. Thus, 0.0026 ⋅ 0.11976 = 0.000 to three decimal places. Practice Set B Use a calculator to find each product. If the calculator will not provide the exact product, round the result to four decimal places. Exercise 6.6.10. (Go to Solution) 5.126 ⋅ 4.08 Exercise 6.6.11. (Go to Solution) 0.00165 ⋅ 0.04 Exercise 6.6.12. (Go to Solution) 0.5598 ⋅ 0.4281 Exercise 6.6.13. (Go to Solution) 0.000002 ⋅ 0.06 Calculators Calculators can be used to find products of decimal numbers. However, a calculator that has only an eight-digit display may not be able to handle numbers or products that result in more than eight digits. But there are plenty of inexpensive ($50 - $75) calculators with more than eight-digit displays. Sample Set B Find the following products, if possible, using a calculator. Example 6.34.  2.58 ⋅ 8.61 Table 6.18.     Display Reads Type 2.58 2.58 Press × 2.58 Type 8.61 8.61 Press = 22.2138 The product is 22.2138. Example 6.35.  0.006 ⋅ 0.0042 Table 6.19.     Display Reads Type .006 .006 Press × .006 Type .0042 0.0042 Press = 0.0000252 We know that there will be seven decimal places in the product (since 3 + 4 = 7). Since the display shows 7 decimal places, we can assume the product is correct. Thus, the product is 0.0000252. Example 6.36.  0.0026 ⋅ 0.11976 Since we expect 4 + 5 = 9 decimal places in the product, we know that an eight-digit display calculator will not be able to provide us with the exact value. To obtain the exact value, we must use "hand technology." Suppose, however, that we agree to round off this product to three decimal places. We then need only four decimal places on the display. Table 6.20.     Display Reads Type .0026 .0026 Press × .0026 Type .11976 0.11976 Press = 0.0003114 Rounding 0.0003114 to three decimal places we get 0.000. Thus, 0.0026 ⋅ 0.11976 = 0.000 to three decimal places. Practice Set B Use a calculator to find each product. If the calculator will not provide the exact product, round the result to four decimal places. Exercise 6.6.10. (Go to Solution) 5.126 ⋅ 4.08 Exercise 6.6.11. (Go to Solution) 0.00165 ⋅ 0.04 Exercise 6.6.12. (Go to Solution) 0.5598 ⋅ 0.4281 Exercise 6.6.13. (Go to Solution) 0.000002 ⋅ 0.06  || 
book4_ch06_6_9	Multiplying Decimals by Powers of 10 There is an interesting feature of multiplying decimals by powers of 10. Consider the following multiplications. Table 6.21. Multiplication Number of Zeros in the Power of 10 Number of Positions the Decimal Point Has Been Moved to the Right 10 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 83 . 15274 1 1 100 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 831 . 5274 2 2 1, 000 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 8, 315 . 274 3 3 10 , 000 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 83 , 152 . 74 4 4 Multiplying a Decimal by a Power of 10 To multiply a decimal by a power of 10, move the decimal place to the right of its current position as many places as there are zeros in the power of 10. Add zeros if necessary. Sample Set C Find the following products. Example 6.37.  100⋅34.876. Since there are 2 zeros in 100, Move the decimal point in 34.876 two places to the right. Example 6.38.  1,000⋅4.8058. Since there are 3 zeros in 1,000, move the decimal point in 4.8058 three places to the right. Example 6.39.  10,000⋅56.82. Since there are 4 zeros in 10,000, move the decimal point in 56.82 four places to the right. We will have to add two zeros in order to obtain the four places. Since there is no fractional part, we can drop the decimal point. Example 6.40.  Example 6.41.  Practice Set C Find the following products. Exercise 6.6.14. (Go to Solution) 100 ⋅ 4.27 Exercise 6.6.15. (Go to Solution) 10,000 ⋅ 16.52187 Exercise 6.6.16. (Go to Solution) (10)(0.0188) Exercise 6.6.17. (Go to Solution) (10,000,000,000)(52.7) Multiplying Decimals by Powers of 10 There is an interesting feature of multiplying decimals by powers of 10. Consider the following multiplications. Table 6.21. Multiplication Number of Zeros in the Power of 10 Number of Positions the Decimal Point Has Been Moved to the Right 10 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 83 . 15274 1 1 100 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 831 . 5274 2 2 1, 000 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 8, 315 . 274 3 3 10 , 000 ⋅ 8 . 315274 = 83 , 152 . 74 4 4 Multiplying a Decimal by a Power of 10 To multiply a decimal by a power of 10, move the decimal place to the right of its current position as many places as there are zeros in the power of 10. Add zeros if necessary. Sample Set C Find the following products. Example 6.37.  100⋅34.876. Since there are 2 zeros in 100, Move the decimal point in 34.876 two places to the right. Example 6.38.  1,000⋅4.8058. Since there are 3 zeros in 1,000, move the decimal point in 4.8058 three places to the right. Example 6.39.  10,000⋅56.82. Since there are 4 zeros in 10,000, move the decimal point in 56.82 four places to the right. We will have to add two zeros in order to obtain the four places. Since there is no fractional part, we can drop the decimal point. Example 6.40.  Example 6.41.  Practice Set C Find the following products. Exercise 6.6.14. (Go to Solution) 100 ⋅ 4.27 Exercise 6.6.15. (Go to Solution) 10,000 ⋅ 16.52187 Exercise 6.6.16. (Go to Solution) (10)(0.0188) Exercise 6.6.17. (Go to Solution) (10,000,000,000)(52.7)  || 
book4_ch06_6_12	Multiplication in Terms of “Of” Recalling that the word "of" translates to the arithmetic operation of multiplica­tion, let's observe the following multiplications. Sample Set D Example 6.42.  Find 4.1 of 3.8. Translating "of" to "×", we get Thus, 4.1 of 3.8 is 15.58. Example 6.43.  Find 0.95 of the sum of 2.6 and 0.8. We first find the sum of 2.6 and 0.8. Now find 0.95 of 3.4 Thus, 0.95 of (2.6 + 0.8) is 3.230. Practice Set D Exercise 6.6.18. (Go to Solution) Find 2.8 of 6.4. Exercise 6.6.19. (Go to Solution) Find 0.1 of 1.3. Exercise 6.6.20. (Go to Solution) Find 1.01 of 3.6. Exercise 6.6.21. (Go to Solution) Find 0.004 of 0.0009. Exercise 6.6.22. (Go to Solution) Find 0.83 of 12. Exercise 6.6.23. (Go to Solution) Find 1.1 of the sum of 8.6 and 4.2. Multiplication in Terms of “Of” Recalling that the word "of" translates to the arithmetic operation of multiplica­tion, let's observe the following multiplications. Sample Set D Example 6.42.  Find 4.1 of 3.8. Translating "of" to "×", we get Thus, 4.1 of 3.8 is 15.58. Example 6.43.  Find 0.95 of the sum of 2.6 and 0.8. We first find the sum of 2.6 and 0.8. Now find 0.95 of 3.4 Thus, 0.95 of (2.6 + 0.8) is 3.230. Practice Set D Exercise 6.6.18. (Go to Solution) Find 2.8 of 6.4. Exercise 6.6.19. (Go to Solution) Find 0.1 of 1.3. Exercise 6.6.20. (Go to Solution) Find 1.01 of 3.6. Exercise 6.6.21. (Go to Solution) Find 0.004 of 0.0009. Exercise 6.6.22. (Go to Solution) Find 0.83 of 12. Exercise 6.6.23. (Go to Solution) Find 1.1 of the sum of 8.6 and 4.2.  || 
book4_ch06_7	 || The Logic Behind the Method As we have done with addition, subtraction, and multiplication of decimals, we will study a method of division of decimals by converting them to fractions, then we will make a general rule. We will proceed by using this example: Divide 196.8 by 6. We have, up to this point, divided 196.8 by 6 and have gotten a quotient of 32 with a remainder of 4. If we follow our intuition and bring down the .8, we have the division 4.8÷6. Thus, 4.8÷6 = .8. Now, our intuition and experience with division direct us to place the .8 immedi­ately to the right of 32. From these observations, we suggest the following method of division.  || A Method of Dividing a Decimal by a Nonzero Whole Number Method of Dividing a Decimal by a Nonzero Whole Number To divide a decimal by a nonzero whole number: Write a decimal point above the division line and directly over the decimal point of the dividend. Proceed to divide as if both numbers were whole numbers. If, in the quotient, the first nonzero digit occurs to the right of the decimal point, but not in the tenths position, place a zero in each position between the decimal point and the first nonzero digit of the quotient. Sample Set A Find the decimal representations of the following quotients. Example 6.44.  114.1÷7 = 7 Thus, 114.1÷7 = 16.3. Check: If 114.1÷7 = 16.3, then 7⋅16.3 should equal 114.1. Example 6.45.  0.02068÷4 Place zeros in the tenths and hundredths positions. (See Step 3.) Thus, 0.02068÷4 = 0.00517. Practice Set A Find the following quotients. Exercise 6.7.1. (Go to Solution) 184.5÷3 Exercise 6.7.2. (Go to Solution) 16.956÷9 Exercise 6.7.3. (Go to Solution) 0.2964÷4 Exercise 6.7.4. (Go to Solution) 0.000496÷8  || A Method of Dividing a Decimal By a Nonzero Decimal Now that we can divide decimals by nonzero whole numbers, we are in a position to divide decimals by a nonzero decimal. We will do so by converting a division by a decimal into a division by a whole number, a process with which we are already familiar. We'll illustrate the method using this example: Divide 4.32 by 1.8. Let's look at this problem as . The divisor is . We can convert into a whole number if we multiply it by 10. But, we know from our experience with fractions, that if we multiply the denomina­tor of a fraction by a nonzero whole number, we must multiply the numerator by that same nonzero whole number. Thus, when converting to a whole number by multiplying it by 10, we must also multiply the numerator by 10. We have converted the division 4.32÷1.8 into the division 43.2÷18, that is, Notice what has occurred. If we "move" the decimal point of the divisor one digit to the right, we must also "move" the decimal point of the dividend one place to the right. The word "move" actually indicates the process of multiplication by a power of 10. Method of Dividing a Decimal by a Decimal Number To divide a decimal by a nonzero decimal, Convert the divisor to a whole number by moving the decimal point to the position immediately to the right of the divisor's last digit. Move the decimal point of the dividend to the right the same number of digits it was moved in the divisor. Set the decimal point in the quotient by placing a decimal point directly above the newly located decimal point in the dividend. Divide as usual. Sample Set B Find the following quotients. Example 6.46.  32.66÷7.1 The divisor has one decimal place. Move the decimal point of both the divisor and the dividend 1 place to the right. Set the decimal point. Divide as usual. Thus, 32.66÷7.1 = 4.6. Check: 32.66÷7.1 = 4.6 if 4.6 × 7.1 = 32.66 Example 6.47.  1.0773÷0.513 The divisor has 3 decimal places. Move the decimal point of both the divisor and the dividend 3 places to the right. Set the decimal place and divide. Thus, 1.0773÷0.513 = 2.1. Checking by multiplying 2.1 and 0.513 will convince us that we have obtained the correct result. (Try it.) Example 6.48.  12÷0.00032 The divisor has 5 decimal places. Move the decimal point of both the divisor and the dividend 5 places to the right. We will need to add 5 zeros to 12. Set the decimal place and divide. This is now the same as the division of whole numbers. Checking assures us that 12÷0.00032 = 37,500. Practice Set B Find the decimal representation of each quotient. Exercise 6.7.5. (Go to Solution) 9.176÷3.1 Exercise 6.7.6. (Go to Solution) 5.0838÷1.11 Exercise 6.7.7. (Go to Solution) 16÷0.0004 Exercise 6.7.8. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷10 Exercise 6.7.9. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷100 Exercise 6.7.10. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷1,000 Exercise 6.7.11. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷10,000  || Calculators Calculators can be useful for finding quotients of decimal numbers. As we have seen with the other calculator operations, we can sometimes expect only approximate results. We are alerted to approximate results when the calculator display is filled with digits. We know it is possible that the operation may produce more digits than the calculator has the ability to show. For example, the multiplication produces 5 + 4 = 9 decimal places. An eight-digit display calculator only has the ability to show eight digits, and an approximation results. The way to recognize a possible approximation is illustrated in problem 3 of the next sample set. Sample Set C Find each quotient using a calculator. If the result is an approximation, round to five decimal places. Example 6.49.  12.596÷4.7 Table 6.30.     Display Reads Type 12.596 12.596 Press ÷ 12.596 Type 4.7 4.7 Press = 2.68 Since the display is not filled, we expect this to be an accurate result. Example 6.50.  0.5696376÷0.00123 Table 6.31.     Display Reads Type .5696376 0.5696376 Press ÷ 0.5696376 Type .00123 0.00123 Press = 463.12 Since the display is not filled, we expect this result to be accurate. Example 6.51.  0.8215199÷4.113 Table 6.32.     Display Reads Type .8215199 0.8215199 Press ÷ 0.8215199 Type 4.113 4.113 Press = 0.1997373 There are EIGHT DIGITS — DISPLAY FILLED! BE AWARE OF POSSIBLE APPROXI­MATIONS. We can check for a possible approximation in the following way. Since the division can be checked by multiplying 4 and 3, we can check our division by performing the multiplication This multiplication produces 3 + 7 = 10 decimal digits. But our suspected quotient contains only 8 decimal digits. We conclude that the answer is an approximation. Then, rounding to five decimal places, we get 0.19974. Practice Set C Find each quotient using a calculator. If the result is an approximation, round to four decimal places. Exercise 6.7.12. (Go to Solution) 42.49778÷14.261 Exercise 6.7.13. (Go to Solution) 0.001455÷0.291 Exercise 6.7.14. (Go to Solution) 7.459085÷2.1192  || Dividing Decimals By Powers of 10 In problems 4 and 5 of the section called “Practice Set B”, we found the decimal representations of 8,162.41÷10 and 8,162.41÷100. Let's look at each of these again and then, from these observations, make a general statement regarding division of a decimal num­ber by a power of 10. Thus, 8,162.41÷10 = 816.241. Notice that the divisor 10 is composed of one 0 and that the quotient 816.241 can be obtained from the dividend 8,162.41 by moving the decimal point one place to the left. Thus, 8,162.41÷100 = 81.6241. Notice that the divisor 100 is composed of two 0's and that the quotient 81.6241 can be obtained from the dividend by moving the decimal point two places to the left. Using these observations, we can suggest the following method for dividing decimal numbers by powers of 10. Dividing a Decimal Fraction by a Power of 10 To divide a decimal fraction by a power of 10, move the decimal point of the decimal fraction to the left as many places as there are zeros in the power of 10. Add zeros if necessary. Sample Set D Find each quotient. Example 6.52.  9,248.6÷100 Since there are 2 zeros in this power of 10, we move the decimal point 2 places to the left. Example 6.53.  3.28÷10,000 Since there are 4 zeros in this power of 10, we move the decimal point 4 places to the left. To do so, we need to add three zeros. Practice Set D Find the decimal representation of each quotient. Exercise 6.7.15. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷10 Exercise 6.7.16. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷100 Exercise 6.7.17. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷1,000 Exercise 6.7.18. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷10,000 Exercise 6.7.19. (Go to Solution) 646.18÷100 Exercise 6.7.20. (Go to Solution) 21.926÷1,000  || 
book4_ch06_7_2	The Logic Behind the Method As we have done with addition, subtraction, and multiplication of decimals, we will study a method of division of decimals by converting them to fractions, then we will make a general rule. We will proceed by using this example: Divide 196.8 by 6. We have, up to this point, divided 196.8 by 6 and have gotten a quotient of 32 with a remainder of 4. If we follow our intuition and bring down the .8, we have the division 4.8÷6. Thus, 4.8÷6 = .8. Now, our intuition and experience with division direct us to place the .8 immedi­ately to the right of 32. From these observations, we suggest the following method of division. The Logic Behind the Method As we have done with addition, subtraction, and multiplication of decimals, we will study a method of division of decimals by converting them to fractions, then we will make a general rule. We will proceed by using this example: Divide 196.8 by 6. We have, up to this point, divided 196.8 by 6 and have gotten a quotient of 32 with a remainder of 4. If we follow our intuition and bring down the .8, we have the division 4.8÷6. Thus, 4.8÷6 = .8. Now, our intuition and experience with division direct us to place the .8 immedi­ately to the right of 32. From these observations, we suggest the following method of division.  || 
book4_ch06_7_3	A Method of Dividing a Decimal by a Nonzero Whole Number Method of Dividing a Decimal by a Nonzero Whole Number To divide a decimal by a nonzero whole number: Write a decimal point above the division line and directly over the decimal point of the dividend. Proceed to divide as if both numbers were whole numbers. If, in the quotient, the first nonzero digit occurs to the right of the decimal point, but not in the tenths position, place a zero in each position between the decimal point and the first nonzero digit of the quotient. Sample Set A Find the decimal representations of the following quotients. Example 6.44.  114.1÷7 = 7 Thus, 114.1÷7 = 16.3. Check: If 114.1÷7 = 16.3, then 7⋅16.3 should equal 114.1. Example 6.45.  0.02068÷4 Place zeros in the tenths and hundredths positions. (See Step 3.) Thus, 0.02068÷4 = 0.00517. Practice Set A Find the following quotients. Exercise 6.7.1. (Go to Solution) 184.5÷3 Exercise 6.7.2. (Go to Solution) 16.956÷9 Exercise 6.7.3. (Go to Solution) 0.2964÷4 Exercise 6.7.4. (Go to Solution) 0.000496÷8 A Method of Dividing a Decimal by a Nonzero Whole Number Method of Dividing a Decimal by a Nonzero Whole Number To divide a decimal by a nonzero whole number: Write a decimal point above the division line and directly over the decimal point of the dividend. Proceed to divide as if both numbers were whole numbers. If, in the quotient, the first nonzero digit occurs to the right of the decimal point, but not in the tenths position, place a zero in each position between the decimal point and the first nonzero digit of the quotient. Sample Set A Find the decimal representations of the following quotients. Example 6.44.  114.1÷7 = 7 Thus, 114.1÷7 = 16.3. Check: If 114.1÷7 = 16.3, then 7⋅16.3 should equal 114.1. Example 6.45.  0.02068÷4 Place zeros in the tenths and hundredths positions. (See Step 3.) Thus, 0.02068÷4 = 0.00517. Practice Set A Find the following quotients. Exercise 6.7.1. (Go to Solution) 184.5÷3 Exercise 6.7.2. (Go to Solution) 16.956÷9 Exercise 6.7.3. (Go to Solution) 0.2964÷4 Exercise 6.7.4. (Go to Solution) 0.000496÷8  || 
book4_ch06_7_6	A Method of Dividing a Decimal By a Nonzero Decimal Now that we can divide decimals by nonzero whole numbers, we are in a position to divide decimals by a nonzero decimal. We will do so by converting a division by a decimal into a division by a whole number, a process with which we are already familiar. We'll illustrate the method using this example: Divide 4.32 by 1.8. Let's look at this problem as . The divisor is . We can convert into a whole number if we multiply it by 10. But, we know from our experience with fractions, that if we multiply the denomina­tor of a fraction by a nonzero whole number, we must multiply the numerator by that same nonzero whole number. Thus, when converting to a whole number by multiplying it by 10, we must also multiply the numerator by 10. We have converted the division 4.32÷1.8 into the division 43.2÷18, that is, Notice what has occurred. If we "move" the decimal point of the divisor one digit to the right, we must also "move" the decimal point of the dividend one place to the right. The word "move" actually indicates the process of multiplication by a power of 10. Method of Dividing a Decimal by a Decimal Number To divide a decimal by a nonzero decimal, Convert the divisor to a whole number by moving the decimal point to the position immediately to the right of the divisor's last digit. Move the decimal point of the dividend to the right the same number of digits it was moved in the divisor. Set the decimal point in the quotient by placing a decimal point directly above the newly located decimal point in the dividend. Divide as usual. Sample Set B Find the following quotients. Example 6.46.  32.66÷7.1 The divisor has one decimal place. Move the decimal point of both the divisor and the dividend 1 place to the right. Set the decimal point. Divide as usual. Thus, 32.66÷7.1 = 4.6. Check: 32.66÷7.1 = 4.6 if 4.6 × 7.1 = 32.66 Example 6.47.  1.0773÷0.513 The divisor has 3 decimal places. Move the decimal point of both the divisor and the dividend 3 places to the right. Set the decimal place and divide. Thus, 1.0773÷0.513 = 2.1. Checking by multiplying 2.1 and 0.513 will convince us that we have obtained the correct result. (Try it.) Example 6.48.  12÷0.00032 The divisor has 5 decimal places. Move the decimal point of both the divisor and the dividend 5 places to the right. We will need to add 5 zeros to 12. Set the decimal place and divide. This is now the same as the division of whole numbers. Checking assures us that 12÷0.00032 = 37,500. Practice Set B Find the decimal representation of each quotient. Exercise 6.7.5. (Go to Solution) 9.176÷3.1 Exercise 6.7.6. (Go to Solution) 5.0838÷1.11 Exercise 6.7.7. (Go to Solution) 16÷0.0004 Exercise 6.7.8. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷10 Exercise 6.7.9. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷100 Exercise 6.7.10. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷1,000 Exercise 6.7.11. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷10,000 A Method of Dividing a Decimal By a Nonzero Decimal Now that we can divide decimals by nonzero whole numbers, we are in a position to divide decimals by a nonzero decimal. We will do so by converting a division by a decimal into a division by a whole number, a process with which we are already familiar. We'll illustrate the method using this example: Divide 4.32 by 1.8. Let's look at this problem as . The divisor is . We can convert into a whole number if we multiply it by 10. But, we know from our experience with fractions, that if we multiply the denomina­tor of a fraction by a nonzero whole number, we must multiply the numerator by that same nonzero whole number. Thus, when converting to a whole number by multiplying it by 10, we must also multiply the numerator by 10. We have converted the division 4.32÷1.8 into the division 43.2÷18, that is, Notice what has occurred. If we "move" the decimal point of the divisor one digit to the right, we must also "move" the decimal point of the dividend one place to the right. The word "move" actually indicates the process of multiplication by a power of 10. Method of Dividing a Decimal by a Decimal Number To divide a decimal by a nonzero decimal, Convert the divisor to a whole number by moving the decimal point to the position immediately to the right of the divisor's last digit. Move the decimal point of the dividend to the right the same number of digits it was moved in the divisor. Set the decimal point in the quotient by placing a decimal point directly above the newly located decimal point in the dividend. Divide as usual. Sample Set B Find the following quotients. Example 6.46.  32.66÷7.1 The divisor has one decimal place. Move the decimal point of both the divisor and the dividend 1 place to the right. Set the decimal point. Divide as usual. Thus, 32.66÷7.1 = 4.6. Check: 32.66÷7.1 = 4.6 if 4.6 × 7.1 = 32.66 Example 6.47.  1.0773÷0.513 The divisor has 3 decimal places. Move the decimal point of both the divisor and the dividend 3 places to the right. Set the decimal place and divide. Thus, 1.0773÷0.513 = 2.1. Checking by multiplying 2.1 and 0.513 will convince us that we have obtained the correct result. (Try it.) Example 6.48.  12÷0.00032 The divisor has 5 decimal places. Move the decimal point of both the divisor and the dividend 5 places to the right. We will need to add 5 zeros to 12. Set the decimal place and divide. This is now the same as the division of whole numbers. Checking assures us that 12÷0.00032 = 37,500. Practice Set B Find the decimal representation of each quotient. Exercise 6.7.5. (Go to Solution) 9.176÷3.1 Exercise 6.7.6. (Go to Solution) 5.0838÷1.11 Exercise 6.7.7. (Go to Solution) 16÷0.0004 Exercise 6.7.8. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷10 Exercise 6.7.9. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷100 Exercise 6.7.10. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷1,000 Exercise 6.7.11. (Go to Solution) 8,162.41÷10,000  || 
book4_ch06_7_9	Calculators Calculators can be useful for finding quotients of decimal numbers. As we have seen with the other calculator operations, we can sometimes expect only approximate results. We are alerted to approximate results when the calculator display is filled with digits. We know it is possible that the operation may produce more digits than the calculator has the ability to show. For example, the multiplication produces 5 + 4 = 9 decimal places. An eight-digit display calculator only has the ability to show eight digits, and an approximation results. The way to recognize a possible approximation is illustrated in problem 3 of the next sample set. Sample Set C Find each quotient using a calculator. If the result is an approximation, round to five decimal places. Example 6.49.  12.596÷4.7 Table 6.30.     Display Reads Type 12.596 12.596 Press ÷ 12.596 Type 4.7 4.7 Press = 2.68 Since the display is not filled, we expect this to be an accurate result. Example 6.50.  0.5696376÷0.00123 Table 6.31.     Display Reads Type .5696376 0.5696376 Press ÷ 0.5696376 Type .00123 0.00123 Press = 463.12 Since the display is not filled, we expect this result to be accurate. Example 6.51.  0.8215199÷4.113 Table 6.32.     Display Reads Type .8215199 0.8215199 Press ÷ 0.8215199 Type 4.113 4.113 Press = 0.1997373 There are EIGHT DIGITS — DISPLAY FILLED! BE AWARE OF POSSIBLE APPROXI­MATIONS. We can check for a possible approximation in the following way. Since the division can be checked by multiplying 4 and 3, we can check our division by performing the multiplication This multiplication produces 3 + 7 = 10 decimal digits. But our suspected quotient contains only 8 decimal digits. We conclude that the answer is an approximation. Then, rounding to five decimal places, we get 0.19974. Practice Set C Find each quotient using a calculator. If the result is an approximation, round to four decimal places. Exercise 6.7.12. (Go to Solution) 42.49778÷14.261 Exercise 6.7.13. (Go to Solution) 0.001455÷0.291 Exercise 6.7.14. (Go to Solution) 7.459085÷2.1192 Calculators Calculators can be useful for finding quotients of decimal numbers. As we have seen with the other calculator operations, we can sometimes expect only approximate results. We are alerted to approximate results when the calculator display is filled with digits. We know it is possible that the operation may produce more digits than the calculator has the ability to show. For example, the multiplication produces 5 + 4 = 9 decimal places. An eight-digit display calculator only has the ability to show eight digits, and an approximation results. The way to recognize a possible approximation is illustrated in problem 3 of the next sample set. Sample Set C Find each quotient using a calculator. If the result is an approximation, round to five decimal places. Example 6.49.  12.596÷4.7 Table 6.30.     Display Reads Type 12.596 12.596 Press ÷ 12.596 Type 4.7 4.7 Press = 2.68 Since the display is not filled, we expect this to be an accurate result. Example 6.50.  0.5696376÷0.00123 Table 6.31.     Display Reads Type .5696376 0.5696376 Press ÷ 0.5696376 Type .00123 0.00123 Press = 463.12 Since the display is not filled, we expect this result to be accurate. Example 6.51.  0.8215199÷4.113 Table 6.32.     Display Reads Type .8215199 0.8215199 Press ÷ 0.8215199 Type 4.113 4.113 Press = 0.1997373 There are EIGHT DIGITS — DISPLAY FILLED! BE AWARE OF POSSIBLE APPROXI­MATIONS. We can check for a possible approximation in the following way. Since the division can be checked by multiplying 4 and 3, we can check our division by performing the multiplication This multiplication produces 3 + 7 = 10 decimal digits. But our suspected quotient contains only 8 decimal digits. We conclude that the answer is an approximation. Then, rounding to five decimal places, we get 0.19974. Practice Set C Find each quotient using a calculator. If the result is an approximation, round to four decimal places. Exercise 6.7.12. (Go to Solution) 42.49778÷14.261 Exercise 6.7.13. (Go to Solution) 0.001455÷0.291 Exercise 6.7.14. (Go to Solution) 7.459085÷2.1192  || 
book4_ch06_7_12	Dividing Decimals By Powers of 10 In problems 4 and 5 of the section called “Practice Set B”, we found the decimal representations of 8,162.41÷10 and 8,162.41÷100. Let's look at each of these again and then, from these observations, make a general statement regarding division of a decimal num­ber by a power of 10. Thus, 8,162.41÷10 = 816.241. Notice that the divisor 10 is composed of one 0 and that the quotient 816.241 can be obtained from the dividend 8,162.41 by moving the decimal point one place to the left. Thus, 8,162.41÷100 = 81.6241. Notice that the divisor 100 is composed of two 0's and that the quotient 81.6241 can be obtained from the dividend by moving the decimal point two places to the left. Using these observations, we can suggest the following method for dividing decimal numbers by powers of 10. Dividing a Decimal Fraction by a Power of 10 To divide a decimal fraction by a power of 10, move the decimal point of the decimal fraction to the left as many places as there are zeros in the power of 10. Add zeros if necessary. Sample Set D Find each quotient. Example 6.52.  9,248.6÷100 Since there are 2 zeros in this power of 10, we move the decimal point 2 places to the left. Example 6.53.  3.28÷10,000 Since there are 4 zeros in this power of 10, we move the decimal point 4 places to the left. To do so, we need to add three zeros. Practice Set D Find the decimal representation of each quotient. Exercise 6.7.15. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷10 Exercise 6.7.16. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷100 Exercise 6.7.17. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷1,000 Exercise 6.7.18. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷10,000 Exercise 6.7.19. (Go to Solution) 646.18÷100 Exercise 6.7.20. (Go to Solution) 21.926÷1,000 Dividing Decimals By Powers of 10 In problems 4 and 5 of the section called “Practice Set B”, we found the decimal representations of 8,162.41÷10 and 8,162.41÷100. Let's look at each of these again and then, from these observations, make a general statement regarding division of a decimal num­ber by a power of 10. Thus, 8,162.41÷10 = 816.241. Notice that the divisor 10 is composed of one 0 and that the quotient 816.241 can be obtained from the dividend 8,162.41 by moving the decimal point one place to the left. Thus, 8,162.41÷100 = 81.6241. Notice that the divisor 100 is composed of two 0's and that the quotient 81.6241 can be obtained from the dividend by moving the decimal point two places to the left. Using these observations, we can suggest the following method for dividing decimal numbers by powers of 10. Dividing a Decimal Fraction by a Power of 10 To divide a decimal fraction by a power of 10, move the decimal point of the decimal fraction to the left as many places as there are zeros in the power of 10. Add zeros if necessary. Sample Set D Find each quotient. Example 6.52.  9,248.6÷100 Since there are 2 zeros in this power of 10, we move the decimal point 2 places to the left. Example 6.53.  3.28÷10,000 Since there are 4 zeros in this power of 10, we move the decimal point 4 places to the left. To do so, we need to add three zeros. Practice Set D Find the decimal representation of each quotient. Exercise 6.7.15. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷10 Exercise 6.7.16. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷100 Exercise 6.7.17. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷1,000 Exercise 6.7.18. (Go to Solution) 182.5÷10,000 Exercise 6.7.19. (Go to Solution) 646.18÷100 Exercise 6.7.20. (Go to Solution) 21.926÷1,000  || 
book4_ch06_8	 || Nonterminating Divisions Let's consider two divisions: 9.8 ÷ 3.5 4÷ 3 Terminating Divisions Previously, we have considered divisions like example 1, which is an example of a terminating division. A terminating division is a division in which the quotient terminates after several divisions (the remainder is zero). Exact Divisions The quotient in this problem terminates in the tenths position. Terminating divi­sions are also called exact divisions. Nonterminating Division The division in example 2 is an example of a nonterminating division. A non-terminating division is a division that, regardless of how far we carry it out, always has a remainder. Repeating Decimal We can see that the pattern in the brace is repeated endlessly. Such a decimal quotient is called a repeating decimal.  || Denoting Nonterminating Quotients We use three dots at the end of a number to indicate that a pattern repeats itself endlessly. 4 ÷ 3 = 1 . 333 … Another way, aside from using three dots, of denoting an endlessly repeating pattern is to write a bar ( ¯ ) above the repeating sequence of digits. The bar indicates the repeated pattern of 3. Repeating patterns in a division can be discovered in two ways: As the division process progresses, should the remainder ever be the same as the dividend, it can be concluded that the division is nonterminating and that the pattern in the quotient repeats. This fact is illustrated in Example 6.54 of the section called “Sample Set A”. As the division process progresses, should the "product, difference" pattern ever repeat two consecutive times, it can be concluded that the division is nonter­minating and that the pattern in the quotient repeats. This fact is illustrated in Example 6.55 and 4 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Carry out each division until the repeating pattern can be determined. Example 6.54.  100 ÷ 27 When the remainder is identical to the dividend, the division is nonterminating. This implies that the pattern in the quotient repeats. 100÷27 = 3.70370370… The repeating block is 703. Example 6.55.  1 ÷ 9 We see that this “product, difference”pattern repeats. We can conclude that the division is nonterminating and that the quotient repeats. 1÷9 = 0.111… The repeating block is 1. Example 6.56.  Divide 2 by 11 and round to 3 decimal places. Since we wish to round the quotient to three decimal places, we'll carry out the division so that the quotient has four decimal places. The number .1818 rounded to three decimal places is .182. Thus, correct to three decimal places, 2 ÷ 11 = 0 . 182 Example 6.57.  Divide 1 by 6. We see that this “product, difference” pattern repeats. We can conclude that the division is nonterminating and that the quotient repeats at the 6. Practice Set A Carry out the following divisions until the repeating pattern can be determined. Exercise 6.8.1. (Go to Solution) 1÷3 Exercise 6.8.2. (Go to Solution) 5÷6 Exercise 6.8.3. (Go to Solution) 11÷9 Exercise 6.8.4. (Go to Solution) 17÷9 Exercise 6.8.5. (Go to Solution) Divide 7 by 6 and round to 2 decimal places. Exercise 6.8.6. (Go to Solution) Divide 400 by 11 and round to 4 decimal places.  || Exercise for Review Exercise 6.8.37. (Go to Solution) (Section 1.2) In the number 411,105, how many ten thousands are there? Exercise 6.8.38. (Section 2.3) Find the quotient, if it exists. 17÷0. Exercise 6.8.39. (Go to Solution) (Section 3.6) Find the least common multiple of 45, 63, and 98. Exercise 6.8.40. (Section 6.5) Subtract 8.01629 from 9.00187 and round the result to three decimal places. Exercise 6.8.41. (Go to Solution) (Section 6.7) Find the quotient. 104.06÷12.1.  || 
book4_ch06_8_2	Nonterminating Divisions Let's consider two divisions: 9.8 ÷ 3.5 4÷ 3 Terminating Divisions Previously, we have considered divisions like example 1, which is an example of a terminating division. A terminating division is a division in which the quotient terminates after several divisions (the remainder is zero). Exact Divisions The quotient in this problem terminates in the tenths position. Terminating divi­sions are also called exact divisions. Nonterminating Division The division in example 2 is an example of a nonterminating division. A non-terminating division is a division that, regardless of how far we carry it out, always has a remainder. Repeating Decimal We can see that the pattern in the brace is repeated endlessly. Such a decimal quotient is called a repeating decimal. Nonterminating Divisions Let's consider two divisions: 9.8 ÷ 3.5 4÷ 3 Terminating Divisions Previously, we have considered divisions like example 1, which is an example of a terminating division. A terminating division is a division in which the quotient terminates after several divisions (the remainder is zero). Exact Divisions The quotient in this problem terminates in the tenths position. Terminating divi­sions are also called exact divisions. Nonterminating Division The division in example 2 is an example of a nonterminating division. A non-terminating division is a division that, regardless of how far we carry it out, always has a remainder. Repeating Decimal We can see that the pattern in the brace is repeated endlessly. Such a decimal quotient is called a repeating decimal.  || 
book4_ch06_8_3	Denoting Nonterminating Quotients We use three dots at the end of a number to indicate that a pattern repeats itself endlessly. 4 ÷ 3 = 1 . 333 … Another way, aside from using three dots, of denoting an endlessly repeating pattern is to write a bar ( ¯ ) above the repeating sequence of digits. The bar indicates the repeated pattern of 3. Repeating patterns in a division can be discovered in two ways: As the division process progresses, should the remainder ever be the same as the dividend, it can be concluded that the division is nonterminating and that the pattern in the quotient repeats. This fact is illustrated in Example 6.54 of the section called “Sample Set A”. As the division process progresses, should the "product, difference" pattern ever repeat two consecutive times, it can be concluded that the division is nonter­minating and that the pattern in the quotient repeats. This fact is illustrated in Example 6.55 and 4 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Carry out each division until the repeating pattern can be determined. Example 6.54.  100 ÷ 27 When the remainder is identical to the dividend, the division is nonterminating. This implies that the pattern in the quotient repeats. 100÷27 = 3.70370370… The repeating block is 703. Example 6.55.  1 ÷ 9 We see that this “product, difference”pattern repeats. We can conclude that the division is nonterminating and that the quotient repeats. 1÷9 = 0.111… The repeating block is 1. Example 6.56.  Divide 2 by 11 and round to 3 decimal places. Since we wish to round the quotient to three decimal places, we'll carry out the division so that the quotient has four decimal places. The number .1818 rounded to three decimal places is .182. Thus, correct to three decimal places, 2 ÷ 11 = 0 . 182 Example 6.57.  Divide 1 by 6. We see that this “product, difference” pattern repeats. We can conclude that the division is nonterminating and that the quotient repeats at the 6. Practice Set A Carry out the following divisions until the repeating pattern can be determined. Exercise 6.8.1. (Go to Solution) 1÷3 Exercise 6.8.2. (Go to Solution) 5÷6 Exercise 6.8.3. (Go to Solution) 11÷9 Exercise 6.8.4. (Go to Solution) 17÷9 Exercise 6.8.5. (Go to Solution) Divide 7 by 6 and round to 2 decimal places. Exercise 6.8.6. (Go to Solution) Divide 400 by 11 and round to 4 decimal places. Denoting Nonterminating Quotients We use three dots at the end of a number to indicate that a pattern repeats itself endlessly. 4 ÷ 3 = 1 . 333 … Another way, aside from using three dots, of denoting an endlessly repeating pattern is to write a bar ( ¯ ) above the repeating sequence of digits. The bar indicates the repeated pattern of 3. Repeating patterns in a division can be discovered in two ways: As the division process progresses, should the remainder ever be the same as the dividend, it can be concluded that the division is nonterminating and that the pattern in the quotient repeats. This fact is illustrated in Example 6.54 of the section called “Sample Set A”. As the division process progresses, should the "product, difference" pattern ever repeat two consecutive times, it can be concluded that the division is nonter­minating and that the pattern in the quotient repeats. This fact is illustrated in Example 6.55 and 4 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Carry out each division until the repeating pattern can be determined. Example 6.54.  100 ÷ 27 When the remainder is identical to the dividend, the division is nonterminating. This implies that the pattern in the quotient repeats. 100÷27 = 3.70370370… The repeating block is 703. Example 6.55.  1 ÷ 9 We see that this “product, difference”pattern repeats. We can conclude that the division is nonterminating and that the quotient repeats. 1÷9 = 0.111… The repeating block is 1. Example 6.56.  Divide 2 by 11 and round to 3 decimal places. Since we wish to round the quotient to three decimal places, we'll carry out the division so that the quotient has four decimal places. The number .1818 rounded to three decimal places is .182. Thus, correct to three decimal places, 2 ÷ 11 = 0 . 182 Example 6.57.  Divide 1 by 6. We see that this “product, difference” pattern repeats. We can conclude that the division is nonterminating and that the quotient repeats at the 6. Practice Set A Carry out the following divisions until the repeating pattern can be determined. Exercise 6.8.1. (Go to Solution) 1÷3 Exercise 6.8.2. (Go to Solution) 5÷6 Exercise 6.8.3. (Go to Solution) 11÷9 Exercise 6.8.4. (Go to Solution) 17÷9 Exercise 6.8.5. (Go to Solution) Divide 7 by 6 and round to 2 decimal places. Exercise 6.8.6. (Go to Solution) Divide 400 by 11 and round to 4 decimal places.  || 
book4_ch06_8_7	Exercise for Review Exercise 6.8.37. (Go to Solution) (Section 1.2) In the number 411,105, how many ten thousands are there? Exercise 6.8.38. (Section 2.3) Find the quotient, if it exists. 17÷0. Exercise 6.8.39. (Go to Solution) (Section 3.6) Find the least common multiple of 45, 63, and 98. Exercise 6.8.40. (Section 6.5) Subtract 8.01629 from 9.00187 and round the result to three decimal places. Exercise 6.8.41. (Go to Solution) (Section 6.7) Find the quotient. 104.06÷12.1. Exercise for Review Exercise 6.8.37. (Go to Solution) (Section 1.2) In the number 411,105, how many ten thousands are there? Exercise 6.8.38. (Section 2.3) Find the quotient, if it exists. 17÷0. Exercise 6.8.39. (Go to Solution) (Section 3.6) Find the least common multiple of 45, 63, and 98. Exercise 6.8.40. (Section 6.5) Subtract 8.01629 from 9.00187 and round the result to three decimal places. Exercise 6.8.41. (Go to Solution) (Section 6.7) Find the quotient. 104.06÷12.1.  || 
book4_ch06_9	 || 
book4_ch06_10	 || 
book4_ch05	 ||  || Addition of Fraction With Like Denominators Let's examine the following diagram. 2 one-fifths and 1 one fifth is shaded. It is shown in the shaded regions of the diagram that (2 one-fifths) + (1 one-fifth) = (3 one-fifths) That is, From this observation, we can suggest the following rule. Method of Adding Fractions Having Like Denominators To add two or more fractions that have the same denominators, add the numer­ators and place the resulting sum over the common denominator. Reduce, if necessary. Sample Set A Find the following sums. Example 5.1.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place that sum over 7. Example 5.2.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 8. Reduce. Example 5.3.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 9. Example 5.4.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 8. Example 5.5.  To see what happens if we mistakenly add the denominators as well as the numerators, let's add Adding the numerators and mistakenly adding the denominators produces This means that two 's is the same as one . Preposterous! We do not add denominators. Practice Set A Find the following sums. Exercise 5.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.5. (Go to Solution) Show why adding both the numerators and denominators is preposterous by adding and and examining the result.  || Subtraction of Fractions With Like Denominators We can picture the concept of subtraction of fractions in much the same way we pictured addition. From this observation, we can suggest the following rule for subtracting fractions having like denominators: Subtraction of Fractions with Like Denominators To subtract two fractions that have like denominators, subtract the numerators and place the resulting difference over the common denominator. Reduce, if possible. Sample Set B Find the following differences. Example 5.6.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 5. Example 5.7.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 6. Example 5.8.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract numerators and place the difference over 9. Example 5.9.  To see what happens if we mistakenly subtract the denominators, let's consider We get division by zero, which is undefined. We do not subtract denominators. Practice Set B Find the following differences. Exercise 5.2.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.10. (Go to Solution) Show why subtracting both the numerators and the denominators is in error by performing the subtraction .  ||  || A Basic Rule There is a basic rule that must be followed when adding or subtracting fractions. A Basic Rule Fractions can only be added or subtracted conveniently if they have like denomi­nators. To see why this rule makes sense, let's consider the problem of adding a quarter and a dime. 1 quarter + 1 dime = 35 cents Now, [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] In order to combine a quarter and a dime to produce 35¢, we convert them to quantities of the same denomination. Same denomination → same denominator  || Addition and Subtraction of Fractions Least Common Multiple (LCM) and Least Common Denominator (LCD) In Section 3.6, we examined the least common multiple (LCM) of a collection of numbers. If these numbers are used as denominators of fractions, we call the least common multiple, the least common denominator (LCD). Method of Adding or Subtracting Fractions with Unlike Denominators To add or subtract fractions having unlike denominators, convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction having as a denominator the least common denomina­tor ( LCD) of the original denominators. Sample Set A Find the following sums and differences. Example 5.10.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 6 and 4. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Write each of the original fractions as a new, equivalent fraction having the common denomina­tor 12. [ERROR: MathML not converted] To find a new numerator, we divide the original denominator into the LCD. Since the original denominator is being multiplied by this quotient, we must multiply the original numerator by this quotient. 12 ÷ 6 = 2 12 ÷ 4 = 3 [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.11.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 2 and 3. LCD = 2 ⋅ 3 = 6 Write each of the original fractions as a new, equivalent fraction having the common denominator 6. [ERROR: MathML not converted] To find a new numerator, we divide the original denominator into the LCD. Since the original denominator is being multiplied by this quotient, we must multiply the original numerator by this quotient. 6 ÷ 2 = 3 Multiply the numerator 1 by 3. 6 ÷ 2 = 3 Multiply the numerator 2 by 2. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.12.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 9 and 12. [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] 36÷9 = 4 Multiply the numerator 5 by 4. 36÷12 = 3 Multiply the numerator 5 by 3. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.13.  [ERROR: MathML not converted] The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 6, 8, and 16 [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] 48÷6 = 8 Multiply the numerator 5 by 8 48÷8 = 6 Multiply the numerator 1 by 6 48÷16 = 3 Multiply the numerator 7 by 3 [ERROR: MathML not converted] Practice Set A Find the following sums and differences. Exercise 5.3.1. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.2. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.3. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.4. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.5. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted]  ||  ||  || Order and the Inequality Symbols Our number system is called an ordered number system because the numbers in the system can be placed in order from smaller to larger. This is easily seen on the number line. On the number line, a number that appears to the right of another number is larger than that other number. For example, 5 is greater than 2 because 5 is located to the right of 2 on the number line. We may also say that 2 is less than 5. To make the inequality phrases "greater than" and "less than" more brief, mathematicians represent them with the symbols > and <, respectively. Symbols for Greater Than > and Less Than < > represents the phrase "greater than." < represents the phrase "less than." 5 > 2 represents "5 is greater than 2." 2 < 5 represents "2 is less than 5."  || Comparing Fractions Recall that the fraction indicates that we have 4 of 5 parts of some whole quantity, and the fraction indicates that we have 3 of 5 parts. Since 4 of 5 parts is more than 3 of 5 parts, is greater than ; that is, We have just observed that when two fractions have the same denominator, we can determine which is larger by comparing the numerators. Comparing Fractions If two fractions have the same denominators, the fraction with the larger nu­merator is the larger fraction. Thus, to compare the sizes of two or more fractions, we need only convert each of them to equivalent fractions that have a common denominator. We then compare the numerators. It is convenient if the common denominator is the LCD. The fraction with the larger numerator is the larger fraction. Sample Set A Example 5.16.  Compare and . Convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction with the LCD as the denominator. Find the LCD. Since 40 < 42, Thus . Example 5.17.  Write and in order from smallest to largest. Convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction with the LCD as the denominator. Find the LCD. Since 21 < 25 < 26 , < < < < Writing these numbers in order from smallest to largest, we get , , . Example 5.18.  Compare and . To compare mixed numbers that have different whole number parts, we need only compare whole number parts. Since 6 < 8, Example 5.19.  Compare To compare mixed numbers that have the same whole number parts, we need only compare fractional parts. Since 14 < 15, Hence, Practice Set A Exercise 5.5.1. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.2. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.3. (Go to Solution) Write , , and in order from smallest to largest. Exercise 5.5.4. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.5. (Go to Solution) Compare and .  ||  || Simple Fractions and Complex Fractions Simple Fraction A simple fraction is any fraction in which the numerator is any whole number and the denominator is any nonzero whole number. Some examples are the following: Complex Fraction A complex fraction is any fraction in which the numerator and/or the denomina­tor is a fraction; it is a fraction of fractions. Some examples of complex fractions are the following:  || Converting Complex Fractions to Simple Fractions The goal here is to convert a complex fraction to a simple fraction. We can do so by employing the methods of adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing fractions. Recall from Section 4.2 that a fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol separating the fractional quantity into two individual groups. We proceed in simplifying a complex fraction to a simple fraction by simplifying the numerator and the denom­inator of the complex fraction separately. We will simplify the numerator and denominator completely before removing the fraction bar by dividing. This tech­nique is illustrated in problems 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Convert each of the following complex fractions to a simple fraction. Example 5.20.  Convert this complex fraction to a simple fraction by performing the indicated division. Example 5.21.  Example 5.22.  Example 5.23.  Example 5.24.  Example 5.25.  Practice Set A Convert each of the following complex fractions to a simple fraction. Exercise 5.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.6. (Go to Solution)  ||  || The Order of Operations To determine the value of a quantity such as where we have a combination of operations (more than one operation occurs), we must use the accepted order of operations. The Order of Operations: In the order (2), (3), (4) described below, perform all operations inside group­ing symbols: ( ), [ ], ( ),. Work from the innermost set to the outermost set. Perform exponential and root operations. Perform all multiplications and divisions moving left to right. Perform all additions and subtractions moving left to right. Sample Set A Determine the value of each of the following quantities. Example 5.26.  Multiply first. Now perform this addition. Find the LCD. Thus, Example 5.27.  Operate within the parentheses first, . Now we have Perform the multiplication. Now perform the addition. The LCD=80. Thus, Example 5.28.  Work within each set of parentheses individually. Now we have Now multiply. Now subtract. Thus, Example 5.29.  Square . Now we have Perform the multiplication. Now perform the subtraction. Thus, Example 5.30.  Begin by operating inside the parentheses. Now simplify the square root. Now we have Perform the division. Now perform the addition. Thus, Practice Set A Find the value of each of the following quantities. Exercise 5.7.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.8. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch05_2	 || Addition of Fraction With Like Denominators Let's examine the following diagram. 2 one-fifths and 1 one fifth is shaded. It is shown in the shaded regions of the diagram that (2 one-fifths) + (1 one-fifth) = (3 one-fifths) That is, From this observation, we can suggest the following rule. Method of Adding Fractions Having Like Denominators To add two or more fractions that have the same denominators, add the numer­ators and place the resulting sum over the common denominator. Reduce, if necessary. Sample Set A Find the following sums. Example 5.1.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place that sum over 7. Example 5.2.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 8. Reduce. Example 5.3.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 9. Example 5.4.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 8. Example 5.5.  To see what happens if we mistakenly add the denominators as well as the numerators, let's add Adding the numerators and mistakenly adding the denominators produces This means that two 's is the same as one . Preposterous! We do not add denominators. Practice Set A Find the following sums. Exercise 5.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.5. (Go to Solution) Show why adding both the numerators and denominators is preposterous by adding and and examining the result.  || Subtraction of Fractions With Like Denominators We can picture the concept of subtraction of fractions in much the same way we pictured addition. From this observation, we can suggest the following rule for subtracting fractions having like denominators: Subtraction of Fractions with Like Denominators To subtract two fractions that have like denominators, subtract the numerators and place the resulting difference over the common denominator. Reduce, if possible. Sample Set B Find the following differences. Example 5.6.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 5. Example 5.7.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 6. Example 5.8.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract numerators and place the difference over 9. Example 5.9.  To see what happens if we mistakenly subtract the denominators, let's consider We get division by zero, which is undefined. We do not subtract denominators. Practice Set B Find the following differences. Exercise 5.2.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.10. (Go to Solution) Show why subtracting both the numerators and the denominators is in error by performing the subtraction .  || 
book4_ch05_2_2	Addition of Fraction With Like Denominators Let's examine the following diagram. 2 one-fifths and 1 one fifth is shaded. It is shown in the shaded regions of the diagram that (2 one-fifths) + (1 one-fifth) = (3 one-fifths) That is, From this observation, we can suggest the following rule. Method of Adding Fractions Having Like Denominators To add two or more fractions that have the same denominators, add the numer­ators and place the resulting sum over the common denominator. Reduce, if necessary. Sample Set A Find the following sums. Example 5.1.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place that sum over 7. Example 5.2.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 8. Reduce. Example 5.3.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 9. Example 5.4.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 8. Example 5.5.  To see what happens if we mistakenly add the denominators as well as the numerators, let's add Adding the numerators and mistakenly adding the denominators produces This means that two 's is the same as one . Preposterous! We do not add denominators. Practice Set A Find the following sums. Exercise 5.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.5. (Go to Solution) Show why adding both the numerators and denominators is preposterous by adding and and examining the result. Addition of Fraction With Like Denominators Let's examine the following diagram. 2 one-fifths and 1 one fifth is shaded. It is shown in the shaded regions of the diagram that (2 one-fifths) + (1 one-fifth) = (3 one-fifths) That is, From this observation, we can suggest the following rule. Method of Adding Fractions Having Like Denominators To add two or more fractions that have the same denominators, add the numer­ators and place the resulting sum over the common denominator. Reduce, if necessary. Sample Set A Find the following sums. Example 5.1.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place that sum over 7. Example 5.2.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 8. Reduce. Example 5.3.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 9. Example 5.4.  . The denominators are the same. Add the numerators and place the sum over 8. Example 5.5.  To see what happens if we mistakenly add the denominators as well as the numerators, let's add Adding the numerators and mistakenly adding the denominators produces This means that two 's is the same as one . Preposterous! We do not add denominators. Practice Set A Find the following sums. Exercise 5.2.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.5. (Go to Solution) Show why adding both the numerators and denominators is preposterous by adding and and examining the result.  || 
book4_ch05_2_5	Subtraction of Fractions With Like Denominators We can picture the concept of subtraction of fractions in much the same way we pictured addition. From this observation, we can suggest the following rule for subtracting fractions having like denominators: Subtraction of Fractions with Like Denominators To subtract two fractions that have like denominators, subtract the numerators and place the resulting difference over the common denominator. Reduce, if possible. Sample Set B Find the following differences. Example 5.6.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 5. Example 5.7.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 6. Example 5.8.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract numerators and place the difference over 9. Example 5.9.  To see what happens if we mistakenly subtract the denominators, let's consider We get division by zero, which is undefined. We do not subtract denominators. Practice Set B Find the following differences. Exercise 5.2.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.10. (Go to Solution) Show why subtracting both the numerators and the denominators is in error by performing the subtraction . Subtraction of Fractions With Like Denominators We can picture the concept of subtraction of fractions in much the same way we pictured addition. From this observation, we can suggest the following rule for subtracting fractions having like denominators: Subtraction of Fractions with Like Denominators To subtract two fractions that have like denominators, subtract the numerators and place the resulting difference over the common denominator. Reduce, if possible. Sample Set B Find the following differences. Example 5.6.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 5. Example 5.7.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators. Place the difference over 6. Example 5.8.  . The denominators are the same. Subtract numerators and place the difference over 9. Example 5.9.  To see what happens if we mistakenly subtract the denominators, let's consider We get division by zero, which is undefined. We do not subtract denominators. Practice Set B Find the following differences. Exercise 5.2.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.8. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.9. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.2.10. (Go to Solution) Show why subtracting both the numerators and the denominators is in error by performing the subtraction .  || 
book4_ch05_3	 || A Basic Rule There is a basic rule that must be followed when adding or subtracting fractions. A Basic Rule Fractions can only be added or subtracted conveniently if they have like denomi­nators. To see why this rule makes sense, let's consider the problem of adding a quarter and a dime. 1 quarter + 1 dime = 35 cents Now, [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] In order to combine a quarter and a dime to produce 35¢, we convert them to quantities of the same denomination. Same denomination → same denominator  || Addition and Subtraction of Fractions Least Common Multiple (LCM) and Least Common Denominator (LCD) In Section 3.6, we examined the least common multiple (LCM) of a collection of numbers. If these numbers are used as denominators of fractions, we call the least common multiple, the least common denominator (LCD). Method of Adding or Subtracting Fractions with Unlike Denominators To add or subtract fractions having unlike denominators, convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction having as a denominator the least common denomina­tor ( LCD) of the original denominators. Sample Set A Find the following sums and differences. Example 5.10.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 6 and 4. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Write each of the original fractions as a new, equivalent fraction having the common denomina­tor 12. [ERROR: MathML not converted] To find a new numerator, we divide the original denominator into the LCD. Since the original denominator is being multiplied by this quotient, we must multiply the original numerator by this quotient. 12 ÷ 6 = 2 12 ÷ 4 = 3 [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.11.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 2 and 3. LCD = 2 ⋅ 3 = 6 Write each of the original fractions as a new, equivalent fraction having the common denominator 6. [ERROR: MathML not converted] To find a new numerator, we divide the original denominator into the LCD. Since the original denominator is being multiplied by this quotient, we must multiply the original numerator by this quotient. 6 ÷ 2 = 3 Multiply the numerator 1 by 3. 6 ÷ 2 = 3 Multiply the numerator 2 by 2. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.12.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 9 and 12. [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] 36÷9 = 4 Multiply the numerator 5 by 4. 36÷12 = 3 Multiply the numerator 5 by 3. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.13.  [ERROR: MathML not converted] The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 6, 8, and 16 [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] 48÷6 = 8 Multiply the numerator 5 by 8 48÷8 = 6 Multiply the numerator 1 by 6 48÷16 = 3 Multiply the numerator 7 by 3 [ERROR: MathML not converted] Practice Set A Find the following sums and differences. Exercise 5.3.1. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.2. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.3. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.4. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.5. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted]  || 
book4_ch05_3_2	A Basic Rule There is a basic rule that must be followed when adding or subtracting fractions. A Basic Rule Fractions can only be added or subtracted conveniently if they have like denomi­nators. To see why this rule makes sense, let's consider the problem of adding a quarter and a dime. 1 quarter + 1 dime = 35 cents Now, [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] In order to combine a quarter and a dime to produce 35¢, we convert them to quantities of the same denomination. Same denomination → same denominator A Basic Rule There is a basic rule that must be followed when adding or subtracting fractions. A Basic Rule Fractions can only be added or subtracted conveniently if they have like denomi­nators. To see why this rule makes sense, let's consider the problem of adding a quarter and a dime. 1 quarter + 1 dime = 35 cents Now, [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] In order to combine a quarter and a dime to produce 35¢, we convert them to quantities of the same denomination. Same denomination → same denominator  || 
book4_ch05_3_3	Addition and Subtraction of Fractions Least Common Multiple (LCM) and Least Common Denominator (LCD) In Section 3.6, we examined the least common multiple (LCM) of a collection of numbers. If these numbers are used as denominators of fractions, we call the least common multiple, the least common denominator (LCD). Method of Adding or Subtracting Fractions with Unlike Denominators To add or subtract fractions having unlike denominators, convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction having as a denominator the least common denomina­tor ( LCD) of the original denominators. Sample Set A Find the following sums and differences. Example 5.10.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 6 and 4. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Write each of the original fractions as a new, equivalent fraction having the common denomina­tor 12. [ERROR: MathML not converted] To find a new numerator, we divide the original denominator into the LCD. Since the original denominator is being multiplied by this quotient, we must multiply the original numerator by this quotient. 12 ÷ 6 = 2 12 ÷ 4 = 3 [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.11.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 2 and 3. LCD = 2 ⋅ 3 = 6 Write each of the original fractions as a new, equivalent fraction having the common denominator 6. [ERROR: MathML not converted] To find a new numerator, we divide the original denominator into the LCD. Since the original denominator is being multiplied by this quotient, we must multiply the original numerator by this quotient. 6 ÷ 2 = 3 Multiply the numerator 1 by 3. 6 ÷ 2 = 3 Multiply the numerator 2 by 2. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.12.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 9 and 12. [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] 36÷9 = 4 Multiply the numerator 5 by 4. 36÷12 = 3 Multiply the numerator 5 by 3. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.13.  [ERROR: MathML not converted] The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 6, 8, and 16 [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] 48÷6 = 8 Multiply the numerator 5 by 8 48÷8 = 6 Multiply the numerator 1 by 6 48÷16 = 3 Multiply the numerator 7 by 3 [ERROR: MathML not converted] Practice Set A Find the following sums and differences. Exercise 5.3.1. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.2. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.3. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.4. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.5. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Addition and Subtraction of Fractions Least Common Multiple (LCM) and Least Common Denominator (LCD) In Section 3.6, we examined the least common multiple (LCM) of a collection of numbers. If these numbers are used as denominators of fractions, we call the least common multiple, the least common denominator (LCD). Method of Adding or Subtracting Fractions with Unlike Denominators To add or subtract fractions having unlike denominators, convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction having as a denominator the least common denomina­tor ( LCD) of the original denominators. Sample Set A Find the following sums and differences. Example 5.10.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 6 and 4. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Write each of the original fractions as a new, equivalent fraction having the common denomina­tor 12. [ERROR: MathML not converted] To find a new numerator, we divide the original denominator into the LCD. Since the original denominator is being multiplied by this quotient, we must multiply the original numerator by this quotient. 12 ÷ 6 = 2 12 ÷ 4 = 3 [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.11.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 2 and 3. LCD = 2 ⋅ 3 = 6 Write each of the original fractions as a new, equivalent fraction having the common denominator 6. [ERROR: MathML not converted] To find a new numerator, we divide the original denominator into the LCD. Since the original denominator is being multiplied by this quotient, we must multiply the original numerator by this quotient. 6 ÷ 2 = 3 Multiply the numerator 1 by 3. 6 ÷ 2 = 3 Multiply the numerator 2 by 2. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.12.  [ERROR: MathML not converted]. The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 9 and 12. [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] 36÷9 = 4 Multiply the numerator 5 by 4. 36÷12 = 3 Multiply the numerator 5 by 3. [ERROR: MathML not converted] Example 5.13.  [ERROR: MathML not converted] The denominators are not the same. Find the LCD of 6, 8, and 16 [ERROR: MathML not converted] [ERROR: MathML not converted] 48÷6 = 8 Multiply the numerator 5 by 8 48÷8 = 6 Multiply the numerator 1 by 6 48÷16 = 3 Multiply the numerator 7 by 3 [ERROR: MathML not converted] Practice Set A Find the following sums and differences. Exercise 5.3.1. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.2. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.3. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.4. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted] Exercise 5.3.5. (Go to Solution) [ERROR: MathML not converted]  || 
book4_ch05_4	 || 
book4_ch05_5	 || Order and the Inequality Symbols Our number system is called an ordered number system because the numbers in the system can be placed in order from smaller to larger. This is easily seen on the number line. On the number line, a number that appears to the right of another number is larger than that other number. For example, 5 is greater than 2 because 5 is located to the right of 2 on the number line. We may also say that 2 is less than 5. To make the inequality phrases "greater than" and "less than" more brief, mathematicians represent them with the symbols > and <, respectively. Symbols for Greater Than > and Less Than < > represents the phrase "greater than." < represents the phrase "less than." 5 > 2 represents "5 is greater than 2." 2 < 5 represents "2 is less than 5."  || Comparing Fractions Recall that the fraction indicates that we have 4 of 5 parts of some whole quantity, and the fraction indicates that we have 3 of 5 parts. Since 4 of 5 parts is more than 3 of 5 parts, is greater than ; that is, We have just observed that when two fractions have the same denominator, we can determine which is larger by comparing the numerators. Comparing Fractions If two fractions have the same denominators, the fraction with the larger nu­merator is the larger fraction. Thus, to compare the sizes of two or more fractions, we need only convert each of them to equivalent fractions that have a common denominator. We then compare the numerators. It is convenient if the common denominator is the LCD. The fraction with the larger numerator is the larger fraction. Sample Set A Example 5.16.  Compare and . Convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction with the LCD as the denominator. Find the LCD. Since 40 < 42, Thus . Example 5.17.  Write and in order from smallest to largest. Convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction with the LCD as the denominator. Find the LCD. Since 21 < 25 < 26 , < < < < Writing these numbers in order from smallest to largest, we get , , . Example 5.18.  Compare and . To compare mixed numbers that have different whole number parts, we need only compare whole number parts. Since 6 < 8, Example 5.19.  Compare To compare mixed numbers that have the same whole number parts, we need only compare fractional parts. Since 14 < 15, Hence, Practice Set A Exercise 5.5.1. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.2. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.3. (Go to Solution) Write , , and in order from smallest to largest. Exercise 5.5.4. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.5. (Go to Solution) Compare and .  || 
book4_ch05_5_2	Order and the Inequality Symbols Our number system is called an ordered number system because the numbers in the system can be placed in order from smaller to larger. This is easily seen on the number line. On the number line, a number that appears to the right of another number is larger than that other number. For example, 5 is greater than 2 because 5 is located to the right of 2 on the number line. We may also say that 2 is less than 5. To make the inequality phrases "greater than" and "less than" more brief, mathematicians represent them with the symbols > and <, respectively. Symbols for Greater Than > and Less Than < > represents the phrase "greater than." < represents the phrase "less than." 5 > 2 represents "5 is greater than 2." 2 < 5 represents "2 is less than 5." Order and the Inequality Symbols Our number system is called an ordered number system because the numbers in the system can be placed in order from smaller to larger. This is easily seen on the number line. On the number line, a number that appears to the right of another number is larger than that other number. For example, 5 is greater than 2 because 5 is located to the right of 2 on the number line. We may also say that 2 is less than 5. To make the inequality phrases "greater than" and "less than" more brief, mathematicians represent them with the symbols > and <, respectively. Symbols for Greater Than > and Less Than < > represents the phrase "greater than." < represents the phrase "less than." 5 > 2 represents "5 is greater than 2." 2 < 5 represents "2 is less than 5."  || 
book4_ch05_5_3	Comparing Fractions Recall that the fraction indicates that we have 4 of 5 parts of some whole quantity, and the fraction indicates that we have 3 of 5 parts. Since 4 of 5 parts is more than 3 of 5 parts, is greater than ; that is, We have just observed that when two fractions have the same denominator, we can determine which is larger by comparing the numerators. Comparing Fractions If two fractions have the same denominators, the fraction with the larger nu­merator is the larger fraction. Thus, to compare the sizes of two or more fractions, we need only convert each of them to equivalent fractions that have a common denominator. We then compare the numerators. It is convenient if the common denominator is the LCD. The fraction with the larger numerator is the larger fraction. Sample Set A Example 5.16.  Compare and . Convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction with the LCD as the denominator. Find the LCD. Since 40 < 42, Thus . Example 5.17.  Write and in order from smallest to largest. Convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction with the LCD as the denominator. Find the LCD. Since 21 < 25 < 26 , < < < < Writing these numbers in order from smallest to largest, we get , , . Example 5.18.  Compare and . To compare mixed numbers that have different whole number parts, we need only compare whole number parts. Since 6 < 8, Example 5.19.  Compare To compare mixed numbers that have the same whole number parts, we need only compare fractional parts. Since 14 < 15, Hence, Practice Set A Exercise 5.5.1. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.2. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.3. (Go to Solution) Write , , and in order from smallest to largest. Exercise 5.5.4. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.5. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Comparing Fractions Recall that the fraction indicates that we have 4 of 5 parts of some whole quantity, and the fraction indicates that we have 3 of 5 parts. Since 4 of 5 parts is more than 3 of 5 parts, is greater than ; that is, We have just observed that when two fractions have the same denominator, we can determine which is larger by comparing the numerators. Comparing Fractions If two fractions have the same denominators, the fraction with the larger nu­merator is the larger fraction. Thus, to compare the sizes of two or more fractions, we need only convert each of them to equivalent fractions that have a common denominator. We then compare the numerators. It is convenient if the common denominator is the LCD. The fraction with the larger numerator is the larger fraction. Sample Set A Example 5.16.  Compare and . Convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction with the LCD as the denominator. Find the LCD. Since 40 < 42, Thus . Example 5.17.  Write and in order from smallest to largest. Convert each fraction to an equivalent fraction with the LCD as the denominator. Find the LCD. Since 21 < 25 < 26 , < < < < Writing these numbers in order from smallest to largest, we get , , . Example 5.18.  Compare and . To compare mixed numbers that have different whole number parts, we need only compare whole number parts. Since 6 < 8, Example 5.19.  Compare To compare mixed numbers that have the same whole number parts, we need only compare fractional parts. Since 14 < 15, Hence, Practice Set A Exercise 5.5.1. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.2. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.3. (Go to Solution) Write , , and in order from smallest to largest. Exercise 5.5.4. (Go to Solution) Compare and . Exercise 5.5.5. (Go to Solution) Compare and .  || 
book4_ch05_6	 || Simple Fractions and Complex Fractions Simple Fraction A simple fraction is any fraction in which the numerator is any whole number and the denominator is any nonzero whole number. Some examples are the following: Complex Fraction A complex fraction is any fraction in which the numerator and/or the denomina­tor is a fraction; it is a fraction of fractions. Some examples of complex fractions are the following:  || Converting Complex Fractions to Simple Fractions The goal here is to convert a complex fraction to a simple fraction. We can do so by employing the methods of adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing fractions. Recall from Section 4.2 that a fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol separating the fractional quantity into two individual groups. We proceed in simplifying a complex fraction to a simple fraction by simplifying the numerator and the denom­inator of the complex fraction separately. We will simplify the numerator and denominator completely before removing the fraction bar by dividing. This tech­nique is illustrated in problems 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Convert each of the following complex fractions to a simple fraction. Example 5.20.  Convert this complex fraction to a simple fraction by performing the indicated division. Example 5.21.  Example 5.22.  Example 5.23.  Example 5.24.  Example 5.25.  Practice Set A Convert each of the following complex fractions to a simple fraction. Exercise 5.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.6. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch05_6_2	Simple Fractions and Complex Fractions Simple Fraction A simple fraction is any fraction in which the numerator is any whole number and the denominator is any nonzero whole number. Some examples are the following: Complex Fraction A complex fraction is any fraction in which the numerator and/or the denomina­tor is a fraction; it is a fraction of fractions. Some examples of complex fractions are the following: Simple Fractions and Complex Fractions Simple Fraction A simple fraction is any fraction in which the numerator is any whole number and the denominator is any nonzero whole number. Some examples are the following: Complex Fraction A complex fraction is any fraction in which the numerator and/or the denomina­tor is a fraction; it is a fraction of fractions. Some examples of complex fractions are the following:  || 
book4_ch05_6_3	Converting Complex Fractions to Simple Fractions The goal here is to convert a complex fraction to a simple fraction. We can do so by employing the methods of adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing fractions. Recall from Section 4.2 that a fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol separating the fractional quantity into two individual groups. We proceed in simplifying a complex fraction to a simple fraction by simplifying the numerator and the denom­inator of the complex fraction separately. We will simplify the numerator and denominator completely before removing the fraction bar by dividing. This tech­nique is illustrated in problems 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Convert each of the following complex fractions to a simple fraction. Example 5.20.  Convert this complex fraction to a simple fraction by performing the indicated division. Example 5.21.  Example 5.22.  Example 5.23.  Example 5.24.  Example 5.25.  Practice Set A Convert each of the following complex fractions to a simple fraction. Exercise 5.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.6. (Go to Solution) Converting Complex Fractions to Simple Fractions The goal here is to convert a complex fraction to a simple fraction. We can do so by employing the methods of adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing fractions. Recall from Section 4.2 that a fraction bar serves as a grouping symbol separating the fractional quantity into two individual groups. We proceed in simplifying a complex fraction to a simple fraction by simplifying the numerator and the denom­inator of the complex fraction separately. We will simplify the numerator and denominator completely before removing the fraction bar by dividing. This tech­nique is illustrated in problems 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the section called “Sample Set A”. Sample Set A Convert each of the following complex fractions to a simple fraction. Example 5.20.  Convert this complex fraction to a simple fraction by performing the indicated division. Example 5.21.  Example 5.22.  Example 5.23.  Example 5.24.  Example 5.25.  Practice Set A Convert each of the following complex fractions to a simple fraction. Exercise 5.6.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.6.6. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch05_7	 || The Order of Operations To determine the value of a quantity such as where we have a combination of operations (more than one operation occurs), we must use the accepted order of operations. The Order of Operations: In the order (2), (3), (4) described below, perform all operations inside group­ing symbols: ( ), [ ], ( ),. Work from the innermost set to the outermost set. Perform exponential and root operations. Perform all multiplications and divisions moving left to right. Perform all additions and subtractions moving left to right. Sample Set A Determine the value of each of the following quantities. Example 5.26.  Multiply first. Now perform this addition. Find the LCD. Thus, Example 5.27.  Operate within the parentheses first, . Now we have Perform the multiplication. Now perform the addition. The LCD=80. Thus, Example 5.28.  Work within each set of parentheses individually. Now we have Now multiply. Now subtract. Thus, Example 5.29.  Square . Now we have Perform the multiplication. Now perform the subtraction. Thus, Example 5.30.  Begin by operating inside the parentheses. Now simplify the square root. Now we have Perform the division. Now perform the addition. Thus, Practice Set A Find the value of each of the following quantities. Exercise 5.7.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.8. (Go to Solution)  || 
book4_ch05_7_2	The Order of Operations To determine the value of a quantity such as where we have a combination of operations (more than one operation occurs), we must use the accepted order of operations. The Order of Operations: In the order (2), (3), (4) described below, perform all operations inside group­ing symbols: ( ), [ ], ( ),. Work from the innermost set to the outermost set. Perform exponential and root operations. Perform all multiplications and divisions moving left to right. Perform all additions and subtractions moving left to right. Sample Set A Determine the value of each of the following quantities. Example 5.26.  Multiply first. Now perform this addition. Find the LCD. Thus, Example 5.27.  Operate within the parentheses first, . Now we have Perform the multiplication. Now perform the addition. The LCD=80. Thus, Example 5.28.  Work within each set of parentheses individually. Now we have Now multiply. Now subtract. Thus, Example 5.29.  Square . Now we have Perform the multiplication. Now perform the subtraction. Thus, Example 5.30.  Begin by operating inside the parentheses. Now simplify the square root. Now we have Perform the division. Now perform the addition. Thus, Practice Set A Find the value of each of the following quantities. Exercise 5.7.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.8. (Go to Solution) The Order of Operations To determine the value of a quantity such as where we have a combination of operations (more than one operation occurs), we must use the accepted order of operations. The Order of Operations: In the order (2), (3), (4) described below, perform all operations inside group­ing symbols: ( ), [ ], ( ),. Work from the innermost set to the outermost set. Perform exponential and root operations. Perform all multiplications and divisions moving left to right. Perform all additions and subtractions moving left to right. Sample Set A Determine the value of each of the following quantities. Example 5.26.  Multiply first. Now perform this addition. Find the LCD. Thus, Example 5.27.  Operate within the parentheses first, . Now we have Perform the multiplication. Now perform the addition. The LCD=80. Thus, Example 5.28.  Work within each set of parentheses individually. Now we have Now multiply. Now subtract. Thus, Example 5.29.  Square . Now we have Perform the multiplication. Now perform the subtraction. Thus, Example 5.30.  Begin by operating inside the parentheses. Now simplify the square root. Now we have Perform the division. Now perform the addition. Thus, Practice Set A Find the value of each of the following quantities. Exercise 5.7.1. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.2. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.3. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.4. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.5. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.6. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.7. (Go to Solution) Exercise 5.7.8. (Go to Solution)  || 
