building lite-weight ead repositories university archives and museums traditional have n't been viewed as a bastion for innovative technology development , but for a number of years now , it has been university archives and museums that have made the most significant moves towards adopting and utilizing xml-based metadata-schemas for bibliographic description . unlike the general library profession , which has been able to rely on marc throughout the years as its primary vehicle for bibliographic description , museums and archives have traditionally had no formal metadata structure to create portable metadata records . it is likely that for this reason that museums and archives were quick to embrace ead (encoded-archival-description) as the defacto method for creating portable finding aids . however , while ead has provided a vehicle for portability , institutions have found that actually using these finding aids within a database or for display can be quite daunting . often times , individual institutions creating finding aids have no idea how to make use of them within their institution 's current infrastructure - often relying on larger organizations like the california digital-library or the northwest digital-archive (nwda) to provide a vehicle for distributing their materials . and while the consortia method of distribution offers a number of benefits , it does come at a cost of individual institutional identity.oregon state university currently is one of the participating libraries in the nwda . this has been a tremendous relationship in terms of creating a resource that provides exposure to a wide number of collections at osu in relation to other archive collections at other participating nwda libraries . however , the cost has been a loss of identity in regards to how osu presents its finding aids to its own user-community . as a result , the osu archives was creating multiple finding aids - an ead record for use within the nwda and a static html page for use at osu.in january 2005 , osu valley library started work on a lite-weight ead repository with the following goals in mind : 1) that the solution be portable to other nwda institutions , 2) be built on top of current open-source technologies (like mysql , php , etc.) , 3) provided a method for federated-searching of the repository and 4) that it be flexible enough to eventually include other metadata-schemas . this lite-weight ead repository is the first product of this development , which uses php , mysql and saxon to produce an easily replicable database environment for querying and serving ead records on the web . likewise , by building sru functionality into the ead repository - this lite-weight solution can also expose it 's own resources to the outside world through a standard query-and-retrieval language.this poster session will discuss the method used to generate a lite-weight search and discovery solution and demonstrate the resulting finished product . this poster session will also discuss the implications of this type of repository solution - particularly the ability for institutions to quickly move ead elements into a searchable , web-based environment as well as the ability for institutions to include their ead repositories in a federated-search infrastructure using a standard search-and-retrieval language .