ben collaborative poster in 1999 , the american association for the advancement of science (aaas) directorate for education and human-resources (ehr) programs and science 's signal-transduction knowledge environment (stke) -- with 11 other professional-societies and coalitions for biological sciences - established the biosciednet (ben) collaborative with limited funding from the us national-science-foundation (nsf) national sciences education-digital-library program (nsdl) . since its inception , ben has grown from its original 11 to 24 collaborators.currently , the digital library collections of ben collaborators provide a rich array of materials for undergraduate biological sciences educators , including ones that prepare k-12-teachers . the materials that users find via the ben portal are unique in several ways . first , ben resources have been reviewed by the individual societies for standards of quality and accuracy . although each ben collaborator has unique review-criteria , overall users find resources that are scientifically accurate and educationally sound . second , the ben portal provides an extended set of search parameters to allow more productive searches by users . finally , due to the collaborative establishment of its metadata structure , the user can easily conduct productive interdisciplinary searches across the diverse biological sciences topics covered by the ben collaborators . in general contributors can submit resources through the digital library of a ben collaborator or directly to the ben portal . submissions to the ben portal are sent to the collaborators that are maintaining discipline specific resources . aaas catalogs submissions that do not fit discipline specific collaborators . contributors enter the cataloging information at the time of submission and a ben digital-library provider or aaas validates the metadata . biological sciences educators , particularly in high-schools and community-colleges and regional comprehensive institutions , have student bodies diverse in every respect - learning-styles and ability , geography , economics , race , gender , physical-disabilities , and experience . to this end , ben collaborators are building digital-collections that are inclusive of all educators and students.biological sciences educators , particularly in high-schools and community-colleges and regional comprehensive institutions , have student bodies diverse in every respect - learning-styles and ability , geography , economics , race , gender , physical-disabilities , and experience . to this end , ben collaborators are building digital-collections that are inclusive of all educators and students . in summary , ben has already developed tools and services that can be shared to leverage technologies across societies , coalitions , and collections affilaites . ben has a documentation site -- http://www.biosciednet.org/project_site/ that includes all its technical standards and specifications : ben metadata-repository database specification ; xml specification and schema for transferring ben lom metadata ; search-engine specifications ; metadata harvester software specifications using the oai protocol ; and cataloging software specifications . for long-term sustainability the ben collaborative goal is to design and develop digital-library-collections that are valued by the members of professional-societies , thereby eventually ensuring inclusion in the ongoing operating budgets of societies . some societies are already providing in - kind support for staff and dollars for development .