what type of page is this ? : genre as web descriptor many have suggested the use of genres to ameliorate the problem of web-search , e.g. [1,3,4,5,6,7] . a central issue in the implementation of this idea is the choice of genres to be used as web-page descriptors . several studies have explored user terminology for and recognition of several types of digital-documents , e.g. , various types of office-documents [8] , personal homepages [2] , and pages returned by user web-searches [4,6] . this poster reports on a series of three user-studies with the purpose of developing a genre `` palette '' for use in web-retrieval . pages viewed by participants in these studies were limited to the edu domain , as in [5] . in the first study , three participants , an information-technology professional , an oncology social worker and a computer science professor , in separate sessions , were given a stack of 102 web-page printouts , and were asked to separate the pages into piles according to genre . they were also asked to name the genres by writing the names on sticky-notes and placing them on the piles . after the piles were complete , participants were asked to provide a short , one or two sentence , description of each genre , and then to describe the page characteristics that led them to place a page in that genre.a list of 49 genre names and definitions was developed from the work of the three participants , keeping the terminology as similar as possible to the original , while combining definitions which were nearly identical in wording . in a second user-study , each of ten participants was given this list of genre name/definition pairs , the same stack of 102 printed web-pages (arranged in a different random-order for each participant) , and a data-collection form on which he/she recorded a genre for each web-page . for each of the 102 web-pages , the participant was given the option to either write a number from the list corresponding to a genre/definition pair which best described the page ; or to provide his/her own suggestion for a genre name and definition , if none of those in the list seemed adequate . the participants were drawn from a convenience sample of approximately 10 college graduates of various occupations . given that participants chose genres from a list of 48 , many of which were extremely similar in nature , the resulting level of agreement (half or more of the participants agreeing on one genre for a given page in 60 \ % of the instances) is quite acceptable . a set of five principles for creating a genre palette from individuals ' sortings was developed . based on those principles , the original list was trimmed down to 18 genres.the third study was an online-experiment in which 257 college , faculty , students , and staff from two schools categorized a new set of 55 pages using the 18 genres . on average , over 70 \ % agreed on the genre of each page . no study of this scale is known to report user-recognition of web-genres . this user validation is necessary to set upper-bounds for machine categorization efforts . also , because genre is usually considered to be `` socially defined '' , genre studies using researcher-defined a priori categories (e.g. , [5]) may not be able to show genres ' usefulness for web search.interestingly , the genres in this palette , although developed independently , are similar to 7 of 8 internet-wide genres based on user-input reported in [7] , and similar to 8 of 11 internet-wide genres as reported in [3] . based on these observations , one might infer that some substantial amount of genre knowledge exists among users , even from different cultures (in this case , the united-states , germany , and sweden) .