simpel : a superimposed multimedia-presentation editor and player in a variety of applications such as learning , we need to integrate multimedia-information into convenient packages (like presentations) . the challenges involved in this process are : selecting or working with information elements at sub-document level while retaining the original context ; describing the integration or packaging of such elements ; and making use of minimal storage during this activity.current multimedia-authoring software , like realproducer (http://www.realnetworks.com/products/producer/) , tend to repeatedly copy information , or to limit granularity-of-information referenced . although editors for the synchronized-multimedia-integration-language (http://www.w3.org/audiovideo/) , such as grins (http://www.oratrix.com/products/g2e) , address some of the aforementioned challenges , they are difficult to use and require considerable training effort before a user can work with them.we developed the superimposed multimedia-presentation editor and player (simpel) , a tool to address these challenges . simpel allows a user to reference information of many types , at varying granularity , without replicating the referenced information . it also allows the user to compose synchronized-multimedia presentations . for example , for a specific topic a user can select an audio clip , some images , and some text . he can then `` play '' (render in specific panes of a window) this information-set in some order . figure 1 shows a snapshot of a simpel presentation . pane a contains an audio clip . panes b , c , and d show selected information within web pages.simpel is in a genre of applications called superimposed applications (sas) , which allow users to superimpose new interpretations over existing or base information [1] . sas employ `` marks '' , references to selected regions within base information . simpel uses the superimposed pluggable-architecture for contexts and excerpts (sparce) , middleware that provides mark management and other services for sas [2] . simpel has been implemented for windows in visual basic.net and uses xml for storing presentation data.future work on simpel will include support for pre-fetching media files (for better performance) and packaging and sharing of simpel presentations . we also plan to index marks and make them searchable , thus facilitating further reuse . a more detailed report on simpel is available at http://pubs.dlib.vt.edu:9090/48/ .