etana-gis : gis for archaeological digital-libraries with the growing importance of mapping land , regions , and their related features , geographic-information-systems (gis) has become an ever important standard in fields where such detailed study of land features is required . our archaeology digital library , etana-dl (http://etana.dlib.vt.edu) , contains thousands of records from eight member excavations . here , we draw on the space aspect of the 5s meta-model [1] for digital-libraries and demonstrate a methodology used to integrate archaeological gis data with the wealth of information within etana-dl . etanagis connects the digital library 's textual records with a spatial-representation of their original locations , enhancing users ' understanding of the find.using a dataset of the university of toronto 's tell madaba excavation project [2] , we developed an interactive , web-based representation of the original arcgis document (accessible from etana-dl homepage) . for dynamic-generation of maps from geospatial-data , we use the mapserver [3] project , a mature , project which boasts a rich toolset of features for cartographicrelated image-generation . mapserver can directly utilize arcgis layer resources but some translation and additional authoring must occur for proper image-generation . then , using php , the mapscript mapserver api , and navigation-tools , the map was ported to an interactive , web-accessible format . based on a study of alternatives , the-technology we chose for our technique seemed to be the best suited for digital-library-integration and is also completely open source.to explore the presentation of the map , a user employs the navigation-tools displayed in the corner of the main view (see figure 1) . in addition , full control of displayed layers , a smaller map showing overall view and context , as well as a dynamic scale bar are available for use . to integrate the web-based version of the tell madaba gis-map with the existing digital-library , the layers depicting archaeological divisions are clickable and labeled for easy identification . any area queried results in a pop-up box with etana-dl 's records and artifacts for that area.while this integration connects the digital library with the spatial-representation of the region , the unique quality of various gis maps causes certain difficulties . the lack of standard in denoting spatial divisions in gis is one hindrance to producing a more automated technique . future work will include more automation , usability-evaluation , and integration of additional excavations . we hope integration of the digital library and gis greatly aids users ' understanding of the spatial-organization of the included data .