pathways core : a data-model for cross-repository services as part of the nsf-funded pathways project , we have created an interoperable data-model to facilitate object re-use and a broad spectrum of cross-repository services . the resulting pathways core data model is designed to be lightweight to implement , and to be widely applicable as a shared profile or as an overlay on data-models currently used in repository systems and applications . we consider the data-models underlying the fedora , dspace and adore repository systems , and a number of xml-based formats used for the representation of compound objects , including mpeg-21 didl , mets , and ims/cp . at the heart of the pathways core data model (fig. 1) are the entity and datastream elements . entity elements model the abstract aspects of digital-objects and align with works and expressions in frbr [1] . an entity can model anything from a-digital object to a collection of digital-objects (other entities) , to a node created merely to express abstract properties . core properties of entities are hasidentifier , hasproviderinfo , haslineage , and hasprovider-persistence . if a repository attaches providerinfo to an entity , it provides a handle to access the entity from the repository , supporting its use and re-use . persistence of this handle may be indicated with providerpersistence . the haslineage property is used to indicate the entity (or entities) from which the entity to which the haslineage is attached was derived . other properties , such as hassemantic , that convey the intellectual genre of the entity (i.e. journal article) , can be added . datastream elements model the concrete aspects of a-digital object ; these align with items in frbr , and can be thought of as aspects at the level of bitstreams . an entity may have any number of datastreams . two properties of datastream have been defined as part of the pathways core : haslocation conveys a uri that can be resolved to yield a bitstream ; and hasformat conveys the digital format of the bitstream . if a datastream has multiple haslocation properties , resolution of the conveyed uris yields bit-equivalent bitstreamsthe pathways core data model can be serialized in a variety of ways , and , an rdf serialization as well as a profile of mpeg-21 didl have been created as reference implementations . we have also conducted the following experiment to illustrate the power of the pathways core . a number of heterogeneous repositories implemented an openurl-based obtain interface from which , given the providerinfo of an entity , an rdf serialization of the entity compliant with the pathways core could be retrievedusing this interface , an overlay journal can collect serializations of some entities (scholarly papers) from the different collaborating repositories , and assemble those into a new issue of the journal . the overlay journal then itself implemented the same obtain interface , and as a result , an rdf serialization of the entire journal , an issue , and an article could be extracted . this interface could then , for example , be used by a preservation repository to collect content from the overlay journal for ingest and mirroring . this experiment illustrates how cross-repository services and workflows can be facilitated through support of an interoperable data-model (the pathways core) and an interoperable service interface (the openurl-based obtain interface)