keeping the context : an investigation in preserving collections of digital-video there has been a recent dramatic shift from analog to digital creation , management and use-of-video , creating unprecedented opportunities to develop rich , interactive collections , but without proper care , much of this digital-video could be inaccessible or incomprehensible in the future . several projects have explored technical challenges and potential strategies for ensuring long-term-access to digital-video-collections . a number of initiatives have also generated sets of proposed metadata for digital-video . most of the above activities have focused on ensuring that videos can be discovered , accessed and rendered over time.another active steam of research has examined how users can best navigate , understand , view , interact with and annotate collections of digital-video . this research has generated valuable lessons , tools and observations to support current users . however , it has generally not investigated how the components of a-digital video collection might support or fail to support future users of videos.the preserving video objects and context (vidarch) project -- nsf grant # iis 0455970 , involving the authors , gary marchionini and gary geisler -- lies at the intersection between the two streams of research described above . we are developing a preservation framework for digital-video context . among other issues , we are considering : are there interface-elements from current collections (e.g. surrogates , navigation-aids , behaviors) that should be retained over time , in order to support long-term-use and understanding of the videos ? how might curators of digital-video-collections decide which contextual elements are important and then devise strategies for preserving them.according to the glossary of the society of american archivists , context is the `` organizational , functional , and operational circumstances surrounding materials ' creation , receipt , storage , or use , and its relationship to other materials . '' documents derive value and meaning from relationships with other documents within the same collection . rather than treating each item as a discrete entity , archival theory-and-practice suggests that digital videos should be managed , preserved and presented to users in a way that reflects the social and documentary context in which they were originally embedded.access systems for text-based collections often rely on surrogates , such as indices , catalogs , and abstracts . in addition to facilitating information-navigation , discovery and retrieval , surrogates also provide valuable contextual-information about the documents . in archival descriptive practices , attention to context is expressed through the creation of finding aids , which include not only inventories of the contents of collections , but also background-information about the actors and activities that generated the materials , and the ways they were organized by their original creators or recipients . recent research has produced and investigated an analogous set of surrogates for digital-video-collections . these include textual descriptions , title , captions , and annotations , but they also include surrogates that are themselves still or moving-images : video segments , keyframes , slide shows , and fast forwards.vidarch is focused on two collections within the open video-repository : the complete set of videos that national aeronautic and space administration (nasa) produces and broadcasts to advance learning and appreciation for science ; and a set of videos of juried presentations to various annual association for computing-machinery (acm) conferences . the two collections reflect several forms of documentation that may be valuable to preserve in order to convey the context of the videos : text-based surrogates , image-based surrogates (story-boards and fast forwards) , links to related videos , use history data , and supporting documents (e.g. lesson-plans) . we have generated archival-finding-aids to the two collections in order to reflect contextual-information that is not readily available within open video . such documentary elements should not simply be treated as part of the current interface to the collection but should also be considered as potential targets of long-term-preservation in their own rig.this poster presents an information-model for digital-video context and places the information-model within the context of recent guidance on metadata for digital-video , metadata for digital-preservation , and the reference-model for an open archival information system (oais) .