incorporating computational-science activities in high-school-algebra despite great increases in the role of computation in science , technology , engineering and mathematics (stem) , there has been no comprehensive curriculum for computational-science in k-12-education [5] . the june 2005 president 's information-technology advisory committee (pitac) report stated that `` only a small fraction of the potential of computational-science is being realized '' , and `` the diverse technical-skills and technologies ... constitute a critical u.s. infrastructure that we under appreciate and undervalue at our peril [4] . '' despite a growing focus on stem-education , a substantial shortage exists of americans qualified to work in stem professions , including scientific-research [1] . progress in training computational scientists is lagging demand in the u.s. today . as this decade is seeing growth in the number of graduate , undergraduate , and teacher-training programs in computational-science [7] , it is vital that the curriculum and materials to infuse computation into k-12-schools are made avail.previous studies have shown how interactive-learning objects can be incorporated into teaching , allowing teachers to make classrooms more engaging and student active , provided faculty using the resources have adequate training , a willingness to modify their teaching-styles , and access to or time to create quality interactive assignments [6] . the computational-science-education reference desk (cserd) , a pathway project of the national-science-digital-library , collects learning-objects for teaching about and teaching with computation , reviewing items in its catalog on the basis of verification , validation , and accreditation to help provide faculty with information regarding the quality of the learning-objects [3] . this study attempts to determine the effectiveness of a set of interactive-learning materials from the cserd collection in teaching concepts in a freshman algebra i class . materials from the cserd resource project interactivate [2] will be used in a series of 4 lessons through february and march 2006 at a parochial school in northeastern new jersey . students will take a pre - and post-test on topics covered in this period . students and teachers will be surveyed to determine their attitudes towards the use of computation in learning and towards mathematics in general . additionally , students will submit a daily feedback statement after each augmented lesson .