blogger perceptions on digital-preservation blogs have emerged as valuable records of current social and political events . in response , calls in the literature have advocated that these new vehicles of communication and information-dissemination are valuable additions to the human record worthy of stewardship [1,2,3] . the intent of this research is to study the requirements and feasibility of impacting stewardship of blogs at the level of creation . this will be accomplished by surveying blogger perceptions on digital-preservation . expected outcomes of this study include the development of a framework for constructing a-digital preservation program for blogs . a survey will be administered to bloggers to assess perceptions of digital-preservation issues as related to their own blogging activities and the blogosphere in general . the instrument is organized into five categories : demographics , awareness , appraisal , impact , and investment . participants will be recruited through established contacts in the blogging-community , with the intent of a resulting snowball effect for gathering additional participation . the demographics section collects basic characteristics of respondents , characteristics of their blogs (e.g. , topic areas , platforms , linkages , content types , permissions for reuse) , and their blogging practices (e.g. , motivations , frequency of updates) . the awareness section surveys current preservation-related activities performed by bloggers such as measures taken to ensure duplication of blog-content ; and whether , why , and how bloggers engage in practices that result in post-publication content changes . the appraisal section assesses perceptions of issues related to persistent-storage and access . respondents are asked to evaluate the importance of researcher-supplied blog characteristics that could be used to appraise blogs and their components . these characteristics include social-and-cultural-factors such as perceived blog popularity , social linkages , and artifactual significance as well as structural components and content types . in addition to seeking clarification of the types and components of blogs that are perceived to be important with respect to preservation , the appraisal section addresses issues related to content ownership . the impact section focuses on the perceived importance of blogs to authors , preserving access to blogs , and blogs as a part of the human record . in the investment section , respondents are asked to quantify resources that they would be willing to expend to preserve their own blogs and their willingness to extend these expenditures to the blogs of others . data-collection will begin april 2007 and continue for one month . following closure of the survey , data will be analyzed using descriptive-statistics and qualitative-evaluation methods . an initial assessment report will include a summary analysis of results and initial calls for recommendations . future works include further development of these recommendations , development of benchmarks for planning ingest of blogs into a repository system , and the design and pilot-testing of a user-interface for deposit , storage , and access . this research is intended to promote digital-preservation activities for continued access to blogs and to raise awareness of digital-preservation issues among a population of users removed from the walls of academia and research . bloggers constitute a significant producer type in that they have produced culturally and socially significant works , including those that contribute to wider public discourse . furthermore , bloggers have the potential to become significant contributors to the dissemination of preservation awareness because they are vital actors in networks of communities that often span the borders of institutional , commercial , grassroots and personal-communications .