the dcc curation lifecycle-model the scientific record and the documentary heritage are increasingly created in digital form . the uk_based digital-curation centre supports institutions who store , manage and preserve such data to help ensure its enhancement and continuing long-term-use . the dcc (digital-curation centre) curation lifecycle-model provides a generic graphical high-level overview of the stages required for successful curation and preservation of digital material from initial conceptualisation . the model can be used to plan curation and preservation activities , to ensure sustainability of repository content or other digital material , within an organisation or consortium . it will help to ensure that all necessary stages are undertaken , each in the correct sequence . the model enables granular functionality to be mapped against it to define roles-and-responsibilities , and build a framework of standards and technologies to implement . it can help with the process of identifying additional steps which may be required , or actions which are not required by certain situations or disciplines , and of ensuring that processes and policies are adequately documented . digital-curation centre staff developed the model before undertaking a period of public-consultation , which was recently completed . the newly ratified model will shortly be used by the dcc to ensure that information , services and advisory material cover all areas of the lifecycle . domain-specific variations of the model will be developed , with greater levels of granularity , to help ensure that advice and information are easily accessible from the website . one planned utilisation is the development of domain-specific standards frameworks within the dcc diffuse standards frameworks , to help practitioners identify which standards they should be using and where they would be appropriately implemented . this poster will present the dcc curation lifecycle-model , incorporating the results of the public-consultation period held during december 2007 to february 2008 .