developing a review-process for online-resources the democratization of content-creation via ubiquitous internet tools and infrastructure [1] has fueled an explosion of user-generated-content in the commercial and educational markets . indeed , funding agencies such as the national-science-foundation (nsf) are actively seeking ways to integrate teachers and learners into the education cyber-infrastructure , whereby they become co-creators of educational content [2] . the ease with which this content , often in the form of online-learning-resources of varying levels of granularity , can be created and disseminated places it outside the usual peer-review processes employed by publishers and professional-societies . to date , digital-library (dl) developers , teachers and school administrators , concerned whether teachers are using peerreviewed online-learning-resources , have depended on one or a combination of the following proxies to establish an imprimatur of quality : the reputation and oversight of a funding organization (e.g. , nsf 's peer-review-process) , the credentials of the content creator (e.g. , national science teachers association) or the collection-development policies of specific dls (e.g. , dlese) . now more than ever , though , sites such as youtube , flickr and ccmixter and the evolving education cyber-infrastructure , have created an environment where user-generated-content is beyond the reach of even these proxy review processes . however , in the omnipresent climate of accountability within k12 education at u.s. federal , state-and-local levels , education dls are being challenged to identify the value : of the resources they hold and services they provide to users ; and , of what their users create with those resources . for all of these reasons , it is useful , and necessary , to develop a standardized rubric and process to review online-education resources . in particular , this work should leverage social and technical networks to enrich , facilitate , and automate the review-process . the digital libraries go to school project was funded by nsf in 2006 to develop a professional-development workshop curriculum that enables teachers to use the instructional-architect (ia ; http://ia.usu.edu) to design their own learning-activities for classrooms using online stem resources from the national-science-digital-library (nsdl.org) and the wider web . one component of the project is to examine the criteria and approaches for reviewing the quality of teacher-created online-learning-resources in order to develop a rubric and workflow process . work to date includes conducting focus-groups and surveys with teachers and a 5-person expert-review committee , complemented by a literature-review to identify elements for a review-rubric incorporating the work of other education dls (e.g. , dlese , merlot , needs , among others) . findings are being synthesized , and based on analysis , a draft list of elements has been identified for further testing in spring 2008 . at the same time , a workflow process for conducting reviews with teacher-created resources will be piloted . it will combine human-generated reviews with machine-generated information about online-resources (e.g. , image and word-count ; educational-standards alignment ; currency of updates , provenance) [3] . further work will identify areas for improving the review-rubric and scaling and standardizing the workflow process for fall 2008 . we will also evaluate the usefulness of the reviews to teachers , and to stakeholders such as the ia , nsdl , nsf and other dls , in providing access to high-quality online-content .