an ajax-based digital-music-stand for greenstone this extended abstract describes a-digital music-stand integrated with the greenstone-digital-library-software . it features text-annotation and an animated fast-to-slow page wipe . figure 1 illustrates both these features , although it is best appreciated in a live demonstration . digital-annotation provides a non-destructive alternative to a musician 's habit of penciling in notes . in figure 1 , slightly over half way down the page , there is a note to watch the fingering . a user can have as many of these as they like , positioned anywhere on the page . the animated page wipe alleviates (somewhat) the issue of when to turn to the next page . unlike its physical counterpart , where turning to the next page means you can no longer see the current page , with a-digital music-stand the next page can gradually be overlaid . the page-transition occurring in figure 1 can be seen as a marked horizontal bar not quite half-way down the page . the speed of the wipe is initially fast , but when it reaches the point where the scroll-bar marker is on the right-hand-side of the page , it slows down significantly . this is to give the musician time to finishing playing the last line of the current page . in the event they have already finished playing that line , they will have naturally moved on to playing the top of the next page (which is already displayed) . rather than adopt a traditional client-side `` helper '' application for the digital music-stand , we have integrated it within greenstone using ajax . for instance : next and previous pages are asynchronously loaded in the background ; when generating a page , the dimensions of the user 's screen is sent to the dl server so it can produce a version that maximizes the available space ; and interactions such as adding an annotation , or altering the position of the animation-break are immediately stored as metadata associated with that document . initially the animated page breaks are set to be between the last two staff systems . this is accomplished as part of the dl ingest process , leveraging off the staff detection step of optical-music-recognition software .