orechem chemxseer : a semantic digital-library for chemistry representing the semantics of unstructured scientific publications will certainly facilitate access and search and hopefully lead to new discoveries . however , current digital-libraries are usually limited to classic flat structured metadata even for scientific publications that potentially contain rich semantic-metadata . in addition , how to search the scientific-literature of linked semantic-metadata is an open problem . we have developed a semantic digital-library orechem chem x seer that models chemistry papers with semantic-metadata . it stores and indexes extracted metadata from a chemistry paper repository chem x seer using `` compound objects '' . we use the open-archives-initiative object-reuse-and-exchange (oai-ore) (http://www.openarchives.org/ore/ standard to define a compound object that aggregates metadata fields related to a-digital object . aggregated metadata can be managed and retrieved easily as one unit resulting in improved ease-of-use and has the potential to improve the semantic interpretation of shared data . we show how metadata can be extracted from documents and aggregated using oai-ore . ore objects are created on-demand ; thus , we are able to search for a set of linked metadata with one query . we were also able to model new types of metadata easily . for example , chemists are especially interested in finding information related to experiments in documents . we show how paragraphs containing experiment information in chemistry papers can be extracted and tagged based on a chemistry ontology with 470 classes , and then represented in ore along with other document-related metadata . our algorithm uses a classifier with features that are words that are typically only used to describe experiments , such as `` apparatus '' , `` prepare '' , etc. . using a dataset comprised of documents from the royal society of chemistry digital-library , we show that the our proposed methodperforms well in extracting experiment-related paragraphs from chemistry documents .