automatic-identification and organization of index-terms for interactive-browsing the potential of automatically generated indexes for information acces s has been recognized for several decades (e.g. , bush 1945 [2] , edmundson and wyllys 1961 [4]) , but the quantity of text and the ambiguity of natural-language-processing have made progress at this task more difficult than was originally foreseen . recently , a body of work on development of interactive-systems to support phrase-browsing has begun to emerge (e.g. , anick and vaithyanathan 1997 [1] , gutwin et al. [10] , nevill-manning et al. 1997 [17] , godby and reighart 1998 [9]) . in this paper , we consider two issues related to the use of automatically identified phrases as index-terms in a dynamic-text browser (dtb) , a user-centered system for navigating and browsing index-terms : 1) what criteria are useful for assessing the usefulness of automatically identified index-terms ? and 2) is the quality of the terms identified by automatic-indexing such that they provide useful access to document-content ? the terms that we focus on have been identified by linkit , a software-tool for identifying significant topics in text [7] . over 90 \ % of the terms identified by linkit are coherent and therefore merit inclusion in the dynamic-text browser . terms identified by linkit are input to intell-index , a prototype dtb that supports interactive-navigation of index-terms . the distinction between phrasal heads (the most important-words in a coherent term) and modifiers serves as the basis for a hierarchical organization of terms . this linguistically motivated structure helps users to efficiently browsing and disambiguate terms . we conclude that the approach to information-access discussed in this paper is very promising , and also that there is much room for further research . in the meantime , this research is a contribution to the establishment of a solid foundation for assessing the usability of terms in phrase-browsing applications .