cumulating and sharing end-users knowledge to improve video-indexing in a video digital library in this paper , we focus on a user driven approach to improve video ind exing . it consists in cumulating the large amount of small , individual efforts done by the users who access information , and to provide a-community management-mechanism to let users share the elicited knowledge . this technique is currently being developed in the opales environment and tuned up at the institut national de l'audiovisuel & r dquo ; (ina) , a national video-library in paris , to increase the value of its patrimonial video-archive collections . it relies on a portal providing private-workspaces to end-users , so that a large part of their work can be shared between them . the effort for interpreting documents is directly done by the expert-users who work for their own job on the archives . opales provides an original notion of point-of-view to enable the elicitation and the sharing of knowledge between communities of users , without leading to messy structures . the overall result consists in linking exportable private metadata to archive documents and managing the sharing of the elicited knowledge between users-communities . provide bring together the leaders developing the national-smete-digital-library to provide a brief background and broad overview of the nsdl program . panelists will discuss the overall vision and broad steps underway to develop the national-smete-digital-library . building the national-smete-digital-library presents many challenges : developing a shared-vision for the form and function of the nsdl ; meeting the needs of diverse learners and of the many disciplines encompassed by the nsdl ; acquiring input from the community-of-users to ensure that the nsdl is both used and useable ; evaluating progress and impacts ; integrating technologies that already exist , and the development of new-technologies ; and providing mechanisms for sharing and cooperation of knowledge and resources among nsdl collaborators .