digital-libraries supporting digital-government the needs of society have long been addressed through government resea rch support for new technologies-the internet representing one example . today , under the rubric of digital-government , federal-agencies as well as state-and-local units of governments at all levels have begun to leverage the fruits of these research investments to better serve the needs of their constituencies . government-agencies apply these technologies in a variety of settings including emergency-response , health-and-safety regulation , financial-management , data-gathering , and hosts of information-dissemination needs . in addition , governments are investigating ways to use technology to encourage citizen-participation . there is a growing digital-government community-of-practice that strongly parallels the evolving digital-library community . these parallel developments are not surprising because libraries and governments share service missions for their overlapping constituencies . governments at all levels create enormous volumes of information for use by citizens and have long depended on libraries to organize , disseminate , and preserve this public-information . there is an inextricable link between democratic government and libraries stemming from the 19th century creation of public-libraries as democracys offer to citizens to learn , to grow , and to participate . the idea of sharing-knowledge to enable good citizenship engenders many cross-currents inherent in social-political policy , and today this idea is given new incarnation in the global internet environment . digital-library projects in national and local libraries were in many ways the precursors of digital-government initiatives and it is particularly instructive to examine a selection of digital-government projects through the lens of digital-libraries . this panel presents overviews of several digital-government projects and initiatives that combine the technical and conceptual threads composing these mutuall