guided linking : efficiently making image-to-transcript correspondence the problem of annotating unstructured images is labor intensive and d ifficult to automate . linking is a type of annotation where an image region is tagged by representing a correspondence between the region and other information . any serious effort at creating a-digital edition of a manuscript from nothing but images and their associated information , such as transcripts and editorial remarks , must include the task of creating a large number of links between image regions and the related information . we present an approach to the problem of image linking , which concentrates on the fundamental and labor-intensive task of associating image regions with their textual counterparts . we assume the input to the system is a set of images representing a manuscript , and that associated data , such as a transcript , is available to provide guidance to the automated portion of the system . our approach targets collections that are damaged and difficult-to-read , such as manuscripts that require intensive editorial annotation . it is essentially impossible to perform fully automated techniques , such as optical-character-recognition (ocr) or accurate handwriting-analysis [2] , on these kinds of manuscripts . we approach the problem with a semi-automatic solution that involves a document-analysis (da) module and a graphical-user-interface . the role of the da module is to assist the user in formulating an algorithm that will automatically detect and rank regions-of-interest in the image . we provide the user with the capability to configure the parameters and steps of the analysis-algorithm and thereby tune it to the task of identifying and ranking-candidate regions for linking . with a graphical-user-interface , the user can interactively establish correspondences between image regions and other data , refine the correspondences detected by the da module , and supply simple yet critical cues to the da module to improve the result of subsequent automated-processing . one