a national digital library for undergraduate mathematics and science teacher-preparation and professional-development the primary goal of the national digital library for undergraduate mat hematics and science teacher-preparation and professional-development , funded through the nsf division of undergraduate-education national science digital libraries initiative , is to increase the use of best teaching practices by faculty by providing the resources - tools , training , and data - needed to build inquiry and discovery into all undergraduate science and mathematics-courses . improving the math and science-education of future and in-service k-12-teachers is one of the most important challenges facing college and university faculties . the preparation of future teachers is a fundamental element in the improvement of the learning-experience of all students , from grades k-16 . as teachers know , it is natural to teach as we have been taught ourselves . the standards in mathematics and science call for greater integration of inquiry-based techniques and more rigorous mathematical and science content . teachers at all levels will be better equipped to meet these standards if they are taught using these approaches during their own education . the resources of this collection target two-year and four-year colleges of arts and sciences faculty members and college of education faculty that teach mathematics and science content courses . the collection focuses primarily on those resources that can be accessed electronically , whether they be web-based text or data resources , software or video that can be downloaded via the-web or other electronic-means , or emerging-technology applications . resources are reviewed and selected by mathematics and science content experts before they are made available to online users . this review ensures that the resources are accurate , pedagogically effective , and that this digital-library is an efficient source of quality materials . this digital-library enables faculty at any undergraduate institution-regardless of financial resources-to