automatic removal of advertising from web-page display the usefulness of the world-wide-web as a-digital library of precise and reliable information is reduced by the increasing presence of advertising on web-pages . but no one is required to read or see advertising , and this cognitive censorship can be automated by software . such filters can be useful to the u.s. government which must permit its employees to use the-web but which is prohibited by law from endorsing commercial products . while the task would seem at first simpler than filtering of pornography or general firewalls , subtleties in recognizing advertising make full success daunting . our work is evaluating the quality of methods and products for automatic ad censorship . commercial products include adkiller (www.adkiller.com) , ad subtract pro (www.adsubtract.com) , advertising killer (www.buypin.com) , adwiper (www.adwiper.com) , filtergate (www.adscience . co.uk) , and webwasher (www.webwasher.com) . other products prevent the annoying popup windows that are usually ads . things these products do include removal of ad-like images embedded in the page , prevention of popup windows and javascript alert boxes , prevention of blinking text , and prevention of playing of embedded audio . or so the vendors claim . not a single one provides any statistics on the accuracy of their product (e.g. recall and precision) to support their grand claims of removing ads . we are experimenting to determine how effective various techniques are in ad censoring . we constructed a censor of our own (`` big head '') with manipulable features . we use java-servlet software to implement a page server that fetches html source-text and edits it to create a modified page for display . the modified page has blanks in the places of inferred ads , and substitutes local links for remote links to permit further censoring . blanks are made the same shape as the censored ads so that meaningful page-layout can be preserved . we initially examined a variety of web-sites to develop a set of clue properties for both image-ads and their associated text , considering the text within a fixed-size window around the html image reference . we defined ads as information intended to arouse a desire to purchase or patronize something . it became clear that identification methods need to include both logical and probabilistic-methods to achieve high recall (fraction of ads removed from pages) , although high precision (fraction of ads among the items eliminated) was easy by simply picking the popup windows and narrow banner-size images . certain image dimensions are strong clues for ads , especially 480 by 60 banners and 150 by 500 , 120 by 600 , and 160 by 600 images along the sides of the page . images stored on sites different from the page 's site (i.e. with different first part of their url) were also very likely to be ads , as were images whose file names contained long integers . these criteria are sufficiently strong to give 95 \ % precision in identifying image-ads . additional weaker criteria used included the words of the image file name (the image url) , words of any directly associated text (`` alt '' string) , and other words within a fixed-size window around the image reference . good clue words and phrases were obtained from a study of random commercial web-pages . examples are `` ad '' , `` buy '' , `` shop '' , `` free '' , `` join '' , `` click '' , and `` now '' . the strength of each clue was estimated as the fraction of the time that the image was an ad when the word was associated with it . in addition , image-ads were usually larger than 2500 pixels , and `` alt '' text for ads was usually less than 100 characters long ; both tendencies can be modeled by probability-distributions derived from statistics from example pages . evidence from these weaker clues was combined using a linear model (or weighted-average) , and items were eliminated if their weighted sum exceeded a fixed threshold . in a quick test , our program examined representative pages , and correctly recognized 19 of 20 ads and 153 of 156 non-ads where ads were manually identified in advance . public-access is from http://triton.cs.nps.navy.mil:8080/rowe/rowedemos.html . text ads also have exploitable syntax . analogously to what we developed for finding image-captions in our marie-4 web-crawler , incitements to purchase typically use a limited range of grammatical expressions recognizable by a partial-parser . good examples are expressions of the imperative form of verb indicating acquiring (`` buy '' , `` get '' , `` join '' , `` click '' , etc. followed by a noun indicating a purchasable quantity (a physical-object or a service) , with optionally a qualifying adjective on the noun or an adverb indicating a desirable property of the acquisition (`` now '' , `` free '' , `` soon '' , etc.) such a parser can approach semantic-understanding of advertising text and improve precision of ad identification . our research is ongoing . future work will obtain more reliable performance-statistics on representative web-pages , and will investigate methods of identifying more difficult kinds of ads . though we did not consider it yet , elimination of popup windows and javascript applets is usually straightforward from analysis of the html source-code . we hope to publish performance comparisons of different methods and different vendor products soon .