breathing life into digital-archives : use of natural-language-processing to revitalize the grey literature of public-health the goal of our 2-year robert wood johnson-funded project is to apply natural-language-processing (nlp) technology to improve access and use of the digitalized public-health `` grey '' literature . much public-health information , such as meeting notes , think-tank reports , policy statements , and data-sets , is not available through traditional commercial pathways and is considered grey or fugitive literature . although grey literature documents are increasingly posted in digital-archives on the web , the unstructured and varied nature of grey literature makes accessing useful content difficult at best.in an effort to help make the content of public-health digital-collections more accessible to public-health providers , we will use proven nlp-techniques to identify and extract key elements of digital-documents . nlp-techniques can be used to identify and tag key elements from full-text documents . once tagged , the content of various documents can be extracted and summarized in tables and charts for comparison and review . the ability of nlp to recognize and represent both the explicit and implicit content of full text documents makes it a powerful technique for interpreting the language of text-documents . our nlp information-access system has been used in other domains to extract individual entities and events , as well as draw relationships-between-entities and events to build a content representation.the goal is to develop a model of public-health interventions and identify key entities and events from these digital-archives . key elements may include type of study and population demographics as well as more traditional bibliographic elements such as author , title and publication date.nlp technology will be used to search , identify and extract key elements based on the user 's request . key elements can be extracted across multiple documents for summary and comparison . for example , the user can extract key elements from annual reports about `` teenage smoking-cessation programs '' to compare method of intervention , demographic population , and outcome . such comparisons will help public-health professionals to determine how a particular intervention fits with similar interventions reported in the grey literature . this system holds great promise for improving access to public-health information through digital-archives .