by the people now , for the people later : using transitory metadata to anchor a-digital archive the congressional research service (crs) serves congress by providing timely , objective and non_partisan research , analysis and information-services . the legislative information office within crs fulfills that mandate by maintaining a-digital library of legislative-documents known as the legislative information system.an ongoing challenge is designing these full text and structured databases for both promptness and permanence . this is accomplished by metadata and interface-design . this foundation prepares for the impending incorporation of more complex born_digital formats such as xml , audio and video.legislative information-system (lis) clients are those who have access to capitol hill intranet systems . (the public version is the thomas site http://thomas.loc.gov .) lis adds value to public domain legislative data with advanced text-retrieval tools and the benefit of a portal site.the content of lis is composed of several collections of documents . the house of representatives and the senate create and update legislative information , which is the bulk of lis . the government printing office publishes text and pdf formats of congressional documents , building up lis 's catalog of full_text documents . the crs bill digest section , established by law in 1935 to index and summarize bills , adds additional metadata . in partnership with the user-community , a high degree of data-quality-control is actively maintained.the primary entry point is a database called bill summary and status . from there , links are available into the full text collections : text of bills , committee reports and the congressional record . these are large_scale collections . lis maintains every published bill version since 1989 . this session , congress already has introduced more than 6000 bills and important bills often have up to five versions . the search pages have been carefully crafted to accommodate both novice and advanced users . a number of prepared searches are built underneath the search page interface . these gather bills on nebulous topics such as `` national security.lis 's primary role is as a prompt deliverer of legislative events and documents . for instance , a senator needs a current list of all co-sponsors on her bill . a staffer needs to read yesterday 's floor debate . legislative events in lis are updated regularly to accommodate this fast_paced need for data . searchers are able to specify narrowly defined legislative status steps in order to track current legislation . the lis alert service sends out email notification when selected legislation is updated.lis data is also used retrospectively to piece together a legislative-history . a legislative-history attempts to establish the intent of a current law by compiling documents created during the legislative process . a legislative-history could include conference reports , congressional hearings , debates and early drafts of bills . all of these documents are available in electronic format in lis . each legislative step has embedded-links to lis full_text documents , creating an easy_to_maintain web of legislative-history . in addition , a text-analysis tool has been developed which allows paragraph level comparison of legislation . this tool allows us to closely track the evolution of legislative language.future developments of lis involve displaying full-text documents in xml , linking to video of congressional proceedings , and completing a retrospective conversion of past congressional content.the prompt recording of current legislative events provides the key to long_term access into our growing digital-archive of legislative-documents . our primary designated community-is the congressional staff , but the results benefit individual citizens , the courts and businesses who are trying to interpret the rules that govern how we live .