panel on digital-preservation digital-information in any form is at risk . software and hardware become obsolete , and versions and file-formats change , making data inaccessible . data stored in even the simplest form are in danger due to computer media degradation and obsolescence . on-line information such as e-journals and databases are susceptible . they may become partially or entirely unreadable , and may not be recoverable by the time the problem is detected . preservation-strategies such as emulation (keeping alive the software and hardware needed to access a-digital object) , migration (converting the digital object to new versions and formats) , and other long-term archival methods have been proposed [1-7] . models such as the open archival information system (oais) provide an architecture for conducting digital-preservation research and experimentation [8-10] . the importance of preservation metadata has been recognized by a number of groups and efforts to develop and deploy metadata-standards are underway [11-14] . as more and more digital-information is created , attention must be paid to what information should be preserved and how it can be preserved most economically and effectively . it is clear that for preservation to be successful , we need to pay attention not only to the format of digital-objects , but also to the commitment we make to providing long-term-access to the information . thus , decisions about digital-preservation will involve technical issues as well as economic , legal , social , and organizational ones . is it possible or feasible to preserve all digital-data automatically and in a cost effective way ? how much functionality can or must be preserved ? what type of metadata will be needed to ensure both access and preservation ? what metrics do we use to evaluate whether our methods will be successful.panelists will make short presentations about work in which they have been involved and which reflect a variety of aspects of digital-preservation . reagan moore will discuss the levels-of-abstraction that are needed to create infrastructure independent representations for data , information , and knowledge , and he will discuss a prototype persistent digital-archive . the persistent archive infrastructure has been developed for use by the national archives and records administration and other federal-agencies . william underwood will report on lessons-learned in preserving digital records created on personal-computers . the records being examined are the digital records created on personal-computers during the administration of president george bush (1988-1992) . vicky reich will present work on the lockss (lots of copies keep stuff safe) project , which is a permanent web-publishing and access system . lockss software allows libraries to retain local collection control of materials delivered through the-web while preserving the functionality of the original web-based content . robin dale will report on activities of the preservation program of the research libraries group (rlg) . she will focus on the joint work of rlg and oclc (online computer library center) on preservation metadata . following the presentations by the four panelists , alexa mccray will provide brief comments and then open the discussion for audience-participation .