facet : thesaurus retrieval with semantic term-expansion there are many advantages for digital-libraries in indexing with classifications or thesauri , but some current disincentive in the lack of flexible retrieval tools that deal with compound-descriptors . this demonstration of a research prototype illustrates a matching-function for compound-descriptors , or multi-concept subject-headings , that does not rely on exact-matching but incorporates term-expansion via thesaurus semantic-relationships to produce ranked results that take account of missing and partially matching terms [5] . the matching-function is based on a measure of semantic-closeness between terms [4] . the work is part of the epsrc funded facet project [2] in collaboration with the uk national museum of science and industry (nmsi) which includes the national railway museum [3] . an export of nmsi 's collections database is used as the dataset for the research . the j. paul getty trust 's art and architecture thesaurus (aat) [1] is the main thesaurus in the project . the aat is a widely used thesaurus (over 120,000 terms) . descriptors are organised in 7 facets representing separate conceptual classes of terms.the facet application is a multi tiered-architecture accessing a sql-server-database , with an ole-db connection . the thesauri are stored as relational-tables in the server 's database . however , a key component of the system is a parallel representation of the underlying semantic-network as an in-memory structure of thesaurus concepts (corresponding to preferred terms) . the structure models the hierarchical and associative interrelationships of thesaurus concepts via weighted poly-hierarchical links . its primary purpose is real-time semantic-expansion of query terms , achieved by a spreading-activation semantic-closeness algorithm . queries with associated results are stored persistently using xml-format data . a visual-basic interface combines a thesaurus browser and an initial term search-facility that takes into account equivalence relationships . terms are dragged to a direct-manipulation query builder which maintains the facet structure .