puget sound 's mars (media asset retrieval-systems) digital-library the corporation-for-public-broadcasting (cpb) and public broadcasters consider media-asset-management (mam) of critical importance since without a concerted and cooperative plan to manage their vast library of content , broadcasters are unable to reach their potential for service in the digital age.the concerns for media-asset-management , which are the digital libraries for broadcasters , human and technical , are myriad . media-asset-management is the framework upon which many of the largest technology projects will be built , including the-future interconnection system between and among cpb member stations . it is cpb 's hope that its licensees and their partners in university , museum , and library communities , will work together to contribute to media-asset-management solutions.this poster will present some of the complex issues around media-asset-management and possible solutions to the problems as well as show the breath of research projects in the area . the issues include metadata , indexing , controlled-vocabularies , storage and access-methods , rights-management , technological infrastructure requirements , and interoperability.to highlight these issues we will use as an example the media asset retrieval-system (mars) project . the goal of this project is to create a model for representing , organizing , storing , and facilitating access to public audio (radio) and audiovisual (television) broadcast material via the-internet . the immediate goal for mars is to produce a-digital online resource that will provide access to material produced by public broadcasters in the puget sound region (kuow and kcts) . the material will be made available to students , teachers , media , and the general public through the king county library system and seattle public-library system . the mission of the convergence consortium guides the mars project . the convergence consortium is a working collaborative between public broadcasters , public-libraries , k-12-schools and the information school of the university of washington that meet to assess the needs of their constituents and propose solutions that will be developed to meet those need.the mars project is funded by a grant from the corporation-for-public-broadcasting television future fund and it falls within the context of major decisions about media-asset-management in public broadcasting . it is the intent that the mars project will produce a reference document that will help public broadcast stations make decisions about media-asset-management as it relates to audio and audiovisual access as a-community resource.the mars team will analyze the current systems and their contexts and design a-digital library system for the kuow and kcts broadcasters that will facilitate access to the broadcast material . the digital library will support advanced knowledge-organization techniques and search-algorithms to facilitate retrieval of the broadcast material . the mars project ties together some of the critical issues in digital-libraries and approaches these problems from a user-centered perspective .