active netlib : an active mathematical-software collection for inquiry-based computational-science & engineering-education a core subject in the undergraduate-education of application scientists and engineers is the use of mathematical-software to solve computational-problems . to make effective use of mathematical-software , application developers need a basic understanding of the underlying numerical-methods and enough knowledge to be able to choose an appropriate solver , parameterize it correctly , and validate the computed results . correct results are of course required , but good computational performance is desired as well . most application scientists have neither the time nor the interest to read the current literature in numerical-analysis . they solve numerical problems by relying on the methods and programs they learned about in previous coursework . this tendency has the unfortunate consequence that new methods with improved functionality and/or efficiency may go unused by practicing engineers . application engineers need enough understanding of the underlying numerical-methods to be able to detect and diagnose problems that occur and to modify or customize the methods if necessary.a large amount of mathematical-software is both commercially and freely available . however , not all the software that is available is of high quality . it can also be difficult to locate the appropriate software by using web-search-engines , since the descriptions available for searching may be lacking or may not match the vocabulary used by the searcher . a good solution to these problems is to have experts in the field of numerical-analysis maintain a moderated collection of high quality software which is organized and cataloged with appropriate metadata to enable easy searching . the netlib mathematical-software repository is such a collection that has been contributed to and managed by the numerical-analysis community for the past fifteen years.active netlib provides an active collection of high-quality mathematical-software resources in the context of an inquiry-based-learning environment for computational-science-and-engineering education . the netlib collection is being extended in a number of ways to support the goals of this project . the netsolve client-server-system for accessing hardware and software resources over a network provides an active-interface to the contents of netlib . netsolve essentially constructs network-accessible objects with executable content from the software-packages in netlib.by making the subroutines housed in netlib available over the network on computational-servers , netsolve enables access to up-to-date mathematical-software from a variety of client interfaces running on users ' workstations , without requiring the users to download and install the software themselves.this demonstration will illustrate the following digital-library technology : searching and browsing the active mathematical-software collection using the repository in a box (rib) interface ; once relevant software is located , it can be dynamically installed on-demand on a computational server . invoking executable content on netsolve computational-servers from the matlab client interface use of an interactive adaptive-user-interface to guiding the user in learning about iterative-methods for solving large sparse linear-systems for more information , see the active-netlib home-page at http://icl.cs.utk.edu/active-netlib/ .