marine realms information bank : a distributed geolibrary for the ocean the marine realms information bank (mrib) is a prototype web-based distributed geolibrary that organizes , indexes , and delivers online-information about the oceanic and coastal environments . the improvement of computer power and connectivity of the 1990s , by enabling very fast exchange of data online , has shown that effective information-management does not automatically result from quicker connection or large broadband . millions of web-sites have been setup to provide information on every subject , and various information-gathering systems have been developed to locate information online . unfortunately , these search-engines often produce exhaustive bibliographic lists that mix first-quality scientific-knowledge with irrelevant materials . to be really useful , information banks require not only quality-control but also classification-systems that integrate and organize the information . in 1999 the national research council proposed the concept of distributed-geolibraries , which are online digital-libraries able to provide a simple mechanism for searching and retrieving information in response to topical and geographically defined needs . distributed-geolibraries are beneficial for various reasons , the most important of which is the authoritative role they would come to assume as subject-gateways . to be referenced through a scientific geolibrary , information-sources must meet quality standards set by the library gatekeeper . another important benefit of a distributed geolibrary comes from its `` distributed '' attribute . without the need to collect information in one physical location , local curators can serve and update online-information without the requirement of maintaining consistency among multiple copies . the mrib prototype implements the distributed geolibrary concept to organize , index , and deliver online-information about the oceanic and coastal environments . mrib provides access-to-information , but it is not an information repository . it incorporates information that exists in remote sources , without modifying formats or content . this system succeeds by building a central index that consists of electronic index cards containing metadata about the information-sources , their geographical areas , and their network locations . the ontology of mrib is expressed in the classification-system through which users can explore the available information . mrib currently classifies information with 13 types of categories (facets) : location , geologic time , features , biota , discipline , scientific-method , hot-topics , project name , agency name , author , class , format , and audience . classifying information is not automatic but is performed by a librarian , which is both the major benefit and the major operating-cost of mrib . the significance of mrib lies both in the utility of the information bank and in the implementation of the distributed-geolibraries concept . distributed information banks , such as mrib , can be applied widely as unifying portals for extensive or rapidly developing information bases , for which a centralized repository would be impractical . in addition , mrib has a modular structure that allows a classification-system to be easily modified , to expedite the development-and-testing of suitable classification-systems for existing information bases .