quantitatively evaluating the influence of online-social-interactions in the community-assisted-digital-library online-social-interactions are useful in information-seeking from digital-libraries , but how to measure their influence on the user 's information-access actions has not yet been revealed . studies on this problem give us interesting insights into the workings of human-dynamics in the context of information-access from digital-libraries . on the basis , we wish to improve the technological supports to provide more intelligent-services in the ongoing china-america million books digital-library so that it can reach its potential in serving human-needs . our research aims at developing a common framework to model online social interaction-process in community-assisted digital libraries . the underlying philosophy of our work is that the online social-interaction can be viewed as a dynamic-process , and the next state of each participant in this process (e.g. , personal-information-access competency) depends on the value of the previous states of all participants involving interactions in the period . hence , considering the dynamics of interaction-process , we model each participant with a hidden-markov-model (hmm) chain and then employ the-influence-model , which was developed by c. asavathiratham as a dynamic bayes net (dbn) of representing the influences a number of markov-chains have on each other , to analyze the effects of participants influencing each other . therefore , one can think of the entire interaction-process as a dbn framework having two levels of structure : the local level and the network-level . each participant i has a local hmm chain & ggr ;(a) which characterizes the transition of his internal-states in the interaction-process with state-transition probability & sum ; over j d ij p (s i t | s j t-1) (here states are his personal-information-access competence in different periods , while observations are his information-access actions) . meanwhile , the network-level , which is described by a network-graph & ggr ;(d t) where d ={ d ij} is the influence factor matrix , represents the interacting relations between participants . the strength of each connection , d ij , describes the influence factor of the participant j at its begin on the one i at its end . hence , this model describes the dynamic inter-influence process of the internal-states of all participants involving online-interactions . to automatically build the model , we need firstly to extract observed features from the data of online-social-interactions and information access actions . obviously , the effects of interactions are stronger if messages are exchanged more frequently , or the participants access more information in the online digital-libraries during the period of time . based on this consideration , we select the interaction measure im i , j t and the amount of information ia j t as the estimation features of x i t . the interaction measure ia i t and the amount of information parameterize the features calculated automatically from the data of online-social-interactions between the participants i and j , and the features calculated from the data of information-access actions respectively . secondly , we need to develop a mechanism for learning the parameters d ij and p (s i t | s j t-1 . given sequences of observations {x i t} for each chain i , we may easily utilize the expectation-maximization-algorithm or the gradient-based learning-algorithm to get their estimation equations . we ran our experiments in the online digital-library of w3c consortium (www.w3c.org) , which contains a mass of news , electronic papers or other materials related to web-technologies . users may access and download any information and materials in this digital-library , and also may free discuss on any related technological problems by means of its mailing-lists . six users were selected in our experiments to collaboratively perform paper - gathering tasks related to four given topics . any user might call for help from the others through the mailing-lists when had difficulties in this process . all participants were required to record subjective evaluations of the effects that the others influenced his tasks . each experiment was scheduled by ten phases . and in each phase , we sampled im i , j t and ia i t for each participant and then fed them into the learning-algorithms to automatically build the-influence-model . by comparing with the subjective influence graphs , the experimental-results show that the-influence-model can estimate approximately the influences of online-social-interactions .