educational-tools in support of the stanford mediaserver medical media resources exist in a variety of analog and digital formats . collections are generally organized and stored by their owners , each of whom utilizes their own method of cataloging and retrieval . as faculty retire , move on , or pass away , institutions risk losing the expertise that enhances the value media . the stanford mediaserver has previously been deployed to catalog , organize , and centralize management of such media collections via the world-wide-web . educational-tools have been developed on top of existing mediaserver infrastructure to address a range of pedagogical models , and to promote widespread adoption within the stanford medical school curriculum and departments . these tools include slide-show , export to powerpoint , teaching file , and e-books . with the exception of e-books , these tools use web-based wizards to lead the user through the steps for creating each component.slide shows consist of an ordered set of images and provide the underpinning data-structures for powerpoint and teaching file-creation . slide shows can be assembled from any accessible media in the mediaserver and shared with other users of the system.export to powerpoint is a utility-function to address the widespread use of powerpoint in medical-education and multimedia-presentation . it allows slide shows to be converted to powerpoint and downloaded to the client system for offline use , easing the process of assembling media and creating a powerpoint document . this function leverages xml-web-services and the soap protocol to achieve the desired outputs.teaching files are used to illustrate a particular educational topic , and consist of a multi-page interface . each page contains media and annotations specific to the educational topic at hand . annotations are stored with the teaching file and not with the collated media . individual pages are assembled by choosing existing slide shows and further annotating the media.e-books are web-based books built on a particular design template provided by the mediaserver . authors can integrate media from the mediaserver into these e-books , which are assembled through the use of 3 rd party tools such as macromedia dreamweaver.mediaserver resources were deployed in a gross anatomy course through the use of these tools and integration with third-party-applications , including a three-dimensional stereo-viewing system . this pilot project was well received by the course participants and evaluation of usage-data is ongoing.these educational-media tools must be further evaluated for their teaching efficacy . these tools will be evaluated with volunteer faculty contributing media and creating slide shows , powerpoint documents , teaching files , and e-books . these educational modules will then be used for medical school classes . feedback will be integrated into further development of new educational-tools , providing new views into the large stanford mediaserver dataset.access rights-management and security is paramount for the protection of digital-media . the existing mediaserver security-system will be enhanced to address privacy-concerns , while providing faculty the flexibility to appropriately create and share educational units with their students and colleagues . standard apis will also be created to allow third-party developers to access the media in the mediaserver and deliver it through their own web-based applications.this work was partially funded by gifts from the yamazaki-yang family foundation , the siminoff family foundation , sun-microsystems , and silicon graphics .