5sgraph demo : a graphical-modeling tool for digital-libraries the current demand from non-experts who wish to build digital-libraries is strong worldwide . however , since dls are complex-systems , it usually takes a huge amount of effort and time to create and tailor a-digital library to satisfy specific needs and requirements of target communities/societies . what is desired is a simplified modeling-process and rapid generation of digital-libraries . to enable this , digital-libraries should be modeled with descriptive domain-specific-languages [1] . in a domain-specific-modeling-language , the models are made up of elements representing concepts , rules , and terminology that are part of the domain world , as opposed to the code world or generic-modeling languages (e.g. , uml [2]) . a visual-modeling tool would be helpful to non-experts so they may model a-digital library without knowing the theoretical-foundations and the syntactical details of the descriptive language.in this demonstration , we present a domain-specific visual modeling-tool , 5sgraph , aimed at modeling digital-libraries . 5sgraph is based on a metamodel that describes dls using the 5s theory [3] . the output from 5sgraph is a-digital library model that is an instance of the metamodel , expressed in the 5s description-language (5sl) [4] .5 sgraph presents the metamodel in a structured toolbox , and provides a top-down visual building environment for designers (see figure 1) . the visual proximity of the metamodel and instance model facilitates requirements-gathering and simplifies the modeling-process . furthermore , 5sgraph maintains semantic-constraints specified by the 5s metamodel and enforces these constraints over the instance model to ensure semantic-consistency and correctness . 5sgraph enables component-reuse to reduce the time and efforts of designers . 5sgraph also is designed to be flexible and extensible , able to accommodate and integrate several other complementary tools (e.g. , to model scenarios or complex digital objects) , reflecting the interdisciplinary nature of digital-libraries . the tool has been tested with real-users and several modeling tasks in a usability experiment [5] and its usefulness and learnability have been demonstrated .