communication-channels and the adoption of digital-libraries for electronic-theses-and-dissertations this research used diffusion-of-innovation-theory to explore factors that influence adoption of digital-libraries for electronic-theses-and-dissertations (etd-dl) among members of the networked-digital-library-of-theses-and-dissertations (ndltd) communication-channels were categorized as being either interpersonal or mediated , and the perceived importance of these channels was assessed both within and between organizations . a web-based survey collected data from the 133 universities in 26 countries that were ndltd members in december 2002 . respondents were members of the university 's ` etd committee ' and represented academic administrators , faculty , librarians , and computer-systems specialists . surveys were received from 95 respondents representing 65 universities in 14 countries . twenty-one of these universities were outside the united-states , and represented countries with a wide range of economic development.results provide insights into university attitudes towards distributed-digital-libraries . for example , results suggest that interpersonal channels of communication about digital-library-adoption are more important than mediated channels within the organization . however , mediated channels of communication are more important for those universities that have decided to adopt the etd-dl but have not yet implemented the dl . there were also significant differences in the importance attributed to these channels by individuals in different jobs . the results suggest strategies that could encourage development of digital-libraries within other social-systems . the study also illustrates the importance of planning for the human-factor in digital-library management . carefully constructed strategies that address all the parties involved in dl adoption and that account for differences in communication-style will more readily facilitate successful adoption of distributed-digital-libraries .