using digital-library components for biodiversity-systems biodiversity information systems (biss) involve all kinds of heterogeneous-data , which include ecological and geographical features however , available information-systems offer very limited support for managing such data in an integrated fashion , and such integration is often based on geographic coordinates alone . furthermore , such systems do not fully support image-content management (e.g. photos of landscapes or living organisms) , a requirement of many bis end -- users . in order to meet their needs , these users -- e.g. biologists , environmental experts -- often have to alternate between distinct biodiversity and image information systems to combine information extracted from them . this cumbersome operational procedure is forced on users by lack of interoperability among these systems . this hampers the addition of new data sources , as well as cooperation among scientists . the approach provided in this project to meet these issues is based on taking advantage of advances in digital-library (dl) innovations to integrate networked collections of heterogeneous-data . it focuses on creating the basis for a biodiversity-information-system under the digital library perspective , combining new techniques of content -- based image-retrieval and database-query-processing mechanisms . this approach solves the problem of system switching , and provides users with a flexible platform from which to tailor a bis to their needs . the main contributions of this project are the following : (a) a generic architecture for managing heterogeneous collections , based ondigital library components , to access heterogeneous biodiversity data sources (text and images) , that allows combining text -- based andcontent -- based queries in a seamless way ; and (b) a new component , for content -- based image-search , integrated into that architecture . the proposed architecture has been implemented by using dl components which are mostly new or recently developed . furthemore , its implementation uses the open-archives-initiative (oai) protocol as a basis for interoperability . this architecture is easily extensible , and provides users a considerable degree of flexibility in data-management . to illustrate our claim that this architecture can be applied to several domains , we are investigating its application in building a biodiversity-information-system on fish species . this solution solves many current problems in this kind of system , allowing handling of images and textual-information in an integrated fashion . a new content-based image search component has been developed to support queries on image-collections . since this component is based onthe oai principles , it provides an easy-to-install search-engine toquery images by content . it can be readily tailored for a particular collection by a trained designer , who carries out a clearly definedset of pilot experiments . it supports the use of different image-descriptors , which can be chosen from the pilot experiment , and theneasily combined to yield improved effectiveness . in addition , it encapsulates a multidimensional-index-structure to speed up the search-process , that also can be easily configured for different image-collections .