collaboration in digital-libraries : a conceptual-framework new classes of services for digital-libraries have been explored in there search community with many now being tested and deployed in real-world settings . unfortunately , there have been problems , some predicted and some unforeseen , in the development of these services . moreover , a number of problems have been identified as becoming critical in the future , especially the difficulties as sociated with preservation of archives of digital-content when data formats and media both have limited life spans . we have analyzed a number of these services in a research-library (personal collection-management , annotation , institutional-repositories , and learning-object-repositories) in terms of their user and task requirements for three prototypical users : a researcher , a teacher and a student . given these , we develop a unified conceptual-model of how these services should work together in collaborative situations and some of the requirements for systems and service organizations that might implement them . this model centers around a vision of the digital library as the hub of a personalized , integrated-information-management environment . in particular we note the importance of : a flexible collection model that encompasses traditional collections managed by librarians , community collections managed by either professionals or users , and private , individual collections ; both synchronous and asynchronous interactions between users and data ; integration between library-services and tools for using the information managed by the library user annotations as metadata associated with documents and document fragments and the integration of this facility with metadata-search ; a data-model that provides universal , granular access to the contents of documents and other resources whether they are structured , semi-structured or unstructured ; a data-security model that provides full support for a range of private to semi-public to fully public data-and-metadata for users and user-communities ; and simple , flexible and integrated control of privacy , security , and integrity of all such data-and-metadata . beyond these , one significant observation that deserves greater emphasis is the need to provide direct and sophisticated support for a variety of epistemic-communities in any such digital-library . in particular , both users and communities need new tools to organize and use the information they are collecting in the context of their personal and collective-knowledge . the claim is that for these patterns of use , it is less useful to provide universal ontological models orcategory hierarchies than it is to provide sophisticated tools to allow both automatic and user-directed semantic-categories and relations to be defined , refined and adapted for information-management in context . finally , this analysis reveals a set oftechnical requirements that highlight a number of critical gaps in the conceptual integration of the services and in the infrastructure underlying theircurrent implementations . one model for building such set of facilities takes the traditional three-tier enterprise-application model and adapts it for use as a layered application-model for integrated data-driven applications we then consider current and potential technologies for implementing this model and suggest that the best hope for a solution that meets both user and technical needs lies in a combination of integrated-services built on a document modelling and collaboration-infrastructure thatwe call nodal , the network-oriented document abstraction language . we illustrate how this model may enable even the most ambitious visions of the potential of the collaborative digital library .