an oai compliant content-based image search component advances in data-storage and image acquisition technologies haveenabled the creation of large image datasets in order to deal withthese data , appropriate information-systems (e.g. image-digital-libraries) have been developed to efficiently manage such collections . one of the most common retrieval approaches is to employ so -- called content -- based image-retrieval (cbir) systems . basically , these systems try to retrieve images similar to auser -- defined pattern (e.g. image example) . their goal is to supportimage retrieval based on content properties (e.g. shape , color , or texture) , which are often encoded in terms of imagedescriptors this demonstration presents a new cbir system based on configurable components . the main novelty resides in its content -- based imagesearch component (cbisc) that supports queries on image-collections cbisc is based on the oaiprinciples , and thus provides an easy -- to -- install search-engine tosupport querying images by content as with the oai protocol , queriesare posed via http requests and the responses are encoded in xml cbisc encapsulates multidimensional indexstructures to speed up the searchprocess . furthermore , it supports the use of different imagedescriptors (metric and non -- metric ; color , texture , and shapedescriptors ; with 1d or 2d feature-vectors) , which canbe easily combined to yield improved effectiveness . we will show thatthis search component can be tailored for particular image collectionsby a trained designer , who carries out a clearly defined set of pilot experiments to select the appropriate descriptors . image-descriptors are typically domain and usage -- dependent further , agiven image can be associated with very many descriptors however , standard cbir methods only support a fixed set of descriptors cbisc , instead , allows progressive extension of thedescriptor base figure 1 presents a screen shotshowing the cbisc configuration-tool developed to support cbisc designers in the configuration process basically , this processconcerns the description/definition of both the image-descriptors thatwill be used to retrieve images by content , and the image-database to which the cbisc is related the xml file generated in thisprocess is used during cbisc execution .