1571949	Web searching for daily living The new concept proposed in this paper is a query free web search that automatically retrieves a web page including information related to the daily activity that we are currently engaged in for automatically displaying the page on Internet-connected domestic appliances around us such as televisions. When we are washing a coffee maker, for example, a web page is retrieved that includes tips such as `cleaning a coffee maker with vinegar removes stains well.' A method designed on the basis of this concept automatically searches for a web page by using a query constructed from the use of ordinary household objects that is detected by sensors attached to the objects. An in-situ experiment tests a variety of IR techniques and the experiment confirmed that our daily activities can produce related web pages with high accuracy.
1571953	Efficient query expansion for advertisement search Online advertising represents a growing part of the revenues of major Internet service providers such as Google and Yahoo. A commonly used strategy is to place advertisements (ads) on the search result pages according to the users' submitted queries. Relevant ads are likely to be clicked by a user and to increase the revenues of both advertisers and publishers. However, bid phrases defined by ad-owners are usually contained in limited number of ads. Directly matching user queries with bid phrases often results in finding few appropriate ads. To address this shortcoming, query expansion is often used to increase the chances to match the ads. Nevertheless, query expansion on top of the traditional inverted index faces efficiency issues such as high time complexity and heavy I/O costs. Moreover, precision cannot always be improved, sometimes even hurt due to the involvement of additional noise. In this paper, we propose an efficient ad search solution relying on a block-based index able to tackle the issues associated with query expansion. Our index structure places clusters of similar bid phrases in corresponding blocks with their associated ads. It reduces the number of merge operations significantly during query expansion and allows sequential scans rather than random accesses, saving I/O costs. We adopt flexible block sizes according to the clustering results of bid phrases to further optimize the index structure for efficient ad search. The pre-computation of such clusters is achieved through an agglomerative iterative clustering algorithm. Finally, we adapt the spreading activation mechanism to return the top-k relevant ads, improving search precision. The experimental results of our prototype, AdSearch, show that we can indeed return a larger number of relevant ads without sacrificing execution speed.
1571957	Addressing morphological variation in alphabetic languages The selection of indexing terms for representing documents is a key decision that limits how effective subsequent retrieval can be. Often stemming algorithms are used to normalize surface forms, and thereby address the problem of not finding documents that contain words related to query terms through infectional or derivational morphology. However, rule-based stemmers are not available for every language and it is unclear which methods for coping with morphology are most effective. In this paper we investigate an assortment of techniques for representing text and compare these approaches using data sets in eighteen languages and five different writing systems. We find character n-gram tokenization to be highly effective. In half of the languages examined n-grams outperform unnormalized words by more than 25%; in highly infective languages relative improvements over 50% are obtained. In languages with less morphological richness the choice of tokenization is not as critical and rule-based stemming can be an attractive option, if available. We also conducted an experiment to uncover the source of n-gram power and a causal relationship between the morphological complexity of a language and n-gram effectiveness was demonstrated.
1571959	Combining LVCSR and vocabulary-independent ranked utterance retrieval for robust speech search Well tuned Large-Vocabulary Continuous Speech Recognition (LVCSR) has been shown to generally be more effective than vocabulary-independent techniques for ranked retrieval of spoken content when one or the other approach is used alone. Tuning LVCSR systems to a topic domain can be costly, however, and the experiments in this paper show that Out-Of-Vocabulary (OOV) query terms can significantly reduce retrieval effectiveness when that tuning is not performed. Further experiments demonstrate, however, that retrieval effectiveness for queries with OOV terms can be substantially improved by combining evidence from LVCSR with additional evidence from vocabulary-independent Ranked Utterance Retrieval (RUR). The combination is performed by using relevance judgments from held-out topics to learn generic (i.e., topic-independent), smooth, non-decreasing transformations from LVCSR and RUR system scores to probabilities of topical relevance. Evaluated using a CLEF collection that includes topics, spontaneous conversational speech audio, and relevance judgments, the system recovers 57% of the mean uninterpolated average precision that could have been obtained through LVCSR domain tuning for very short queries (or 41% for longer queries).
1571961	Risky business: modeling and exploiting uncertainty in information retrieval Most retrieval models estimate the relevance of each document to a query and rank the documents accordingly. However, such an approach ignores the uncertainty associated with the estimates of relevancy. If a high estimate of relevancy also has a high uncertainty, then the document may be very relevant or not relevant at all. Another document may have a slightly lower estimate of relevancy but the corresponding uncertainty may be much less. In such a circumstance, should the retrieval engine risk ranking the first document highest, or should it choose a more conservative (safer) strategy that gives preference to the second document? There is no definitive answer to this question, as it depends on the risk preferences of the user and the information retrieval system. In this paper we present a general framework for modeling uncertainty and introduce an asymmetric loss function with a single parameter that can model the level of risk the system is willing to accept. By adjusting the risk preference parameter, our approach can effectively adapt to users' different retrieval strategies. We apply this asymmetric loss function to a language modeling framework and a practical risk-aware document scoring function is obtained. Our experiments on several TREC collections show that our "risk-averse" approach significantly improves the Jelinek-Mercer smoothing language model, and a combination of our "risk-averse" approach and the Jelinek-Mercer smoothing method generally outperforms the Dirichlet smoothing method. Experimental results also show that the "risk-averse" approach, even without smoothing from the collection statistics, performs as well as three commonly-adopted retrieval models, namely, the Jelinek-Mercer and Dirichlet smoothing methods, and BM25 model.
1571962	Approximating true relevance distribution from a mixture model based on irrelevance data Pseudo relevance feedback (PRF), which has been widely applied in IR, aims to derive a distribution from the top n pseudo relevant documents D . However, these documents are often a mixture of relevant and irrelevant documents. As a result, the derived distribution is actually a mixture model, which has long been limiting the performance of PRF. This is particularly the case when we deal with difficult queries where the truly relevant documents in D are very sparse. In this situation, it is often easier to identify a small number of seed irrelevant documents, which can form a seed irrelevant distribution. Then, a fundamental and challenging problem arises: solely based on the mixed distribution and a seed irrelevance distribution, how to automatically generate an optimal approximation of the true relevance distribution? In this paper, we propose a novel distribution separation model (DSM) to tackle this problem. Theoretical justifications of the proposed algorithm are given. Evaluation results from our extensive simulated experiments on several large scale TREC data sets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, which outperforms a well respected PRF Model, the Relevance Model (RM), as well as the use of RM on D with the seed negative documents directly removed.
1571982	Using anchor texts with their hyperlink structure for web search As a good complement to page content, anchor texts have been extensively used, and proven to be useful, in commercial search engines. However, anchor texts have been assumed to be independent, whether they come from the same Web site or not. Intuitively, an anchor text from unrelated Web sites should be considered as stronger evidence than that from the same site. This paper proposes two new methods to take into account the possible relationships between anchor texts. We consider two relationships in this paper: links from the same site and links from related sites. The importance assigned to the anchor texts in these two situations is discounted. Experimental results show that these two new models outperform the baseline model which assumes independence between hyperlinks.
1571983	Link analysis for private weighted graphs Link analysis methods have been used successfully for knowledge discovery from the link structure of mutually linking entities. Existing link analysis methods have been inherently designed based on the fact that the entire link structure of the target graph is observable such as public web documents; however, link information in graphs in the real world, such as human relationship or economic activities, is rarely open to public. If link analysis can be performed using graphs with private links in a privacy-preserving way, it enables us to rank entities connected with private ties, such as people, organizations, or business transactions. In this paper, we present a secure link analysis for graphs with private links by means of cryptographic protocols. Our solutions are designed as privacy-preserving expansions of well-known link analysis methods, PageRank and HITS. The outcomes of our protocols are completely equivalent to those of PageRank and HITS. Furthermore, our protocols theoretically guarantee that the private link information possessed by each node is not revealed to other nodes. %We demonstrate the efficiency of our solution by experimental studies, comparing with existing solutions, such as secure function evaluation, decentralized spectral analysis, and privacy-preserving link-analysis.
1571985	Learning to rank for quantity consensus queries Web search is increasingly exploiting named entities like persons, places, businesses, addresses and dates. Entity ranking is also of current interest at INEX and TREC. Numerical quantities are an important class of entities, especially in queries about prices and features related to products, services and travel. We introduce Quantity Consensus Queries (QCQs), where each answer is a tight quantity interval distilled from evidence of relevance in thousands of snippets. Entity search and factoid question answering have benefited from aggregating evidence from multiple promising snippets, but these do not readily apply to quantities. Here we propose two new algorithms that learn to aggregate information from multiple snippets. We show that typical signals used in entity ranking, like rarity of query words and their lexical proximity to candidate quantities, are very noisy. Our algorithms learn to score and rankquantity intervals directly, combining snippet quantity and snippet text information. We report on experiments using hundreds of QCQs with ground truth taken from TREC QA, Wikipedia Infoboxes, and other sources, leading to tens of thousands of candidate snippets and quantities. Our algorithms yield about 20% better MAP and NDCG compared to the best-known collective rankers, and are 35% better than scoring snippets independent of each other.
1571987	Robust sparse rank learning for non-smooth ranking measures Recently increasing attention has been focused on directly optimizing ranking measures and inducing sparsity in learning models. However, few attempts have been made to relate them together in approaching the problem of learning to rank. In this paper, we consider the sparse algorithms to directly optimize the Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG) which is a widely-used ranking measure. We begin by establishing a reduction framework under which we reduce ranking, as measured by NDCG, to the importance weighted pairwise classification. Furthermore, we provide a sound theoretical guarantee for this reduction, bounding the realized NDCG regret in terms of a properly weighted pairwise classification regret, which implies that good performance can be robustly transferred from pairwise classification to ranking. Based on the converted pairwise loss function, it is conceivable to take into account sparsity in ranking models and to come up with a gradient possessing certain performance guarantee. For the sake of achieving sparsity, a novel algorithm named RSRank has also been devised, which performs L1 regularization using truncated gradient descent. Finally, experimental results on benchmark collection confirm the significant advantage of RSRank in comparison with several baseline methods.
1571990	A 2-poisson model for probabilistic coreference of named entities for improved text retrieval Text retrieval queries frequently contain named entities. The standard approach of term frequency weighting does not work well when estimating the term frequency of a named entity, since anaphoric expressions (like he, she, the movie, etc) are frequently used to refer to named entities in a document, and the use of anaphoric expressions causes the term frequency of named entities to be underestimated. In this paper, we propose a novel 2-Poisson model to estimate the frequency of anaphoric expressions of a named entity, without explicitly resolving the anaphoric expressions. Our key assumption is that the frequency of anaphoric expressions is distributed over named entities in a document according to the probabilities of whether the document is elite for the named entities. This assumption leads us to formulate our proposed Co-referentially Enhanced Entity Frequency (CEEF). Experimental results on the text collection of TREC Blog Track show that CEEF achieves significant and consistent improvements over state-of-the-art retrieval methods using standard term frequency estimation. In particular, we achieve a 3% increase of MAP over the best performing run of TREC 2008 Blog Track.
1571991	Mining employment market via text block detection and adaptive cross-domain information extraction We have developed an approach for analyzing online job advertisements in different domains (industries) from different regions worldwide. Our approach is able to extract precise information from the text content supporting useful employment market analysis locally and globally. A major component in our approach is an information extraction framework which is composed of two challenging tasks. The first task is to detect unformatted text blocks automatically based on an unsupervised learning model. Identifying these useful text blocks through this learning model allows the generation of highly effective features for the next task which is text fragment extraction learning. The task of text fragment extraction learning is formulated as a domain adaptation model for text fragment classification. One advantage of our approach is that it can easily adapt to a large number of online job advertisements in different and new domains. Extensive experiments have been conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness and flexibility of our approach.
1571995	A bayesian learning approach to promoting diversity in ranking for biomedical information retrieval In this paper, we propose a Bayesian learning approach to promoting diversity for information retrieval in biomedicine and a re-ranking model to improve retrieval performance in the biomedical domain. First, the re-ranking model computes the maximum posterior probability of the hidden property corresponding to each retrieved passage. Then it iteratively groups the passages into subsets according to their properties. Finally, these passages are re-ranked from the subsets as our output. There is no need for our proposed method to use any external biomedical resource. We evaluate our Bayesian learning approach by conducting extensive experiments on the TREC 2004-2007 Genomics data sets. The experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed Bayesian learning approach for promoting diversity in ranking for biomedical information retrieval on four years TREC data sets.
160726	Simple word strings as compound keywords: an indexing and ranking method for Japanese texts This paper describes a new indexing method for Japanese text databases using the simple keyword string , in which a compound word is treated as a string of simple words, which are the smallest units in Japanese grammar which still maintain their meanings. This method allows retrieved texts to be ranked, according to the similarity of their meaning to the query, without using a control vocabulary or thesaurus. This paper also introduces the keyword feature , which describes the syntactic and semantic characteristics of a word, and results in more precise keyword extraction and text retrieval as well as simple dictionary maintenance.
160735	Content awareness in a file system interface: implementing the “pile” metaphor for organizing information The pile is a new element of the desktop user interface metaphor, designed to support the casual organization of documents. An interface design based on the pile concept suggested uses of content awareness for describing, organizing, and filing textual documents. We describe a prototype implementation of these capabilities, and give a detailed example of how they might appear to the user. We believe the system demonstrates how content awareness can be not only used in a computer filing system, but made an integral part of the user's experience.
160737	A browser for bibliographic information retrieval, based on an application of lattice theory An application of mathematical lattice theory, called relationship lattices, is utilized to attack problems of operational bibliographic information retrieval. The proposed solution offers an interface to the information searcher enabling operation in a world of concepts, authors, and document records and their relationships. This hides the complexities of query language and database structures, and it allows to use a personally preferred terminology and to browse, query and download document records in a convenient way. The main component of the proposed solution is a personal thesaurus built up as a relationship lattice.
160761	An evaluation of query processing strategies using the TIPSTER collection The TIPSTER collection is unusual because of both its size and detail. In particular, it describes a set of information needs, as opposed to traditional queries. These detailed representations of information need are an opportunity for research on different methods of formulating queries. This paper describes several methods of constructing queries for the INQUERY information retrieval system, and then evaluates those methods on the TIPSTER document collection. Both AdHoc and Routing query processing methods are evaluated.
1572007	An aspectual interface for supporting complex search tasks With the increasing importance of search systems on the web, there is a continuing push to design interfaces which are a better match with the kinds of real-world tasks in which users are engaged. In this paper, we consider how broad, complex search tasks may be supported via the search interface. In particular, we consider search tasks which may be composed of multiple aspects, or multiple related subtasks. For example, in decision making tasks the user may investigate multiple possible solutions before settling on a single, final solution, while other tasks, such as report writing, may involve searching on multiple interrelated topics. A search interface is presented which is designed to support such broad search tasks, allowing a user to create search aspects, each of which models an independent subtask of some larger task. The interface is built on the intuition that users should be able to structure their searching environment when engaged on complex search tasks, where the act of structuring and organization may aid the user in understanding his or her task. A user study was carried out which compared our aspectual interface to a standard web-search interface. The results suggest that an aspectual interface can aid users when engaged in broad search tasks where the search aspects must be identified during searching; for a task where search aspects were pre-defined, no advantage over the baseline was found. Results for a decision making task were less clear cut, but show some evidence for improved task performance.
1572015	Effective query expansion for federated search While query expansion techniques have been shown to improve retrieval performance in a centralized setting, they have not been well studied in a federated setting. In this paper, we consider how query expansion may be adapted to federated environments and propose several new methods: where focused expansions are used in a selective fashion to produce specific queries for each source (or a set of sources). On a number of different testbeds, we show that focused query expansion can significantly outperform the previously proposed global expansion method, and---contrary to earlier work---show that query expansion can improve performance over standard federated retrieval. These findings motivate further research examining the different methods for query expansion, and other forms of system and user interaction, in order to continue improving the performance of interactive federated search systems.
1572018	Score adjustment for correction of pooling bias Information retrieval systems are evaluated against test collections of topics, documents, and assessments of which documents are relevant to which topics. Documents are chosen for relevance assessment by pooling runs from a set of existing systems. New systems can return unassessed documents, leading to an evaluation bias against them. In this paper, we propose to estimate the degree of bias against an unpooled system, and to adjust the system's score accordingly. Bias estimation can be done via leave-one-out experiments on the existing, pooled systems, but this requires the problematic assumption that the new system is similar to the existing ones. Instead, we propose that all systems, new and pooled, be fully assessed against a common set of topics, and the bias observed against the new system on the common topics be used to adjust scores on the existing topics. We demonstrate using resampling experiments on TREC test sets that our method leads to a marked reduction in error, even with only a relatively small number of common topics, and that the error decreases as the number of topics increases.
1572026	An automatic translation of tags for multimedia contents using folksonomy networks This paper proposes a novel method to translate tags attached to multimedia contents for cross-language retrieval. The main issue in this problem is the sense disambiguation of tags given with few textual contexts. In order to solve this problem, the proposed method represents both tags and its translation candidates as networks of co-occurring tags since a network allows richer expression of contexts than other expressions such as co-occurrence vectors. The method translates a tag by selecting the optimal one from possible candidates based on a network similarity even when neither the textual contexts nor sophisticated language resources are available. The experiments on the MIR Flickr-2008 test set show that the proposed method achieves 90.44% accuracy in translating tags from English into German, which is significantly higher than the baseline methods of a frequency based translation and a co-occurrence-based translation.
1572037	Query side evaluation: an empirical analysis of effectiveness and effort Typically, Information Retrieval evaluation focuses on measuring the performance of the system's ability at retrieving relevant information, and not the query's ability. However, the effectiveness of a retrieval system is strongly influenced by the quality of the query submitted. In this paper, the effectiveness and effort of querying is empirically examined in the context of the Principle of Least Effort, Zipf's Law and the Law of Diminishing Returns. This query focused investigation leads to a number of novel findings which should prove useful in the development of future retrieval methods and evaluation techniques. While, also motivating further research into query side evaluation.
1572041	The impact of crawl policy on web search effectiveness Crawl selection policy has a direct influence on Web search effectiveness, because a useful page that is not selected for crawling will also be absent from search results. Yet there has been little or no work on measuring this effect. We introduce an evaluation framework, based on relevance judgments pooled from multiple search engines, measuring the maximum potential NDCG that is achievable using a particular crawl. This allows us to evaluate different crawl policies and investigate important scenarios like selection stability over multiple iterations. We conduct two sets of crawling experiments at the scale of 1~billion and 100~million pages respectively. These show that crawl selection based on PageRank, indegree and trans-domain indegree all allow better retrieval effectiveness than a simple breadth-first crawl of the same size. PageRank is the most reliable and effective method. Trans-domain indegree can outperform PageRank, but over multiple crawl iterations it is less effective and more unstable. Finally we experiment with combinations of crawl selection methods and per-domain page limits, which yield crawls with greater potential NDCG than PageRank.
1572043	Web-derived resources for web information retrieval: from conceptual hierarchies to attribute hierarchies A weakly-supervised extraction method identifies concepts within conceptual hierarchies, at the appropriate level of specificity (e.g., Bank vs. Institution ), to which attributes (e.g., routing number ) extracted from unstructured text best apply. The extraction exploits labeled classes of instances acquired from a combination of Web documents and query logs, and inserted into existing conceptual hierarchies. The correct concept is identified within the top three positions on average over gold-standard attributes, which corresponds to higher accuracy than in alternative experiments.
1572049	AdOn: an intelligent overlay video advertising system This paper presents a new video advertising system, called AdOn, which supports intelligent overlay video ads. Unlike most current ad-networks such as Youtube that overlay the ads at fixed positions in the videos (e.g., on the bottom fifth of videos 15 seconds in), AdOn is able to automatically detect a set of spatio-temporal nonintrusive positions and associate the contextually relevant ads with these positions. The overlay positions are obtained on the basis of video structuring, face and text detection, as well as visual saliency analysis, so that the intrusiveness to the users can be minimized. The ads are selected according to content-based multimodal relevance so that advertising relevance can be maximized. AdOn represents one of the first attempts towards intelligent overlay video advertising by leveraging video content analysis techniques.
1572050	Agreement among statistical significance tests for information retrieval evaluation at varying sample sizes Research has shown that little practical difference exists between the randomization, Student's paired t, and bootstrap tests of statistical significance for TREC ad-hoc retrieval experiments with 50 topics. We compared these three tests on runs with topic sizes down to 10 topics. We found that these tests show increasing disagreement as the number of topics decreases. At smaller numbers of topics, the randomization test tended to produce smaller p-values than the t-test for p-values less than 0.1. The bootstrap exhibited a systematic bias towards p-values strictly less than the t-test with this bias increasing as the number of topics decreased. We recommend the use of the randomization test although the t-test appears to be suitable even when the number of topics is small.
1572054	Blog distillation using random walks This paper addresses the blog distillation problem. That is, given a user query find the blogs most related to the query topic. We model the blogosphere as a single graph that includes extra information besides the content of the posts. By performing a random walk on this graph we extract most relevant blogs for each query. Our experiments on the TREC'07 data set show 15% improvement in MAP and 8% improvement in Precision@10 over the Language Modeling baseline.
1572055	A case for improved evaluation of query difficulty prediction Query difficulty prediction aims to identify, in advance, how well an information retrieval system will perform when faced with a particular search request. The current standard evaluation methodology involves calculating a correlation coefficient, to indicate how strongly the predicted query difficulty is related with an actual system performance measure, usually Average Precision. We run a series of experiments based on predictors that have been shown to perform well in the literature, comparing these across different TREC runs. Our results demonstrate that the current evaluation methodology is severely limited. Although it can be used to demonstrate the performance of a predictor for a single system, such performance is not consistent over a variety of retrieval systems. We conclude that published results in the query difficulty area are generally not comparable, and recommend that prediction be evaluated against a spectrum of underlying search systems.
1572058	Cluster-based query expansion We demonstrate the merits of using document clusters that are created offline to improve the overall effectiveness and performance robustness of a state-of-the-art pseudo-feedback-based query expansion method -- the relevance model.
1572063	Context transfer in search advertising We define and study the process of context transfer in search advertising, which is the transition of a user from the context of Web search to the context of the landing page that follows an ad-click. We conclude that in the vast majority of cases, the user is shown one of three types of pages, which can be accurately distinguished using automatic text classification.
1572066	Deep versus shallow judgments in learning to rank Much research in learning to rank has been placed on developing sophisticated learning methods, treating the training set as a given. However, the number of judgments in the training set directly aff ects the quality of the learned system. Given the expense of obtaining relevance judgments for constructing training data, one often has a limited budget in terms of how many judgments he can get. The major problem then is how to distribute this judgment e ffort across diff erent queries. In this paper, we investigate the tradeo ff between the number of queries and the number of judgments per query when training sets are constructed. In particular, we show that up to a limit, training sets with more queries but shallow (less) judgments per query are more cost effective than training sets with less queries but deep (more) judgments per query.
1572067	Developing energy efficient filtering systems Processing large volumes of information generally requires massive amounts of computational power, which consumes a significant amount of energy. An emerging challenge is the development of ``environmentally friendly'' systems that are not only efficient in terms of time, but also energy efficient. In this poster, we outline our initial efforts at developing greener filtering systems by employing Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) to perform the core information processing task. FPGAs enable code to be executed in parallel at a chip level, while consuming only a fraction of the power of a standard (von Neuman style) processor. On a number of test collections, we demonstrate that the FPGA filtering system performs 10-20 times faster than the Itanium based implementation, resulting in considerable energy savings.
1572071	Estimating query performance using class predictions We investigate using topic prediction data, as a summary of document content, to compute measures of search result quality. Unlike existing quality measures such as query clarity that require the entire content of the top-ranked results, class-based statistics can be computed efficiently online, because class information is compact enough to precompute and store in the index. In an empirical study we compare the performance of class-based statistics to their language-model counterparts for predicting two measures: query difficulty and expansion risk. Our findings suggest that using class predictions can offer comparable performance to full language models while reducing computation overhead.
1572072	Evaluating effects of machine translation accuracy on cross-lingual patent retrieval We organized a machine translation (MT) task at the Seventh NTCIR Workshop. Participating groups were requested to machine translate sentences in patent documents and also search topics for retrieving patent documents across languages. We analyzed the relationship between the accuracy of MT and its effects on the retrieval accuracy.
1572073	Evaluating web search using task completion time We consider experiments to measure the quality of a web search algorithm based on how much total time users take to complete assigned search tasks using that algorithm. We first analyze our data to verify that there is in fact a negative relationship between a user's total search time and a user's satisfaction for the types of tasks under consideration. Secondly, we fit a model with the user's total search time as the response to compare two different search algorithms. Finally, we propose an alternative experimental design which we demonstrate to be a substantial improvement over our current design in terms of variance reduction and efficiency.
1572074	An evaluation of entity and frequency based query completion methods We present a semantic approach to suggesting query completions which leverages entity and type information. When compared to a frequency-based approach, we show that such information mostly helps rare queries.
1572075	Evolutionary document summarization for disaster management In this poster, we develop an evolutionary document summarization system for discovering the changes and differences in each phase of a disaster evolution. Given a collection of document streams describing an event, our system generates a short summary delivering the main development theme of the event by extracting the most representative and discriminative sentences at each phase. Experimental results on the collection of press releases for Hurricane Wilma in 2005 demonstrate the efficacy of our proposal.
1572080	A graph-based approach to mining multilingual word associations from wikipedia In this paper, we propose a graph-based approach to constructing a multilingual association dictionary from Wikipedia, in which we exploit two kinds of links in Wikipedia articles to associate multilingual words and concepts together in a graph. The mined association dictionary is applied in cross language information retrieval (CLIR) to verify its quality. We evaluate our approach on four CLIR data sets and the experimental results show that it is possible to mine a good multilingual association dictionary from Wikipedia articles.
1572081	Has adhoc retrieval improved since 1994? Evaluation forums such as TREC allow systematic measurement and comparison of information retrieval techniques. The goal is consistent improvement, based on reliable comparison of the effectiveness of different approaches and systems. In this paper we report experiments to determine whether this goal has been achieved. We ran five publicly available search systems, in a total of seventeen different configurations, against nine TREC adhoc-style collections, spanning 1994 to 2005. These runsets were then used as a benchmark for reassessing the relative effectiveness of the original TREC runs for those collections. Surprisingly, there appears to have been no overall improvement in effectiveness for either median or top-end TREC submissions, even after allowing for several possible confounds. We therefore question whether the effectiveness of adhoc information retrieval has improved over the past decade and a half.
1572087	Incorporating prior knowledge into a transductive ranking algorithm for multi-document summarization This paper presents a transductive approach to learn ranking functions for extractive multi-document summarization. At the first stage, the proposed approach identifies topic themes within a document collection, which help to identify two sets of relevant and irrelevant sentences to a question. It then iteratively trains a ranking function over these two sets of sentences by optimizing a ranking loss and fitting a prior model built on keywords. The output of the function is used to find further relevant and irrelevant sentences. This process is repeated until a desired stopping criterion is met.
1572090	Is spam an issue for opinionated blog post search? In opinion-finding, the retrieval system is tasked with retrieving not just relevant documents, but those that also express an opinion towards the query target entity. This task has been studied in the context of the blogosphere by groups participating in the 2006-2008 TREC Blog tracks. Spam blogs (splogs) are thought to be a problem on the blogosphere. In this paper, we investigate the extent to which spam has affected the participating groups' retrieval systems over the three years of the TREC Blog track opinion-finding task. Our results show that spam can be an issue, with most systems retrieving some spam for every topic. However, removing spam from the rankings does not markedly change the relative performance of opinion-finding approaches.
1572091	Is this urgent?: exploring time-sensitive information needs in collaborative question answering As online Collaborative Question Answering (CQA) servicessuch as Yahoo! Answers and Baidu Knows are attracting users, questions, and answers at an explosive rate, the truly urgent and important questions are increasingly getting lost in the crowd. That is, questions that require immediate responses are pushed out of the way by the trivial but more recently arriving questions. Unlike other questions in collaborative question answering (CQA) for which users might be willing to wait until good answers appear, urgent questions are likely to be of interest to the asker only if answered in the next few minutes or hours. For such questions, late responses are either not useful or are simply not applicable. Unfortunately, current collaborative question-answering systems do not distinguish urgent questions from the rest, and could thus be ineffective for urgent information needs. We explore text- and data- mining methods for automatically identifying urgent questions in the CQA setting. Our results indicate that modeling the question context (i.e., the particular forum/category where the question was posted) can increase classification accuracy compared to the text of the question alone.
1572094	K-tree: large scale document clustering We introduce K-tree in an information retrieval context. It is an efficient approximation of the k-means clustering algorithm. Unlike k-means it forms a hierarchy of clusters. It has been extended to address issues with sparse representations. We compare performance and quality to CLUTO using document collections. The K-tree has a low time complexity that is suitable for large document collections. This tree structure allows for efficient disk based implementations where space requirements exceed that of main memory.
1572095	A latent topic model for linked documents Documents in many corpora, such as digital libraries and webpages, contain both content and link information. To explicitly consider the document relations represented by links, in this paper we propose a citation-topic (CT) model which assumes a probabilistic generative process for corpora. In the CT model a given document is modeled as a mixture of a set of topic distributions, each of which is borrowed (cited) from a document that is related to the given document. Moreover, the CT model contains a random process for selecting the related documents according to the structure of the generative model determined by links and therefore, the transitivity of the relations among documents is captured. We apply the CT model on the document clustering task and the experimental comparisons against several state-of-the-art approaches demonstrate very promising performances.
1572096	Measuring constraint violations in information retrieval Recently, an inductive approach to modelling term-weighting function correctness has provided a number of axioms (constraints), to which all good term-weighting functions should adhere. These constraints have been shown to be theoretically and empirically sound in a number of works. It has been shown that when a term-weighting function breaks one or more of the constraints, it typically indicates sub-optimality of that function. This elegant inductive approach may more accurately model the human process of determining the relevance a document. It is intuitive that a person's notion of relevance changes as terms that are either on or off-topic are encountered in a given document. Ultimately, it would be desirable to be able to mathematically determine the performance of term-weighting functions without the need for test collections. Many modern term-weighting functions do not satisfy the constraints in an unconditional manner. However, the degree to which these functions violate the constraints has not been investigated. A comparison between weighting functions from this perspective may shed light on the poor performance of certain functions in certain settings. Moreover, if a correlation exists between performance and the number of violations, measuring the degree of violation could help more accurately predict how a certain scheme will perform on a given collection.
1572097	Measuring the descriptiveness of web comments This paper investigates whether Web comments are of descriptive nature, that is, whether the combined text of a set of comments is similar in topic to the commented object. If so, comments may be used in place of the respective object in all kinds of cross-media retrieval tasks. Our experiments reveal that comments on textual objects are indeed descriptive: 10 comments suffice to expect a high similarity between the comments and the commented text; 100-500 comments suffice to replace the commented text in a ranking task, and to measure the contribution of the commenters beyond the commented text.
1572098	Mining product reviews based on shallow dependency parsing This paper presents a novel method for mining product reviews, where it mines reviews by identifying product features, expressions of opinions and relations between them. By taking advantage of the fact that most of product features are phrases, a concept of shallow dependency parsing is introduced, which extends traditional dependency parsing to phrase level. This concept is then implemented for extracting relation between product features and expressions of opinions. Experimental evaluations show that the mining task can benefit from shallow dependency parsing.
1572103	Multiview clustering: a late fusion approach using latent models Multi-view clustering is an important problem in information retrieval due to the abundance of data offering many perspectives and generating multi-view representations. We investigate in this short note a late fusion approach for multi-view clustering based on the latent modeling of cluster-cluster relationships. We derive a probabilistic multi-view clustering model outperforming an early-fusion approach based on multi-view feature correlation analysis.
1572104	On efficient posting list intersection with multicore processors An abstract is not available.
1572105	On perfect document rankings for expert search Expert search systems often employ a document search component to identify on-topic documents, which are then used to identify people likely to have relevant expertise. This work investigates the impact of the retrieval effectiveness of the underlying document search component. It has been previously shown that applying techniques to the underlying document search component that normally improve the effectiveness of a document search engine also have a positive impact on the retrieval effectiveness of the expert search engine. In this work, we experiment with fictitious perfect document rankings, to attempt to identify an upper-bound in expert search system performance. Our surprising results infer that non-relevant documents can bring useful expertise evidence, and that removing these does not lead to an upper-bound in retrieval performance.
1572106	On single-pass indexing with MapReduce Indexing is an important Information Retrieval (IR) operation, which must be parallelised to support large-scale document corpora. We propose a novel adaptation of the state-of-the-art single-pass indexing algorithm in terms of the MapReduce programming model. We then experiment with this adaptation, in the context of the Hadoop MapReduce implementation. In particular, we explore the scale of improvements that can be achieved when using firstly more processing hardware and secondly larger corpora. Our results show that indexing speed increases in a close to linear fashion when scaling corpus size or number of processing machines. This suggests that the proposed indexing implementation is viable to support upcoming large-scale corpora.
1572108	Page hunt: improving search engines using human computation games There has been a lot of work on evaluating and improving the relevance of web search engines. In this paper, we suggest using human computation games to elicit data from players that can be used to improve search. We describe Page Hunt, a single-player game. The data elicited using Page Hunt has several applications including providing metadata for pages, providing query alterations for use in query refinement, and identifying ranking issues. We describe an experiment with over 340 game players, and highlight some interesting aspects of the data obtained.
1572110	Predicting stopping behaviour: a preliminary analysis The analysis of search transaction logs often characterizes a search session but rarely looks at the end point. When do users stop, and what cues are present suggesting that stopping is eminent? In this preliminary analysis of the logs of 288 search sessions conducted in a laboratory setting, we identified the activity performed by participants as well as search transitions that were invoked over the course of a search session. The 4331 search transitions (15 per task on average) contained a total of 9295 actions. We isolated the final transition in each search session for detailed analysis. As hypothesized some behaviours are predictable, and suggestive of stopping behavior, with the potential for modeling.
1572112	Query sampling for ranking learning in web search Learning to rank has become a popular approach to build a ranking model for Web search recently. Based on our observation, the constitution of the training set will greatly influence the performance of the learned ranking model. Meanwhile, the number of queries in Web search is nearly infinite and the human labeling cost is expensive, hence a subset of queries need to be carefully selected for training. In this paper, we develop a greedy algorithm to sample the queries, by simultaneously taking the query density, difficulty and diversity into consideration. The experimental results on a collected Web search dataset comprising 2024 queries show that the proposed method can lead to a more informative training set for building an effective model.
1572115	Relevance criteria for e-commerce: a crowdsourcing-based experimental analysis We discuss the concept of relevance criteria in the context of e-Commerce search. A vast body of research literature describes the beyond-topical criteria used to determine the relevance of the document to the need. We argue that in an e-Commerce scenario there are some differences, and novel and different criteria can be used to determine relevance. We experimentally validate this hypothesis by means of Amazon Mechanical Turk using a crowdsourcing approach.
1572116	A relevance model based filter for improving ad quality Recently there has been a surge in research that predicts retrieval relevance using historical click-through data. While a larger number of clicks between a query and a document provides a stronger ``confidence" of relevance, most models in the literature that learn from clicks are error-prone as they do not take into account any confidence estimates. Sponsored Search models are especially prone to this error as they are typically trained on search engine logs in order to predict click-through-rate (CTR). The estimated CTR ultimately determines the rank at which an ad is shown and also impacts the price (cost-per-click) for the advertiser. In this paper, we improve a model that applies collaborative filtering on click data by training a filter that has been trained to predict pure relevance. Applying the filter to ads that have seen few clicks on live traffic results in improved CTR and click-yield (CY). Additionally, in offline experiments we find that using features based on the emph{organic} results improves the relevance based filter's performance.
1572122	Search engine predilection towards news media providers In this poster paper, we present a preliminary study on the predilection of web search engines towards various online news media provider sites using an access based measure.
1572125	Serendipitous search via wikipedia: a query log analysis We analyse the query log of a click-oriented Japanese search engine that utilises the link structures of Wikipedia for encouraging the user to change his information need and to perform repeated, serendipitous, exploratory search. Our results show that users tend to make transitions within the same query type: from person names to person names, from place names to place names, and so on.
1572127	A study of inter-annotator agreement for opinion retrieval Evaluation of sentiment analysis, like large-scale IR evaluation, relies on the accuracy of human assessors to create judgments. Subjectivity in judgments is a problem for relevance assessment and even more so in the case of sentiment annotations. In this study we examine the degree to which assessors agree upon sentence-level sentiment annotation. We show that inter-assessor agreement is not contingent on document length or frequency of sentiment but correlates positively with automated opinion retrieval performance. We also examine the individual annotation categories to determine which categories pose most difficulty for annotators.
1572135	Term-based commercial intent analysis In this work, we investigate the contribution of query terms and their corresponding ad click rates on commercial intent of queries. A probabilistic model is proposed following the hypothesis that a query is likely to receive ad clicks based on contributions from its individual terms.
1572143	Usefulness of click-through data in expert search The task in expert finding is to identify members of an organisation with relevant expertise on a given topic. Typically, an expert search engine uses evidence from the authors of on-topic documents found in the organisation's intranet by search engines. The search result click-through behaviour of many intranet search engine users provides an additional source of evidence to identify topically-relevant documents, and via document authorship, experts. In this poster, we assess the usefulness of click-through log data for expert finding. We find that ranking authors based solely on the clicks their documents receive is reasonably effective at correctly identifying relevant experts. Moreover, we show that this evidence can successfully be integrated with an existing expert search engine to increase its retrieval effectiveness.
1572146	Using dynamic markov compression to detect vandalism in the wikipedia We apply the Dynamic Markov Compression model to detect spam edits in the Wikipedia. The method appears to outperform previous efforts based on compression models, providing performance comparable to methods based on manually constructed rules.
1572147	Using wikipedia categories for ad hoc search In this paper we explore the use of category information for ad hoc retrieval in Wikipedia. We show that techniques for entity ranking exploiting this category information can also be applied to ad hoc topics and lead to significant improvements. Automatically assigned target categories are good surrogates for manually assigned categories, which perform only slightly better.
1572150	When is query performance prediction effective? The utility of Query Performance Prediction (QPP) methods is commonly evaluated by reporting correlation coefficients to denote how well the methods perform at predicting the retrieval performance of a set of queries. However, a quintessential question remains unexplored: how strong does the correlation need to be in order to realize an increase in retrieval performance? In this work, we address this question in the context of Selective Query Expansion (SQE) and perform a large-scale experiment. The results show that to consistently and predictably improve retrieval effectiveness in the ideal SQE setting, a Kendall's Tau correlation of tau>=0.5 is required, a threshold which most existing query performance prediction methods fail to reach.
1572151	Who said what to whom?: capturing the structure of debates Transcripts of meetings are a document genre characterized by a complex narrative structure. The essence is not only what is said, but also by who and to whom. This paper investigates whether we can use semantic annotations like the speaker in order to capture this debate structure, as well as the related content of the debate. The structure is visualized in a graph, while the content is condensed into word clouds, that are created using a parsimonious language model. Evaluation shows that both tools adequately capture the structure and content of the debate at an aggregated level.
1572153	EvaluatIR: an online tool for evaluating and comparing IR systems An abstract is not available.
1572156	Social networks and discovery in the enterprise (SaND) An abstract is not available.
1572157	Sifting micro-blogging stream for events of user interest Micro-blogging is a new form of social communication that encourages users to share information about anything they are seeing or doing, the motivation facilitated by the ability to post brief text messages through a variety of devices. Twitter, the most popular micro-blogging tool, is exhibiting rapid growth [3]: up to 11% of online Americans are using Twitter by December 2008, compared to 6% in May 2008. Due to its nature, micro-blogosphere has unique features: (i) It is a source of extremely up-to-date information about what is happening in the world; (ii) It captures the wisdom of millions of people and covers a broad range of domains. These features make micro-blogosphere more than a popular medium of social communication: we believe that it has additionally become a valuable source of extremely up-to-date news on virtually any subject of user interest. Making use of micro-blogosphere in this new role we meet the following challenges: (A) Since any given subject is generally mentioned in the micro-blogging stream on the continuous basis, a method is needed for locating periods of news on this subject. (B) Additionally, even for such periods, stream filtering is required for removing noise and for extracting messages that best describe the news. To address these challenges we make and exploit the following observations: (A) For an arbitrary subject, events that catch user interest gain distinguishably more attention than the average mentioning of the subject resulting in message activity bursts for it. (B) Most of the messages in an activity burst describe common event in close variations - either rephrased or "retweeted" between the users. We demonstrate TweetSieve - a system that allows obtaining news on any given subject by sifting the Twitter stream. Our work is related to frequecy-based analysis applied to blogs [1], but higher latency and lower coverage in blogs makes the analysis less effective than in case of micro-blogs. In TweetSieve demo, the user is able to express the subject of her interest by an arbitrary search string. The system shows the period of events occuring for the subject and outputs tweets that best describe each of the events. Figure 1 shows a screenshot of the system for "Semantic search" as a sample subject. The underlying process consists of two steps: Identifying activity bursts. Counting the messages matching the search string in the stream over time, the frequency curve is constructed. Activity bursts in the curve are identified by taking the periods of frequency exceeding the standard deviation from the average. Selecting messages that best describe news events. For the set of all messages matching the search string in an activity burst, we apply the message-granular variation of our keyphrase extraction algorithm [2] that is specifically suited to efficiently filtering noisy data. The algorithm clusters messages with respect to their similarity to each other and chooses central messages from the most dense clusters. As the similarity measure we use Jaccard coefficient for the "bag of words" representation of messages. The demonstration illustrates the potential of our approach in bringing news acquisition to a new level of promptness and coverage range.
1572158	Incentives for social annotation The effectiveness of community-driven annotation, such as social bookmarking, depends on user participation. Since the participation of many users is motivated by selfish reasons, an effective way to encourage participation is to create useful or entertaining applications. We demo two such tools -- a browser extension and a game.
160690	Efficient context-sensitive plausible inference for information disclosure Plausible inference is an essential aspect of logic-based information disclosure. This paper proposes a context-sensitive plausible inference mechanism based on a so-called index expression belief network. Plausible inference is cloaked as probabilistic evidence propagation within this network. Preliminary experiments show general evidence propagation algorithms to be too inefficient for real-life information disclosure applications. The paper sketches two optimizations whereby efficient, special-purpose evidence propagation may be realized.
160697	Is Huffman coding dead? (extended abstract) An abstract is not available.
160699	Compression of indexes with full positional information in very large text databases This paper describes a combination of compression methods which may be used to reduce the size of inverted indexes for very large text databases. These methods are Prefix Omission, Run-Length Encoding, and a novel family of numeric representations called n-s coding . Using these compression methods on two different text sources (the King James Version of the Bible and a sample of Wall Street Journal Stories), the compressed index occupies less than 40% of the size of the original text, even when both stopwords and numbers are included in the index. The decreased time required for I/O can almost fully compensate for the time needed to uncompress the postings. This research is part of an effort to handle very large text databases on the CM-5, a massively parallel MIMD supercomputer.
1835465	Scalability of findability: effective and efficient IR operations in large information networks It is crucial to study basic principles that support adaptive and scalable retrieval functions in large networked environments such as the Web, where information is distributed among dynamic systems. We conducted experiments on decentralized IR operations on various scales of information networks and analyzed effectiveness, efficiency, and scalability of various search methods. Results showed network structure, i.e., how distributed systems connect to one another, is crucial for retrieval performance. Relying on partial indexes of distributed systems, some level of network clustering enabled very efficient and effective discovery of relevant information in large scale networks. For a given network clustering level, search time was well explained by a poly-logarithmic relation to network size (i.e., the number of distributed systems), indicating a high scalability potential for searching in a growing information space. In addition, network clustering only involved local self-organization and required no global control - clustering time remained roughly constant across the various scales of networks.
1835468	A joint probabilistic classification model for resource selection Resource selection is an important task in Federated Search to select a small number of most relevant information sources. Current resource selection algorithms such as GlOSS, CORI, ReDDE, Geometric Average and the recent classification-based method focus on the evidence of individual information sources to determine the relevance of available sources. Current algorithms do not model the important relationship information among individual sources. For example, an information source tends to be relevant to a user query if it is similar to another source with high probability of being relevant. This paper proposes a joint probabilistic classification model for resource selection. The model estimates the probability of relevance of information sources in a joint manner by considering both the evidence of individual sources and their relationship. An extensive set of experiments have been conducted on several datasets to demonstrate the advantage of the proposed model.
1835472	The importance of anchor text for ad hoc search revisited It is generally believed that propagated anchor text is very important for effective Web search as offered by the commercial search engines. "Google Bombs" are a notable illustration of this. However, many years of TREC Web retrieval research failed to establish the effectiveness of link evidence for ad hoc retrieval on Web collections. The ultimate resolution to this dilemma was that typical Web search is very different from the traditional ad hoc methodology. So far, however, no one has established why link information, like incoming link degree or anchor text, does not help ad hoc retrieval effectiveness. Several possible explanations were given, including the collections being too small for anchors to be effective, and the density of the link graph being too low. The new TREC 2009 Web Track collection is substantially larger than previous collections and has a dense link graph. Our main finding is that propagated anchor text outperforms full-text retrieval in terms of early precision, and in combination with it, gives an improvement in overall precision. We then analyse the impact of link density and collection size by down-sampling the number of links and the number of pages respectively. Other findings are that, contrary to expectations, (inter-server) link density has little impact on effectiveness, while the size of the collection has a substantial impact on the quantity, quality and effectiveness of anchor text. We also compare the diversity of the search results of anchor text and full-text approaches, which show that anchor text performs significantly better than full-text search and confirm our findings for the ad hoc search task.
1835476	Ranking for the conversion funnel In contextual advertising advertisers show ads to users so that they will click on them and eventually purchase a product. Optimizing this action sequence, called the conversion funnel, is the ultimate goal of advertising. Advertisers, however, often have very different sub-goals for their ads such as purchase, request for a quote, or simply a site visit. Often an improvement for one advertiser's goal comes at the expense of others. A single ranking function must balance these different goals in order to make an efficient system for all advertisers. We propose a ranking method that globally balances the goals of all advertisers, while simultaneously improving overall performance. Our method has been shown to improve significantly over the baseline in online traffic at a major ad network.
1835480	Optimal meta search results clustering By analogy with merging documents rankings, the outputs from multiple search results clustering algorithms can be combined into a single output. In this paper we study the feasibility of meta search results clustering, which has unique features compared to the general meta clustering problem. After showing that the combination of multiple search results clusterings is empirically justified, we cast meta clustering as an optimization problem of an objective function measuring the probabilistic concordance between the clustering combination and the single clusterings. We then show, using an easily computable upper bound on such a function, that a simple stochastic optimization algorithm delivers reasonable approximations of the optimal value very efficiently, and we also provide a method for labeling the generated clusters with the most agreed upon cluster labels. Optimal meta clustering with meta labeling is applied to three description-centric, state-of-the-art search results clustering algorithms. The performance improvement is demonstrated through a range of evaluation techniques (i.e., internal, classification-oriented, and information retrieval-oriented), using suitable test collections of search results with document-level relevance judgments per subtopic.
1835481	Analysis of structural relationships for hierarchical cluster labeling Cluster label quality is crucial for browsing topic hierarchies obtained via document clustering. Intuitively, the hierarchical structure should influence the labeling accuracy. However, most labeling algorithms ignore such structural properties and therefore, the impact of hierarchical structures on the labeling accuracy is yet unclear. In our work we integrate hierarchical information, i.e. sibling and parent-child relations, in the cluster labeling process. We adapt standard labeling approaches, namely Maximum Term Frequency, Jensen-Shannon Divergence, Chi Square Test, and Information Gain, to take use of those relationships and evaluate their impact on 4 different datasets, namely the Open Directory Project, Wikipedia, TREC Ohsumed and the CLEF IP European Patent dataset. We show, that hierarchical relationships can be exploited to increase labeling accuracy especially on high-level nodes.
1835482	On the existence of obstinate results in vector space models The vector space model (VSM) is a popular and widely applied model in information retrieval (IR). VSM creates vector spaces whose dimensionality is usually high (e.g., tens of thousands of terms). This may cause various problems, such as susceptibility to noise and difficulty in capturing the underlying semantic structure, which are commonly recognized as different aspects of the "curse of dimensionality." In this paper, we investigate a novel aspect of the dimensionality curse, which is referred to as hubness and manifested by the tendency of some documents (called hubs) to be included in unexpectedly many search result lists. Hubness may impact VSM considerably since hubs can become obstinate results, irrelevant to a large number of queries, thus harming the performance of an IR system and the experience of its users. We analyze the origins of hubness, showing it is primarily a consequence of high (intrinsic) dimensionality of data, and not a result of other factors such as sparsity and skewness of the distribution of term frequencies. We describe the mechanisms through which hubness emerges by exploring the behavior of similarity measures in high-dimensional vector spaces. Our consideration begins with the classical VSM (tf-idf term weighting and cosine similarity), but the conclusions generalize to more advanced variations, such as Okapi BM25. Moreover, we explain why hubness may not be easily mitigated by dimensionality reduction, and propose a similarity adjustment scheme that takes into account the existence of hubs. Experimental results over real data indicate that significant improvement can be obtained through consideration of hubness.
1835485	A network-based model for high-dimensional information filtering The Vector Space Model has been and to a great extent still is the de facto choice for profile representation in content-based Information Filtering. However, user profiles represented as weighted keyword vectors have inherent dimensionality problems. As the number of profile keywords increases, the vector representation becomes ambiguous, due to the exponential increase in the volume of the vector space and in the number of possible keyword combinations. We argue that the complexity and dynamics of Information Filtering require user profile representations which are resilient and resistant to this "curse of dimensionality". A user profile has to be able to incorporate many features and to adapt to a variety of interest changes. We propose an alternative, network-based profile representation that meets these challenging requirements. Experiments show that the network profile representation can more effectively capture additional information about a user's interests and thus achieve significant performance improvements over a vector-based representation comprising the same weighted keywords.
1835487	Serendipitous recommendations via innovators To realize services that provide serendipity, this paper assesses the surprise of each user when presented recommendations. We propose a recommendation algorithm that focuses on the search time that, in the absence of any recommendation, each user would need to find a desirable and novel item by himself. Following the hypothesis that the degree of user's surprise is proportional to the estimated search time, we consider both innovators' preferences and trends for identifying items with long estimated search times. To predict which items the target user is likely to purchase in the near future, the candidate items, this algorithm weights each item that innovators have purchased and that reflect one or more current trends; it then lists them in order of decreasing weight. Experiments demonstrate that this algorithm outputs recommendations that offer high user/item coverage, a low Gini coefficient, and long estimated search times, and so offers a high degree of recommendation serendipitousness.
1835489	On statistical analysis and optimization of information retrieval effectiveness metrics This paper presents a new way of thinking for IR metric optimization. It is argued that the optimal ranking problem should be factorized into two distinct yet interrelated stages: the relevance prediction stage and ranking decision stage. During retrieval the relevance of documents is not known a priori, and the joint probability of relevance is used to measure the uncertainty of documents' relevance in the collection as a whole. The resulting optimization objective function in the latter stage is, thus, the expected value of the IR metric with respect to this probability measure of relevance. Through statistically analyzing the expected values of IR metrics under such uncertainty, we discover and explain some interesting properties of IR metrics that have not been known before. Our analysis and optimization framework do not assume a particular (relevance) retrieval model and metric, making it applicable to many existing IR models and metrics. The experiments on one of resulting applications have demonstrated its significance in adapting to various IR metrics.
1835491	Score distribution models: assumptions, intuition, and robustness to score manipulation Inferring the score distribution of relevant and non-relevant documents is an essential task for many IR applications (e.g. information filtering, recall-oriented IR, meta-search, distributed IR). Modeling score distributions in an accurate manner is the basis of any inference. Thus, numerous score distribution models have been proposed in the literature. Most of the models were proposed on the basis of empirical evidence and goodness-of-fit. In this work, we model score distributions in a rather different, systematic manner. We start with a basic assumption on the distribution of terms in a document. Following the transformations applied on term frequencies by two basic ranking functions, BM25 and Language Models, we derive the distribution of the produced scores for all documents. Then we focus on the relevant documents. We detach our analysis from particular ranking functions. Instead, we consider a model for precision-recall curves, and given this model, we present a general mathematical framework which, given any score distribution for all retrieved documents, produces an analytical formula for the score distribution of relevant documents that is consistent with the precision-recall curves that follow the aforementioned model. In particular, assuming a Gamma distribution for all retrieved documents, we show that the derived distribution for the relevant documents resembles a Gaussian distribution with a heavy right tail.
1835498	Generalized syntactic and semantic models of query reformulation We present a novel approach to query reformulation which combines syntactic and semantic information by means of generalized Levenshtein distance algorithms where the substitution operation costs are based on probabilistic term rewrite functions. We investigate unsupervised, compact and efficient models, and provide empirical evidence of their effectiveness. We further explore a generative model of query reformulation and supervised combination methods providing improved performance at variable computational costs. Among other desirable properties, our similarity measures incorporate information-theoretic interpretations of taxonomic relations such as specification and generalization.
1835501	SED: supervised experimental design and its application to text classification In recent years, active learning methods based on experimental design achieve state-of-the-art performance in text classification applications. Although these methods can exploit the distribution of unlabeled data and support batch selection, they cannot make use of labeled data which often carry useful information for active learning. In this paper, we propose a novel active learning method for text classification, called supervised experimental design (SED), which seamlessly incorporates label information into experimental design. Experimental results show that SED outperforms its counterparts which either discard the label information even when it is available or fail to exploit the distribution of unlabeled data.
1835502	Temporally-aware algorithms for document classification Automatic Document Classification (ADC) is still one of the major information retrieval problems. It usually employs a supervised learning strategy, where we first build a classification model using pre-classified documents and then use this model to classify unseen documents. The majority of supervised algorithms consider that all documents provide equally important information. However, in practice, a document may be considered more or less important to build the classification model according to several factors, such as its timeliness, the venue where it was published in, its authors, among others. In this paper, we are particularly concerned with the impact that temporal effects may have on ADC and how to minimize such impact. In order to deal with these effects, we introduce a temporal weighting function (TWF) and propose a methodology to determine it for document collections. We applied the proposed methodology to ACM-DL and Medline and found that the TWF of both follows a lognormal. We then extend three ADC algorithms (namely kNN, Rocchio and Naïve Bayes) to incorporate the TWF. Experiments showed that the temporally-aware classifiers achieved significant gains, outperforming (or at least matching) state-of-the-art algorithms.
1835503	Multilabel classification with meta-level features Effective learning in multi-label classification (MLC) requires an appropriate level of abstraction for representing the relationship between each instance and multiple categories. Current MLC methods have been focused on learning-to-map from instances to ranked lists of categories in a relatively high-dimensional space. The fine-grained features in such a space may not be sufficiently expressive for characterizing discriminative patterns, and worse, make the model complexity unnecessarily high. This paper proposes an alternative approach by transforming conventional representations of instances and categories into a relatively small set of link-based meta-level features, and leveraging successful learning-to-rank retrieval algorithms (e.g., SVM-MAP) over this reduced feature space. Controlled experiments on multiple benchmark datasets show strong empirical evidence for the strength of the proposed approach, as it significantly outperformed several state-of-the-art methods, including Rank-SVM, ML-kNN and IBLR-ML (Instance-based Logistic Regression for Multi-label Classification) in most cases.
1835507	Finding support sentences for entities We study the problem of finding sentences that explain the relationship between a named entity and an ad-hoc query, which we refer to as entity support sentences . This is an important sub-problem of entity ranking which, to the best of our knowledge, has not been addressed before. In this paper we give the first formalization of the problem, how it can be evaluated, and present a full evaluation dataset. We propose several methods to rank these sentences, namely retrieval-based, entity-ranking based and position-based. We found that traditional bag-of-words models perform relatively well when there is a match between an entity and a query in a given sentence, but they fail to find a support sentence for a substantial portion of entities. This can be improved by incorporating small windows of context sentences and ranking them appropriately.
1835508	Estimating probabilities for effective data fusion Data Fusion is the combination of a number of independent search results, relating to the same document collection, into a single result to be presented to the user. A number of probabilistic data fusion models have been shown to be effective in empirical studies. These typically attempt to estimate the probability that particular documents will be relevant, based on training data. However, little attempt has been made to gauge how the accuracy of these estimations affect fusion performance. The focus of this paper is twofold: firstly, that accurate estimation of the probability of relevance results in effective data fusion; and secondly, that an effective approximation of this probability can be made based on less training data that has previously been employed. This is based on the observation that the distribution of relevant documents follows a similar pattern in most high-quality result sets. Curve fitting suggests that this can be modelled by a simple function that is less complex than other models that have been proposed. The use of existing IR evaluation metrics is proposed as a substitution for probability calculations. Mean Average Precision is used to demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach, with evaluation results demonstrating competitive performance when compared with related algorithms with more onerous requirements for training data.
1835512	A comparison of general vs personalised affective models for the prediction of topical relevance Information retrieval systems face a number of challenges, originating mainly from the semantic gap problem. Implicit feedback techniques have been employed in the past to address many of these issues. Although this was a step towards the right direction, a need to personalise and tailor the search experience to the user-specific needs has become evident. In this study we examine ways of personalising affective models trained on facial expression data. Using personalised data we adapt these models to individual users and compare their performance to a general model. The main goal is to determine whether the behavioural differences of users have an impact on the models' ability to determine topical relevance and if, by personalising them, we can improve their accuracy. For modelling relevance we extract a set of features from the facial expression data and classify them using Support Vector Machines. Our initial evaluation indicates that accounting for individual differences and applying personalisation introduces, in most cases, a noticeable improvement in the models' performance.
1835515	Segmentation of multi-sentence questions: towards effective question retrieval in cQA services Existing question retrieval models work relatively well in finding similar questions in community-based question answering (cQA) services. However, they are designed for single-sentence queries or bag-of-word representations, and are not sufficient to handle multi-sentence questions complemented with various contexts. Segmenting questions into parts that are topically related could assist the retrieval system to not only better understand the user's different information needs but also fetch the most appropriate fragments of questions and answers in cQA archive that are relevant to user's query. In this paper, we propose a graph based approach to segmenting multi-sentence questions. The results from user studies show that our segmentation model outperforms traditional systems in question segmentation by over 30% in user's satisfaction. We incorporate the segmentation model into existing cQA question retrieval framework for more targeted question matching, and the empirical evaluation results demonstrate that the segmentation boosts the question retrieval performance by up to 12.93% in Mean Average Precision and 11.72% in Top One Precision. Our model comes with a comprehensive question detector equipped with both lexical and syntactic features.
1835516	Mining the blogosphere for top news stories identification The analysis of query logs from blog search engines show that news-related queries occupy a significant portion of the logs. This raises a interesting research question on whether the blogosphere can be used to identify important news stories. In this paper, we present novel approaches to identify important news story headlines from the blogosphere for a given day. The proposed system consists of two components based on the language model framework, the query likelihood and the news headline prior. For the query likelihood, we propose several approaches to estimate the query language model and the news headline language model. We also suggest several criteria to evaluate the news headline prior that is the prior belief about the importance or newsworthiness of the news headline for a given day. Experimental results show that our system significantly outperforms a baseline system. Specifically, the proposed approach gives 2.62% and 10.19% further increases in MAP and P@5 over the best performing result of the TREC'09 Top Stories Identification Task.
1835520	Adaptive near-duplicate detection via similarity learning In this paper, we present a novel near-duplicate document detection method that can easily be tuned for a particular domain. Our method represents each document as a real-valued sparse k -gram vector, where the weights are learned to optimize for a specified similarity function, such as the cosine similarity or the Jaccard coefficient. Near-duplicate documents can be reliably detected through this improved similarity measure. In addition, these vectors can be mapped to a small number of hash-values as document signatures through the locality sensitive hashing scheme for efficient similarity computation. We demonstrate our approach in two target domains: Web news articles and email messages. Our method is not only more accurate than the commonly used methods such as Shingles and I-Match, but also shows consistent improvement across the domains, which is a desired property lacked by existing methods.
1835521	A content based approach for discovering missing anchor text for web search Although anchor text provides very useful information for web search, a large portion of web pages have few or no incoming hyperlinks (anchors), which is known as the anchor text sparsity problem. In this paper, we propose a language modeling based technique for overcoming anchor text sparsity by discovering a web page's plausible missing anchor text from its similar web pages' in-link anchor text. We design experiments with two publicly available TREC web corpora (GOV2 and ClueWeb09) to evaluate different approaches for discovering missing anchor text. Experimental results show that our approach can effectively discover plausible missing anchor terms. We then use the web named page finding task in the TREC Terabyte track to explore the utility of missing anchor text information discovered by our approach for helping retrieval. Experimental results show that our approach can statistically significantly improve retrieval performance, compared with several approaches that only use anchor text aggregated over the web graph.
1835526	Collecting high quality overlapping labels at low cost This paper studies quality of human labels used to train search engines' rankers. Our specific focus is performance improvements obtained by using overlapping relevance labels, which is by collecting multiple human judgments for each training sample. The paper explores whether, when, and for which samples one should obtain overlapping training labels, as well as how many labels per sample are needed. The proposed selective labeling scheme collects additional labels only for a subset of training samples, specifically for those that are labeled relevant by a judge. Our experiments show that this labeling scheme improves the NDCG of two Web search rankers on several real-world test sets, with a low labeling overhead of around 1.4 labels per sample. This labeling scheme also outperforms several methods of using overlapping labels, such as simple k-overlap, majority vote, the highest labels, etc. Finally, the paper presents a study of how many overlapping labels are needed to get the best improvement in retrieval accuracy.
1835528	Multi-style language model for web scale information retrieval Web documents are typically associated with many text streams, including the body, the title and the URL that are determined by the authors, and the anchor text or search queries used by others to refer to the documents. Through a systematic large scale analysis on their cross entropy, we show that these text streams appear to be composed in different language styles, and hence warrant respective language models to properly describe their properties. We propose a language modeling approach to Web document retrieval in which each document is characterized by a mixture model with components corresponding to the various text streams associated with the document. Immediate issues for such a mixture model arise as all the text streams are not always present for the documents, and they do not share the same lexicon, making it challenging to properly combine the statistics from the mixture components. To address these issues, we introduce an 'open-vocabulary' smoothing technique so that all the component language models have the same cardinality and their scores can simply be linearly combined. To ensure that the approach can cope with Web scale applications, the model training algorithm is designed to require no labeled data and can be fully automated with few heuristics and no empirical parameter tunings. The evaluation on Web document ranking tasks shows that the component language models indeed have varying degrees of capabilities as predicted by the cross-entropy analysis, and the combined mixture model outperforms the state-of-the-art BM25F based system.
1835529	Combining coregularization and consensus-based self-training for multilingual text categorization We investigate the problem of learning document classifiers in a multilingual setting, from collections where labels are only partially available. We address this problem in the framework of multiview learning, where different languages correspond to different views of the same document, combined with semi-supervised learning in order to benefit from unlabeled documents. We rely on two techniques, coregularization and consensus-based self-training, that combine multiview and semi-supervised learning in different ways. Our approach trains different monolingual classifiers on each of the views, such that the classifiers' decisions over a set of unlabeled examples are in agreement as much as possible, and iteratively labels new examples from another unlabeled training set based on a consensus across language-specific classifiers. We derive a boosting-based training algorithm for this task, and analyze the impact of the number of views on the semi-supervised learning results on a multilingual extension of the Reuters RCV1/RCV2 corpus using five different languages. Our experiments show that coregularization and consensus-based self-training are complementary and that their combination is especially effective in the interesting and very common situation where there are few views (languages) and few labeled documents available.
1835530	Towards subjectifying text clustering Although it is common practice to produce only a single clustering of a dataset, in many cases text documents can be clustered along different dimensions. Unfortunately, not only do traditional text clustering algorithms fail to produce multiple clusterings of a dataset, the only clustering they produce may not be the one that the user desires. In this paper, we propose a simple active clustering algorithm that is capable of producing multiple clusterings of the same data according to user interest. In comparison to previous work on feedback-oriented clustering, the amount of user feedback required by our algorithm is minimal. In fact, the feedback turns out to be as simple as a cursory look at a list of words. Experimental results are very promising: our system is able to generate clusterings along the user-specified dimensions with reasonable accuracies on several challenging text classification tasks, thus providing suggestive evidence that our approach is viable.
1835532	EUSUM: extracting easy-to-understand english summaries for non-native readers In this paper we investigate a novel and important problem in multi-document summarization, i.e., how to extract an easy-to-understand English summary for non-native readers. Existing summarization systems extract the same kind of English summaries from English news documents for both native and non-native readers. However, the non-native readers have different English reading skills because they have different English education and learning backgrounds. An English summary which can be easily understood by native readers may be hardly understood by non-native readers. We propose to add the dimension of reading easiness or difficulty to multi-document summarization, and the proposed EUSUM system can produce easy-to-understand summaries according to the English reading skills of the readers. The sentence-level reading easiness (or difficulty) is predicted by using the SVM regression method. And the reading easiness score of each sentence is then incorporated into the summarization process. Empirical evaluation and user study have been performed and the results demonstrate that the EUSUM system can produce more easy-to-understand summaries for non-native readers than existing summarization systems, with very little sacrifice of the summary's informativeness.
1835541	Reusable test collections through experimental design Portable, reusable test collections are a vital part of research and development in information retrieval. Reusability is difficult to assess, however. The standard approach--simulating judgment collection when groups of systems are held out, then evaluating those held-out systems--only works when there is a large set of relevance judgments to draw on during the simulation. As test collections adapt to larger and larger corpora, it becomes less and less likely that there will be sufficient judgments for such simulation experiments. Thus we propose a methodology for information retrieval experimentation that collects evidence for or against the reusability of a test collection while judgments are being made. Using this methodology along with the appropriate statistical analyses, researchers will be able to estimate the reusability of their test collections while building them and implement "course corrections" if the collection does not seem to be achieving desired levels of reusability. We show the robustness of our design to inherent sources of variance, and provide a description of an actual implementation of the framework for creating a large test collection.
1835544	Estimating advertisability of tail queries for sponsored search Sponsored search is one of the major sources of revenue for search engines on the World Wide Web. It has been observed that while showing ads for every query maximizes short-term revenue, irrelevant ads lead to poor user experience and less revenue in the long-term. Hence, it is in search engines' interest to place ads only for queries that are likely to attract ad-clicks. Many algorithms for estimating query advertisability exist in literature, but most of these methods have been proposed for and tested on the frequent or "head" queries. Since query frequencies on search engine are known to be distributed as a power-law, this leaves a huge fraction of the queries uncovered. In this paper we focus on the more challenging problem of estimating query advertisability for infrequent or "tail" queries. These require fundamentally different methods than head queries: for e.g., tail queries are almost all unique and require the estimation method to be online and inexpensive. We show that previously proposed methods do not apply to tail queries, and when modified for our scenario they do not work well. Further, we give a simple, yet effective, approach, which estimates query advertisability using only the words present in the queries. We evaluate our approach on a real-world dataset consisting of search engine queries and user clicks. Our results show that our simple approach outperforms a more complex one based on regularized regression.
1835549	Human performance and retrieval precision revisited Several studies have found that the Cranfield approach to evaluation can report significant performance differences between retrieval systems for which little to no performance difference is found for humans completing tasks with these systems. We revisit the relationship between precision and performance by measuring human performance on tightly controlled search tasks and with user interfaces offering limited interaction. We find that human performance and retrieval precision are strongly related. We also find that users change their relevance judging behavior based on the precision of the results. This change in behavior coupled with the well-known lack of perfect inter-assessor agreement can reduce the measured performance gains predicted by increased precision.
1835554	Robust audio identification for MP3 popular music Audio identification via fingerprint has been an active research field with wide applications for years. Many technical papers were published and commercial software systems were also employed. However, most of these previously reported methods work on the raw audio format in spite of the fact that nowadays compressed format audio, especially MP3 music, has grown into the dominant way to store on personal computers and transmit on the Internet. It would be interesting if a compressed unknown audio fragment is able to be directly recognized from the database without the fussy and time-consuming decompression-identification-recompression procedure. So far, very few algorithms run directly in the compressed domain for music information retrieval, and most of them take advantage of MDCT coefficients or derived energy type of features. As a first attempt, we propose in this paper utilizing compressed-domain spectral entropy as the audio feature to implement a novel audio fingerprinting algorithm. The compressed songs stored in a music database and the possibly distorted compressed query excerpts are first partially decompressed to obtain the MDCT coefficients as the intermediate result. Then by grouping granules into longer blocks, remapping the MDCT coefficients into 192 new frequency lines to unify the frequency distribution of long and short windows, and defining 9 new subbands which cover the main frequency bandwidth of popular songs in accordance with the scale-factor bands of short windows, we calculate the spectral entropy of all consecutive blocks and come to the final fingerprint sequence by means of magnitude relationship modeling. Experiments show that such fingerprints exhibit strong robustness against various audio signal distortions like recompression, noise interference, echo addition, equalization, band-pass filtering, pitch shifting, and slight time-scale modification etc. For 5s-long query examples which might be severely degraded, an average top-five retrieval precision rate of more than 90% can be obtained in our test data set composed of 1822 popular songs.
1835555	Effective music tagging through advanced statistical modeling Music information retrieval (MIR) holds great promise as a technology for managing large music archives. One of the key components of MIR that has been actively researched into is music tagging. While significant progress has been achieved, most of the existing systems still adopt a simple classification approach, and apply machine learning classifiers directly on low level acoustic features. Consequently, they suffer the shortcomings of (1) poor accuracy, (2) lack of comprehensive evaluation results and the associated analysis based on large scale datasets, and (3) incomplete content representation, arising from the lack of multimodal and temporal information integration. In this paper, we introduce a novel system called MMTagger that effectively integrates both multimodal and temporal information in the representation of music signal. The carefully designed multilayer architecture of the proposed classification framework seamlessly combines Multiple Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) and Support Vector Machine (SVM) into a single framework. The structure preserves more discriminative information, leading to more accurate and robust tagging. Experiment results obtained with two large music collections highlight the various advantages of our multilayer framework over state of the art techniques.
1835556	Properties of optimally weighted data fusion in CBMIR Content-Based Multimedia Information Retrieval (CBMIR) systems which leverage multiple retrieval experts ( E n ) often employ a weighting scheme when combining expert results through data fusion. Typically however a query will comprise multiple query images ( I m ) leading to potentially N × M weights to be assigned. Because of the large number of potential weights, existing approaches impose a hierarchy for data fusion, such as uniformly combining query image results from a single retrieval expert into a single list and then weighting the results of each expert. In this paper we will demonstrate that this approach is sub-optimal and leads to the poor state of CBMIR performance in benchmarking evaluations. We utilize an optimization method known as Coordinate Ascent to discover the optimal set of weights (| E n | ? | I m |) which demonstrates a dramatic difference between known results and the theoretical maximum. We find that imposing common combinatorial hierarchies for data fusion will half the optimal performance that can be achieved. By examining the optimal weight sets at the topic level, we observe that approximately 15% of the weights (from set | E n | ? | I m |) for any given query, are assigned 70%-82% of the total weight mass for that topic. Furthermore we discover that the ideal distribution of weights follows a log-normal distribution. We find that we can achieve up to 88% of the performance of fully optimized query using just these 15% of the weights. Our investigation was conducted on TRECVID evaluations 2003 to 2007 inclusive and ImageCLEFPhoto 2007, totalling 181 search topics optimized over a combined collection size of 661,213 images and 1,594 topic images.
1835558	To translate or not to translate? Query translation is an important task in cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) aiming to translate queries into languages used in documents. The purpose of this paper is to investigate the necessity of translating query terms, which might differ from one term to another. Some untranslated terms cause irreparable performance drop while others do not. We propose an approach to estimate the translation probability of a query term, which helps decide if it should be translated or not. The approach learns regression and classification models based on a rich set of linguistic and statistical properties of the term. Experiments on NTCIR-4 and NTCIR-5 English-Chinese CLIR tasks demonstrate that the proposed approach can significantly improve CLIR performance. An in-depth analysis is also provided for discussing the impact of untranslated out-of-vocabulary (OOV) query terms and translation quality of non-OOV query terms on CLIR performance.
1835559	Multilingual PRF: english lends a helping hand In this paper, we present a novel approach to Pseudo-Relevance Feedback (PRF) called Multilingual PRF (MultiPRF). The key idea is to harness multilinguality. Given a query in a language, we take the help of another language to ameliorate the well known problems of PRF, viz. (a) The expansion terms from PRF are primarily based on co-occurrence relationships with query terms, and thus other terms which are lexically and semantically related, such as morphological variants and synonyms, are not explicitly captured, and (b) PRF is quite sensitive to the quality of the initially retrieved top k documents and is thus not robust. In MultiPRF, given a query in language L1, it is translated into language L2 and PRF is performed on a collection in language L2 and the resultant feedback model is translated from L2 back into L1. The final feedback model is obtained by combining the translated model with the original feedback model of the query in L1. Experiments were performed on standard CLEF collections in languages with widely differing characteristics, viz., French, German, Finnish and Hungarian with English as the assisting language. We observe that MultiPRF outperforms PRF and is more robust with consistent and significant improvements in the above widely differing languages. A thorough analysis of the results reveal that the second language helps in obtaining both co-occurrence based conceptual terms as well as lexically and semantically related terms. Additionally, the use of the second language collection reduces the sensitivity to performance of initial retrieval, thereby making it more robust.
1835563	Discriminative models of integrating document evidence and document-candidate associations for expert search Generative models such as statistical language modeling have been widely studied in the task of expert search to model the relationship between experts and their expertise indicated in supporting documents. On the other hand, discriminative models have received little attention in expert search research, although they have been shown to outperform generative models in many other information retrieval and machine learning applications. In this paper, we propose a principled relevance-based discriminative learning framework for expert search and derive specific discriminative models from the framework. Compared with the state-of-the-art language models for expert search, the proposed research can naturally integrate various document evidence and document-candidate associations into a single model without extra modeling assumptions or effort. An extensive set of experiments have been conducted on two TREC Enterprise track corpora (i.e., W3C and CERC) to demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed framework.
1835569	Finding and filtering information for children Children face several challenges when using information access systems. These include formulating queries, judging the relevance of documents, and focusing attention on interface cues, such as query suggestions, while typing queries. It has also been shown that children want a personalised Web experience and prefer content presented to them that matches their long-term entertainment and education needs. To this end, we have developed an interaction-based information filtering system to address these challenges.
1835577	Closed form solution of similarity algorithms Algorithms defining similarities between objects of an information network are important of many IR tasks. SimRank algorithm and its variations are popularly used in many applications. Many fast algorithms are also developed. In this note, we first reformulate them as random walks on the network and express them using forward and backward transition probably in a matrix form. Second, we show that P-Rank (SimRank is only the special case of P-Rank) has a unique solution of eeT when decay factor c is equal to 1. We also show that SimFusion algorithm is a special case of P-Rank algorithm and prove that the similarity matrix of SimFusion is the product of PageRank vector. Our experiments on the web datasets show that for P-Rank the decay factor c doesn't seriously affect the similarity accuracy and accuracy of P-Rank is also higher than SimFusion and SimRank.
1835582	Learning to rank audience for behavioral targeting Behavioral Targeting (BT) is a recent trend of online advertising market. However, some classical BT solutions, which predefine the user segments for BT ads delivery, are sometimes too large to numerous long-tail advertisers, who cannot afford to buy any large user segments due to budget consideration. In this extend abstract, we propose to rank users according to their probability of interest in an advertisement in a learning to rank framework. We propose to extract three types of features between user behaviors such as search queries, ad click history etc and the ad content provided by advertisers. Through this way, a long-tail advertiser can select a certain number of top ranked users as needed from the user segments for ads delivery. In the experiments, we use a 30-days' ad click-through log from a commercial search engine. The results show that using our proposed features under a learning to rank framework, we can well rank users who potentially interest in an advertisement.
1835588	A picture is worth a thousand search results: finding child-oriented multimedia results with collAge We present a simple and effective approach to complement search results for children's web queries with child-oriented multimedia results, such as coloring pages and music sheets. Our approach determines appropriate media types for a query by searching Google's database of frequent queries for co-occurrences of a query's terms (e.g., "dinosaurs") with preselected multimedia terms (e.g., "coloring pages"). We show the effectiveness of this approach through an online user evaluation.
1835591	Flickr group recommendation based on tensor decomposition Over the last few years, Flickr has gained massive popularity and groups in Flickr are one of the main ways for photo diffusion. However, the huge volume of groups brings troubles for users to decide which group to choose. In this paper, we propose a tensor decomposition-based group recommendation model to suggest groups to users which can help tackle this problem. The proposed model measures the latent associations between users and groups by considering both semantic tags and social relations. Experimental results show the usefulness of the proposed model.
1835593	Estimating interference in the QPRP for subtopic retrieval The Quantum Probability Ranking Principle (QPRP) has been recently proposed, and accounts for interdependent document relevance when ranking. However, to be instantiated, the QPRP requires a method to approximate the "interference" between two documents. In this poster, we empirically evaluate a number of different methods of approximation on two TREC test collections for subtopic retrieval. It is shown that these approximations can lead to significantly better retrieval performance over the state of the art.
1835594	Query quality: user ratings and system predictions Numerous studies have examined the ability of query performance prediction methods to estimate a query's quality for system effectiveness measures (such as average precision). However, little work has explored the relationship between these methods and user ratings of query quality. In this poster, we report the findings from an empirical study conducted on the TREC ClueWeb09 corpus, where we compared and contrasted user ratings of query quality against a range of query performance prediction methods. Given a set of queries, it is shown that user ratings of query quality correlate to both system effectiveness measures and a number of pre-retrieval predictors.
1835596	Language-model-based pro/con classification of political text Given a controversial political topic, our aim is to classify documents debating the topic into pro or con. Our approach extracts topic related terms, pro/con related terms, and pairs of topic related and pro/con related terms and uses them as the basis for constructing a pro query and a con query. Following standard LM techniques, a document is classified as pro or con depending on which of the query likelihoods is higher for the document. Our experiments show that our approach is promising.
1835597	Intent boundary detection in search query logs Identifying intent boundary in search query logs is important for learning users' behaviors and applying their experiences. Time-based, query-based, and cluster-based approaches are proposed. Experiments show that the integration of intent clusters and dynamic time model performs the best.
1835602	Unsupervised estimation of dirichlet smoothing parameters A standard approach for determining a Dirichlet smoothing parameter is to choose a value which maximizes a retrieval performance metric using training data consisting of queries and relevance judgments. There are, however, situations where training data does not exist or the queries and relevance judgments do not reflect typical user information needs for the application. We propose an unsupervised approach for estimating a Dirichlet smoothing parameter based on collection statistics. We show empirically that this approach can suggest a plausible Dirichlet smoothing parameter value in cases where relevance judgments cannot be used.
1835603	Comparing click-through data to purchase decisions for retrieval evaluation Traditional retrieval evaluation uses explicit relevance judgments which are expensive to collect. Relevance assessments inferred from implicit feedback such as click-through data can be collected inexpensively, but may be less reliable. We compare assessments derived from click-through data to another source of implicit feedback that we assume to be highly indicative of relevance: purchase decisions. Evaluating retrieval runs based on a log of an audio-visual archive, we find agreement between system rankings and purchase decisions to be surprisingly high.
1835604	Personalize web search results with user's location We build a probabilistic model to identify implicit local intent queries, and leverage user's physical location to improve Web search results for these queries. Evaluation on commercial search engine shows significant improvement on search relevance and user experience.
1835605	Using search session context for named entity recognition in query Recently, the problem of Named Entity Recognition in Query (NERQ) is attracting increasingly attention in the field of information retrieval. However, the lack of context information in short queries makes some classical named entity recognition (NER) algorithms fail. In this paper, we propose to utilize the search session information before a query as its context to address this limitation. We propose to improve two classical NER solutions by utilizing the search session context, which are known as Conditional Random Field (CRF) based solution and Topic Model based solution respectively. In both approaches, the relationship between current focused query and previous queries in the same session are used to extract novel context aware features. Experimental results on real user search session data show that the NERQ algorithms using search session context performs significantly better than the algorithms using only information of the short queries.
1835606	Evaluating whole-page relevance Whole page relevance defines how well the surface-level repre-sentation of all elements on a search result page and the corre-sponding holistic attributes of the presentation respond to users' information needs. We introduce a method for evaluating the whole-page relevance of Web search engine results pages. Our key contribution is that the method allows us to investigate aspects of component relevance that are difficult or impossible to judge in isolation. Such aspects include component-level information redundancy and cross-component coherence. The method we describe complements traditional document relevance measurement, affords comparative relevance assessment across multiple search engines, and facilitates the study of important factors such as brand presentation effects and component-level quality.
1835607	Predicting escalations of medical queries based on web page structure and content Logs of users' searches on Web health topics can exhibit signs of escalation of medical concerns, where initial queries about common symptoms are followed by queries about serious, rare illnesses. We present an effort to predict such escalations based on the structure and content of pages encountered during medical search sessions. We construct and then characterize the performance of classifiers that predict whether an escalation will occur after the access of a page. Our findings have implications for ranking algorithms and the design of search interfaces.
1835608	Contextual video advertising system using scene information inferred from video scripts With the rise of digital video consumptions, contextual video advertising demands have been increasing in recent years. This paper presents a novel video advertising system that selects relevant text ads for a given video scene by automatically identifying the situation of the scene. The situation information of video scenes is inferred from available video scripts. Experimental results show that the use of the situation information enhances the accuracy of ad retrieval for video scenes. The proposed system represents one of the pioneer video advertising systems using contextual information obtained from video scripts.
1835613	Focused access to sparsely and densely relevant documents XML retrieval provides a focused access to the relevant content of documents. However, in evaluation, full document retrieval has appeared competitive to focused XML retrieval. We analyze the density of relevance in documents, and show that in sparsely relevant documents focused retrieval performs better, whereas in densely relevant documents the performance of focused and document retrieval is equal.
1835614	Text document clustering with metric learning One reason for semi-supervised clustering fail to deliver satisfactory performance in document clustering is that the transformed optimization problem could have many candidate solutions, but existing methods provide no mechanism to select a suitable one from all those candidates. This paper alleviates this problem by posing the same task as a soft-constrained optimization problem, and introduces the salient degree measure as an information guide to control the searching of an optimal solution. Experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed method in the improvement of the performance, especially when the amount of priori domain knowledge is limited.
1835621	The power of naive query segmentation We address the problem of query segmentation: given a keyword query submitted to a search engine, the task is to group the keywords into phrases, if possible. Previous approaches to the problem achieve good segmentation performance on a gold standard but are fairly intricate. Our method is easy to implement and comes with a comparable accuracy.
1835623	Three web-based heuristics to determine a person's or institution's country of origin We propose three heuristics to determine the country of origin of a person or institution via text-based IE from the Web. We evaluate all methods on a collection of music artists and bands, and show that some heuristics outperform earlier work on the topic by terms of coverage, while retaining similar precision levels. We further investigate an extension using country-specific synonym lists.
1835626	Learning to rank query reformulations Query reformulation techniques based on query logs have recently proven to be effective for web queries. However, when initial queries have reasonably good quality, these techniques are often not reliable enough to identify the helpful reformulations among the suggested queries. In this paper, we show that we can use as few as two features to rerank a list of reformulated queries, or expanded queries to be specific, generated by a log-based query reformulation technique. Our results across five TREC collections suggest that there are consistently more useful reformulations in the first two positions in the new ranked list than there were initially, which leads to statistically significant improvements in retrieval effectiveness.
1835627	Many are better than one: improving multi-document summarization via weighted consensus Given a collection of documents, various multi-document summarization methods have been proposed to generate a short summary. However, few studies have been reported on aggregating different summarization methods to possibly generate better summarization results. We propose a weighted consensus summarization method to combine the results from single summarization systems. Experimental results on DUC2004 data sets demonstrate the performance improvement by aggregating multiple summarization systems, and our proposed weighted consensus summarization method outperforms other combination methods.
1835628	Exploring the use of labels to shortcut search trails Search trails comprising queries and Web page views are created as searchers engage in information-seeking activity online. During known-item search (where the objective may be to locate a target Web page), searchers may waste valuable time repeatedly reformulating queries as they attempt to locate an elusive page. Trail shortcuts help users bypass unnecessary queries and get them to their desired destination faster. In this poster we present a comparative oracle study of techniques to shortcut sub-optimal search trails using labels derived from social bookmarking, anchor text, query logs, and a human-computation game. We show that labels can help users reach target pages efficiently, that the label sources perform differently, and that shortcuts are potentially most useful when the target is challenging to find.
1835631	High precision opinion retrieval using sentiment-relevance flows Opinion retrieval involves the measuring of opinion score of a document about the given topic. We propose a new method, namely sentiment-relevance flow, that naturally unifies the topic relevance and the opinionated nature of a document. Experiments conducted over a large-scaled Web corpus show that the proposed approach improves performance of opinion retrieval in terms of precision at top ranks.
1835632	Ontology-enriched multi-document summarization in disaster management In this poster, we propose a novel document summarization approach named Ontology-enriched Multi-Document Summarization(OMS) for utilizing background knowledge to improve summarization results. OMS first maps the sentences of input documents onto an ontology, then links the given query to a specific node in the ontology, and finally extracts the summary from the sentences in the subtree rooted at the query node. By using the domain-related ontology, OMS can better capture the semantic relevance between the query and the sentences, and thus lead to better summarization results. As a byproduct, the final summary generated by OMS can be represented as a tree showing the hierarchical relationships of the extracted sentences. Evaluation results on the collection of press releases by Miami-Dade County Department of Emergency Management during Hurricane Wilma in 2005 demonstrate the efficacy of OMS.
1835633	Multi-view clustering of multilingual documents We propose a new multi-view clustering method which uses clustering results obtained on each view as a voting pattern in order to construct a new set of multi-view clusters. Our experiments on a multilingual corpus of documents show that performance increases significantly over simple concatenation and another multi-view clustering technique.
1835635	Late fusion of compact composite descriptors for retrieval from heterogeneous image databases Compact composite descriptors (CCDs) are global image features, capturing more than one types of information at the same time in a very compact representation. Their quality has so far been evaluated in retrieval from several homogeneous databases containing images of only the type that each CCD is intended for, and has been found better than other descriptors in the literature such as the MPEG-7 descriptors. In this study, we consider heterogeneous databases and investigate query-time fusion techniques for CCDs. The results show that fusion is beneficial, even with simple score normalization and combination methods due to the compatibility of the score distributions produced by the CCDs considered.
1835637	Query term ranking based on dependency parsing of verbose queries Query term ranking approaches are used to select effective terms from a verbose query by ranking terms. Features used for query term ranking and selection in previous work do not consider grammatical relationships between terms. To address this issue, we use syntactic features extracted from dependency parsing results of verbose queries. We also modify the method for measuring the effectiveness of query terms for query term ranking.
1835639	Probabilistic latent maximal marginal relevance Diversity has been heavily motivated in the information retrieval literature as an objective criterion for result sets in search and recommender systems. Perhaps one of the most well-known and most used algorithms for result set diversification is that of Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR). In this paper, we show that while MMR is somewhat ad-hoc and motivated from a purely pragmatic perspective, we can derive a more principled variant via probabilistic inference in a latent variable graphical model. This novel derivation presents a formal probabilistic latent view of MMR (PLMMR) that (a) removes the need to manually balance relevance and diversity parameters, (b) shows that specific definitions of relevance and diversity metrics appropriate to MMR emerge naturally, and (c) formally derives variants of latent semantic indexing (LSI) similarity metrics for use in PLMMR. Empirically, PLMMR outperforms MMR with standard term frequency based similarity and diversity metrics since PLMMR maximizes latent diversity in the results.
1835642	Linking wikipedia to the web We investigate the task of finding links from Wikipedia pages to external web pages. Such external links significantly extend the information in Wikipedia with information from the Web at large, while retaining the encyclopedic organization of Wikipedia. We use a language modeling approach to create a full-text and anchor text runs, and experiment with different document priors. In addition we explore whether social bookmarking site Delicious can be exploited to further improve our performance. We have constructed a test collection of 53 topics, which are Wikipedia pages on different entities. Our findings are that the anchor text index is a very effective method to retrieve home pages. Url class and anchor text length priors and their combination leads to the best results. Using Delicious on its own does not lead to very good results, but it does contain valuable information. Combining the best anchor text run and the Delicious run leads to further improvements.
1835645	Can search systems detect users' task difficulty?: some behavioral signals In this paper, we report findings on how user behaviors vary in tasks with different difficulty levels as well as of different types. Two behavioral signals: document dwell time and number of content pages viewed per query, were found to be able to help the system detect when users are working with difficult tasks.
1835646	Query log analysis in the context of information retrieval for children In this paper we analyze queries and sessions intended to satisfy children's information needs using a large-scale query log. The aim of this analysis is twofold: i) To identify differences between such queries and sessions, and general queries and sessions; ii) To enhance the query log by including annotations of queries, sessions, and actions for future research on information retrieval for children. We found statistically significant differences between the set of general purpose and queries seeking for content intended for children. We show that our findings are consistent with previous studies on the physical behavior of children using Web search engines.
1835650	Learning to select rankers Combining evidence from multiple retrieval models has been widely studied in the context of of distributed search, metasearch and rank fusion. Much of the prior work has focused on combining retrieval scores (or the rankings) assigned by different retrieval models or ranking algorithms. In this work, we focus on the problem of choosing between retrieval models using performance estimation. We propose modeling the differences in retrieval performance directly by using rank-time features - features that are available to the ranking algorithms - and the retrieval scores assigned by the ranking algorithms. Our experimental results show that when choosing between two rankers, our approach yields significant improvements over the best individual ranker.
1835653	HCC: a hierarchical co-clustering algorithm In this poster, we develop a novel method, called HCC, for hierarchical co-clustering. HCC brings together two interrelated but distinct themes from clustering: hierarchical clustering and co-clustering. The goal of the former theme is to organize clusters into a hierarchy that facilitates browsing and navigation, while the goal of the latter theme is to cluster different types of data simultaneously by making use of the relationship information. Our initial empirical results are promising and they demonstrate that simultaneously attempting both these goals in a single model leads to improvements over models that focus on a single goal.
1835660	Supervised query modeling using wikipedia We use Wikipedia articles to semantically inform the generation of query models. To this end, we apply supervised machine learning to automatically link queries to Wikipedia articles and sample terms from the linked articles to re-estimate the query model. On a recent large web corpus, we observe substantial gains in terms of both traditional metrics and diversity measures.
1835662	Machine learned ranking of entity facets The research described in this paper forms the backbone of a service that enables the faceted search experience of the Yahoo! search engine. We introduce an approach for a machine learned ranking of entity facets based on user click feedback and features extracted from three different ranking sources. The objective of the learned model is to predict the click-through rate on an entity facet. In an empirical evaluation we compare the performance of gradient boosted decision trees (GBDT) against a linear combination of features on two different click feedback models using the raw click-through rate (CTR), and click over expected clicks (COEC). The results show a significant improvement in retrieval performance, in terms of discounted cumulated gain, when ranking entity facets with GBDT trained on the COEC model. Most notably this is true when evaluated against the CTR test set.
1835663	User comments for news recommendation in social media Reading and Commenting online news is becoming a common user behavior in social media. Discussion in the form of comments following news postings can be effectively facilitated if the service provider can recommend articles based on not only the original news itself but also the thread of changing comments. This turns the traditional news recommendation to a "discussion moderator" that can intelligently assist online forums. In this work, we present a framework to recommend relevant information in the forum-based social media using user comments. When incorporating user comments, we consider structural and semantic information carried by them. Experiments indicate that our proposed solutions provide an effective recommendation service.
1835666	Author interest topic model This paper presents a hierarchical topic model that simultaneously captures topics and author's interests. Our proposal, the Author Interest Topic model (AIT), introduces a latent variable with a separate probability distribution over topics into each document. Experiments on a research paper corpus show that the AIT is useful as a generative model.
1835667	On the relationship between effectiveness and accessibility Typically the evaluation of Information Retrieval (IR) systems is focused upon two main system attributes: efficiency and effectiveness. However, it has been argued that it is also important to consider accessibility, i.e. the extent to which the IR system makes information easily accessible. But, it is unclear how accessibility relates to typical IR evaluation, and specifically whether there is a trade-off between accessibility and effectiveness. In this poster, we empirically explore the relationship between effectiveness and accessibility to determine whether the two objectives i.e. maximizing effectiveness and maximizing accessibility, are compatible, or not. To this aim, we empirically examine this relationship using two popular IR models and explore the trade-off between access and performance as these models are tuned.
1835671	Learning the click-through rate for rare/new ads from similar ads Ads on the search engine (SE) are generally ranked based on their Click-through rates (CTR). Hence, accurately predicting the CTR of an ad is of paramount importance for maximizing the SE's revenue. We present a model that inherits the click information of rare/new ads from other semantically related ads. The semantic features are derived from the query ad click-through graphs and advertisers account information. We show that the model learned using these features give a very good prediction for the CTR values.
1835673	A survival modeling approach to biomedical search result diversification using wikipedia In this paper, we propose a probabilistic survival model derived from the survival analysis theory for measuring aspect novelty. The retrieved documents' query-relevance and novelty are combined at the aspect level for re-ranking. Experiments conducted on the TREC 2006 and 2007 Genomics collections demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach in promoting ranking diversity for biomedical information retrieval.
1835676	Learning to rank for information retrieval This tutorial is concerned with a comprehensive introduction to the research area of learning to rank for information retrieval. In the first part of the tutorial, we will introduce three major approaches to learning to rank, i.e., the pointwise, pairwise, and listwise approaches, analyze the relationship between the loss functions used in these approaches and the widely-used IR evaluation measures, evaluate the performance of these approaches on the LETOR benchmark datasets, and demonstrate how to use these approaches to solve real ranking applications. In the second part of the tutorial, we will discuss some advanced topics regarding learning to rank, such as relational ranking, diverse ranking, semi-supervised ranking, transfer ranking, query-dependent ranking, and training data preprocessing. In the third part, we will briefly mention the recent advances on statistical learning theory for ranking, which explain the generalization ability and statistical consistency of different ranking methods. In the last part, we will conclude the tutorial and show several future research directions.
1835682	From federated to aggregated search Federated search refers to the brokered retrieval of content from a set of auxiliary retrieval systems instead of from a single, centralized retrieval system. Federated search tasks occur in, for example, digital libraries (where documents from several retrieval systems must be seamlessly merged) or peer-to-peer information retrieval (where documents distributed across a network of local indexes must be retrieved). In the context of web search, aggregated search refers to the integration of non-web content (e.g. images, videos, news articles, maps, tweets) into a web search result page. This is in contrast with classic web search where users are presented with a ranked list consisting exclusively of general web documents. As in other federated search situations, the non-web content is often retrieved from auxiliary retrieval systems (e.g. image or video databases, news indexes). Although aggregated search can be seen as an instance of federated search, several aspects make aggregated search a unique and compelling research topic. These include large sources of evidence (e.g. click logs) for deciding what non-web items to return, constrained interfaces (e.g. mobile screens), and a very heterogeneous set of available auxiliary resources (e.g. images, videos, maps, news articles). Each of these aspects introduces problems and opportunities not addressed in the federated search literature. Aggregated search is an important future research direction for information retrieval. All major search engines now provide aggregated search results. As the number of available auxiliary resources grows, deciding how to effectively surface content from each will become increasingly important. The goal of this tutorial is to provide an overview of federated search and aggregated search techniques for an intermediate information retrieval researcher. At the same time, the content will be valuable for practitioners in industry. We will take the audience through the most influential work in these areas and describe how they relate to real world aggregated search systems. We will also list some of the new challenges confronted in aggregated search and discuss directions for future work.
1835683	Estimating the query difficulty for information retrieval Many information retrieval (IR) systems suffer from a radical variance in performance when responding to users' queries. Even for systems that succeed very well on average, the quality of results returned for some of the queries is poor. Thus, it is desirable that IR systems will be able to identify "difficult" queries in order to handle them properly. Understanding why some queries are inherently more difficult than others is essential for IR, and a good answer to this important question will help search engines to reduce the variance in performance, hence better servicing their customer needs. The high variability in query performance has driven a new research direction in the IR field on estimating the expected quality of the search results, i.e. the query difficulty, when no relevance feedback is given. Estimating the query difficulty is a significant challenge due to the numerous factors that impact retrieval performance. Many prediction methods have been proposed recently. However, as many researchers observed, the prediction quality of state-of-the-art predictors is still too low to be widely used by IR applications. The low prediction quality is due to the complexity of the task, which involves factors such as query ambiguity, missing content, and vocabulary mismatch. The goal of this tutorial is to expose participants to the current research on query performance prediction (also known as query difficulty estimation). Participants will become familiar with states-of-the-art performance prediction methods, and with common evaluation methodologies for prediction quality. We will discuss the reasons that cause search engines to fail for some of the queries, and provide an overview of several approaches for estimating query difficulty. We then describe common methodologies for evaluating the prediction quality of those estimators, and some experiments conducted recently with their prediction quality, as measured over several TREC benchmarks. We will cover a few potential applications that can utilize query difficulty estimators by handling each query individually and selectively based on its estimated difficulty. Finally we will summarize with a discussion on open issues and challenges in the field.
188498	Using IR techniques for text classification in document analysis An abstract is not available.
188500	On the measurement of inter-linker consistency and retrieval effectiveness in hypertext databases An abstract is not available.
188509	Perceptual speed, learning and information retrieval performance An abstract is not available.
188517	Modelling information retrieval agents with belief revision An abstract is not available.
188552	A document retrieval model based on term frequency ranks An abstract is not available.
188599	Adapting a full-text information retrieval system to the computer troubleshooting domain An abstract is not available.
2009925	Understanding re-finding behavior in naturalistic email interaction logs In this paper we present a longitudinal, naturalistic study of email behavior (n=47) and describe our efforts at isolating re-finding behavior in the logs through various qualitative and quantitative analyses. The presented work underlines the methodological challenges faced with this kind of research, but demonstrates that it is possible to isolate re-finding behavior from email interaction logs with reasonable accuracy. Using the approaches developed we uncover interesting aspects of email re-finding behavior that have so far been impossible to study, such as how various features of email-clients are used in re-finding and the difficulties people encounter when using these. We explain how our findings could influence the design of email-clients and outline our thoughts on how future, more in depth analyses, can build on the work presented here to achieve a fuller understanding of email behavior and the support that people need.
2009927	People searching for people: analysis of a people search engine log Recent years show an increasing interest in vertical search: searching within a particular type of information. Understanding what people search for in these "verticals" gives direction to research and provides pointers for the search engines themselves. In this paper we analyze the search logs of one particular vertical: people search engines. Based on an extensive analysis of the logs of a search engine geared towards finding people, we propose a classification scheme for people search at three levels: (a) queries, (b) sessions, and (c) users. For queries, we identify three types, (i) event-based high-profile queries (people that become "popular" because of an event happening), (ii) regular high-profile queries (celebrities), and (iii) low-profile queries (other, less-known people). We present experiments on automatic classification of queries. On the session level, we observe five types: (i) family sessions (users looking for relatives), (ii) event sessions (querying the main players of an event), (iii) spotting sessions (trying to "spot" different celebrities online), (iv) polymerous sessions (sessions without a clear relation between queries), and (v) repetitive sessions (query refinement and copying). Finally, for users we identify four types: (i) monitors, (ii) spotters, (iii) followers, and (iv) polymers. Our findings not only offer insight into search behavior in people search engines, but they are also useful to identify future research directions and to provide pointers for search engine improvements.
2009928	Learning search tasks in queries and web pages via graph regularization As the Internet grows explosively, search engines play a more and more important role for users in effectively accessing online information. Recently, it has been recognized that a query is often triggered by a search task that the user wants to accomplish. Similarly, many web pages are specifically designed to help accomplish a certain task. Therefore, learning hidden tasks behind queries and web pages can help search engines return the most useful web pages to users by task matching. For instance, the search task that triggers query "thinkpad T410 broken" is to maintain a computer, and it is desirable for a search engine to return the Lenovo troubleshooting page on the top of the list. However, existing search engine technologies mainly focus on topic detection or relevance ranking, which are not able to predict the task that triggers a query and the task a web page can accomplish. In this paper, we propose to simultaneously classify queries and web pages into the popular search tasks by exploiting their content together with click-through logs. Specifically, we construct a taskoriented heterogeneous graph among queries and web pages. Each pair of objects in the graph are linked together as long as they potentially share similar search tasks. A novel graph-based regularization algorithm is designed for search task prediction by leveraging the graph. Extensive experiments in real search log data demonstrate the effectiveness of our method over state-of-the-art classifiers, and the search performance can be significantly improved by using the task prediction results as additional information.
2009930	User behavior in zero-recall ecommerce queries User expectation and experience for web search and eCommerce (product) search are quite different. Product descriptions are concise as compared to typical web documents. User expectation is more specific to find the right product. The difference in the publisher and searcher vocabulary (in case of product search the seller and the buyer vocabulary) combined with the fact that there are fewer products to search over than web documents result in observable numbers of searches that return no results (zero recall searches). In this paper we describe a study of zero recall searches. Our study is focused on eCommerce search and uses data from a leading eCommerce site's user click stream logs. There are 3 main contributions of our study: 1) The cause of zero recall searches; 2) A study of user's reaction and recovery from zero recall; 3) A study of differences in behavior of power users versus novice users to zero recall searches.
2009935	Relevant knowledge helps in choosing right teacher: active query selection for ranking adaptation Learning to adapt in a new setting is a common challenge to our knowledge and capability. New life would be easier if we actively pursued supervision from the right mentor chosen with our relevant but limited prior knowledge. This variant principle of active learning seems intuitively useful to many domain adaptation problems. In this paper, we substantiate its power for advancing automatic ranking adaptation, which is important in web search since it's prohibitive to gather enough labeled data for every search domain for fully training domain-specific rankers. For the cost-effectiveness, it is expected that only those most informative instances in target domain are collected to annotate while we can still utilize the abundant ranking knowledge in source domain. We propose a unified ranking framework to mutually reinforce the active selection of informative target-domain queries and the appropriate weighting of source training data as related prior knowledge. We select to annotate those target queries whose documents' order most disagrees among the members of a committee built on the mixture of source training data and the already selected target data. Then the replenished labeled set is used to adjust the importance of source queries for enhancing their rank transfer. This procedure iterates until labeling budget exhausts. Based on LETOR3.0 and Yahoo! Learning to Rank Challenge data sets, our approach significantly outperforms the random query annotation commonly used in ranking adaptation and the active rank learner on target-domain data only.
2009939	Active learning to maximize accuracy vs. effort in interactive information retrieval We consider an interactive information retrieval task in which the user is interested in finding several to many relevant documents with minimal effort. Given an initial document ranking, user interaction with the system produces relevance feedback (RF) which the system then uses to revise the ranking. This interactive process repeats until the user terminates the search. To maximize accuracy relative to user effort, we propose an active learning strategy. At each iteration, the document whose relevance is maximally uncertain to the system is slotted high into the ranking in order to obtain user feedback for it. Simulated feedback on the Robust04 TREC collection shows our active learning approach dominates several standard RF baselines relative to the amount of feedback provided by the user. Evaluation on Robust04 under noisy feedback and on LETOR collections further demonstrate the effectiveness of active learning, as well as value of negative feedback in this task scenario.
2009941	CRTER: using cross terms to enhance probabilistic information retrieval Term proximity retrieval rewards a document where the matched query terms occur close to each other. Although term proximity is known to be effective in many Information Retrieval (IR) applications, the within-document distribution of each individual query term and how the query terms associate with each other, are not fully considered. In this paper, we introduce a pseudo term, namely Cross Term, to model term proximity for boosting retrieval performance. An occurrence of a query term is assumed to have an impact towards its neighboring text, which gradually weakens with the increase of the distance to the place of occurrence. We use a shape function to characterize such an impact. A Cross Term occurs when two query terms appear close to each other and their impact shape functions have an intersection. We propose a Cross Term Retrieval (CRTER) model that combines the Cross Terms' information with basic probabilistic weighting models to rank the retrieved documents. Extensive experiments on standard TREC collections illustrate the effectiveness of our proposed CRTER model.
2009942	A boosting approach to improving pseudo-relevance feedback Pseudo-relevance feedback has proven effective for improving the average retrieval performance. Unfortunately, many experiments have shown that although pseudo-relevance feedback helps many queries, it also often hurts many other queries, limiting its usefulness in real retrieval applications. Thus an important, yet difficult challenge is to improve the overall effectiveness of pseudo-relevance feedback without sacrificing the performance of individual queries too much. In this paper, we propose a novel learning algorithm, FeedbackBoost, based on the boosting framework to improve pseudo-relevance feedback through optimizing the combination of a set of basis feedback algorithms using a loss function defined to directly measure both robustness and effectiveness. FeedbackBoost can potentially accommodate many basis feedback methods as features in the model, making the proposed method a general optimization framework for pseudo-relevance feedback. As an application, we apply FeedbackBoost to improve pseudo feedback based on language models through combining different document weighting strategies. The experiment results demonstrate that FeedbackBoost can achieve better average precision and meanwhile dramatically reduce the number and magnitude of feedback failures as compared to three representative pseudo feedback methods and a standard learning to rank approach for pseudo feedback.
2009946	Mining tags using social endorsement networks Entities on social systems, such as users on Twitter, and images on Flickr, are at the core of many interesting applications: they can be ranked in search results, recommended to users, or used in contextual advertising. Such applications assume knowledge of an entity's nature and characteristic attributes. An effective way to encode such knowledge is in the form of tags. An untagged entity is practically inaccessible, since it is hard to retrieve or interact with. To address this, some platforms allow users to manually tag entities. However,while such tags can be informative, they can oftentimes be inadequate, trivial, ambiguous, or even plain false. Numerous automated tagging methods have been proposed to address these issues. However,most of them require pre-existing high-quality tags or descriptive texts for every entity that needs to be tagged. In our work, we propose a method based on social endorsements that is free from such constraints. Virtually every major social networking platform allows users to endorse entities that they find appealing. Examples include "following" Twitter users or "favoriting" Flickr photos. These endorsements are abundant and directly capture the preferences of users. In this paper, we pose and solve the problem of using the underlying social endorsement network to extract useful tags for entities in a social system. Our work leverages techniques from topic modeling to capture the interests of users and then uses them to extract relevant and descriptive tags for the entities they endorse. We perform an extensive evaluation of our proposed approach on real large-scale datasets from both Twitter and Flickr, and show that it significantly outperforms meaningful and competitive baselines.
2009949	A site oriented method for segmenting web pages Information about how to segment a Web page can be used nowadays by applications such as segment aware Web search, classification and link analysis. In this research, we propose a fully automatic method for page segmentation and evaluate its application through experiments with four separate Web sites. While the method may be used in other applications, our main focus in this article is to use it as input to segment aware Web search systems. Our results indicate that the proposed method produces better segmentation results when compared to the best segmentation method we found in literature. Further, when applied as input to a segment aware Web search method, it produces results close to those produced when using a manual page segmentation method.
2009952	DOM based content extraction via text density In addition to the main content, most web pages also contain navigation panels, advertisements and copyright and disclaimer notices. This additional content, which is also known as noise, is typically not related to the main subject and may hamper the performance of web data mining, and hence needs to be removed properly. In this paper, we present Content Extraction via Text Density (CETD) a fast, accurate and general method for extracting content from diverse web pages, and using DOM (Document Object Model) node text density to preserve the original structure. For this purpose, we introduce two concepts to measure the importance of nodes: Text Density and Composite Text Density. In order to extract content intact, we propose a technique called DensitySum to replace Data Smoothing. The approach was evaluated with the CleanEval benchmark and with randomly selected pages from well-known websites, where various web domains and styles are tested. The average F1-scores with our method were 8.79% higher than the best scores among several alternative methods.
2009955	Probabilistic factor models for web site recommendation Due to the prevalence of personalization and information filtering applications, modeling users' interests on the Web has become increasingly important during the past few years. In this paper, aiming at providing accurate personalized Web site recommendations for Web users, we propose a novel probabilistic factor model based on dimensionality reduction techniques. We also extend the proposed method to collective probabilistic factor modeling, which further improves model performance by incorporating heterogeneous data sources. The proposed method is general, and can be applied to not only Web site recommendations, but also a wide range of Web applications, including behavioral targeting, sponsored search, etc. The experimental analysis on Web site recommendation shows that our method outperforms other traditional recommendation approaches. Moreover, the complexity analysis indicates that our approach can be applied to very large datasets since it scales linearly with the number of observations.
2009966	Measuring improvement in user search performance resulting from optimal search tips Web search performance can be improved by either improving the search engine itself or by educating the user to search more efficiently. There is a large amount of literature describing techniques for measuring the former; whereas, improvements resulting from the latter are more difficult to quantify. In this paper we demonstrate an experimental methodology that proves to successfully quantify improvements from user education. The user education in our study is realized in the form of tactical search feature tips that expand user awareness of task-relevant tools and features of the search application. Initially, these tips are presented in an idealized situation: each tip is shown at the same time as the study participants are given a task that is constructed to benefit from the specific tip. However, we also present a follow-up study roughly one week later in which the search tips are no longer presented but the study participants who previously were shown search tips still demonstrate improved search efficiency compared to the control group. This research has implications for search user interface designers and the study of information retrieval systems.
2009969	CrowdLogging: distributed, private, and anonymous search logging We describe CrowdLogging, an approach for distributed search log collection, storage, and mining, with the dual goals of preserving privacy and making the mined information broadly available. Most search log mining approaches and most privacy enhancing schemes have focused on centralized search logs and methods for disseminating them to third parties. In our approach, a user's search log is encrypted and shared in such a way that (a) the source of a search behavior artifact, such as a query, is unknown and (b) extremely rare artifacts---that is, artifacts more likely to contain private information---are not revealed. The approach works with any search behavior artifact that can be extracted from a search log, including queries, query reformulations, and query-click pairs. In this work, we: (1) present a distributed search log collection, storage, and mining framework; (2) compare several privacy policies, including differential privacy, showing the trade-offs between strong guarantees and the utility of the released data; (3) demonstrate the impact of our approach using two existing research query logs; and (4) describe a pilot study for which we implemented a version of the framework.
2009970	Out of sight, not out of mind: on the effect of social and physical detachment on information need The information needs of users and the documents which answer it are frequently contingent on the different characteristics of users. This is especially evident during natural disasters, such as earthquakes and violent weather incidents, which create a strong transient information need. In this paper we investigate how the information need of users is affected by their physical detachment, as estimated by their physical location in relation to that of the event, and by their social detachment, as quantified by the number of their acquaintances who may be affected by the event. Drawing on large-scale data from three major events, we show that social and physical detachment levels of users are a major influence on their information needs, as manifested by their search engine queries. We demonstrate how knowing social and physical detachment levels can assist in improving retrieval for two applications: identifying search queries related to events and ranking results in response to event-related queries. We find that the average precision in identifying relevant search queries improves by approximately 18%, and that the average precision of ranking that uses detachment information improves by 10%.
2009971	Scalable multi-dimensional user intent identification using tree structured distributions The problem of identifying user intent has received considerable attention in recent years, particularly in the context of improving the search experience via query contextualization. Intent can be characterized by multiple dimensions, which are often not observed from query words alone. Accurate identification of Intent from query words remains a challenging problem primarily because it is extremely difficult to discover these dimensions. The problem is often significantly compounded due to lack of representative training sample. We present a generic, extensible framework for learning the multi-dimensional representation of user intent from the query words. The approach models the latent relationships between facets using tree structured distribution which leads to an efficient and convergent algorithm, FastQ, for identifying the multi-faceted intent of users based on just the query words. We also incorporated WordNet to extend the system capabilities to queries which contain words that do not appear in the training data. Empirical results show that FastQ yields accurate identification of intent when compared to a gold standard.
2009972	Social annotation in query expansion: a machine learning approach Automatic query expansion technologies have been proven to be effective in many information retrieval tasks. Most existing approaches are based on the assumption that the most informative terms in top-retrieved documents can be viewed as context of the query and thus can be used for query expansion. One problem with these approaches is that some of the expansion terms extracted from feedback documents are irrelevant to the query, and thus may hurt the retrieval performance. In social annotations, users provide different keywords describing the respective Web pages from various aspects. These features may be used to boost IR performance. However, to date, the potential of social annotation for this task has been largely unexplored. In this paper, we explore the possibility and potential of social annotation as a new resource for extracting useful expansion terms. In particular, we propose a term ranking approach based on social annotation resource. The proposed approach consists of two phases: (1) in the first phase, we propose a term-dependency method to choose the most likely expansion terms; (2) in the second phase, we develop a machine learning method for term ranking, which is learnt from the statistics of the candidate expansion terms, using ListNet. Experimental results on three TREC test collections show that the retrieval performance can be improved when the term ranking method is used. In addition, we also demonstrate that terms selected by the term-dependency method from social annotation resources are beneficial to improve the retrieval performance.
2009975	Competition-based user expertise score estimation In this paper, we consider the problem of estimating the relative expertise score of users in community question and answering services (CQA). Previous approaches typically only utilize the explicit question answering relationship between askers and an-swerers and apply link analysis to address this problem. The im-plicit pairwise comparison between two users that is implied in the best answer selection is ignored. Given a question and answering thread, it's likely that the expertise score of the best answerer is higher than the asker's and all other non-best answerers'. The goal of this paper is to explore such pairwise comparisons inferred from best answer selections to estimate the relative expertise scores of users. Formally, we treat each pairwise comparison between two users as a two-player competition with one winner and one loser. Two competition models are proposed to estimate user expertise from pairwise comparisons. Using the NTCIR-8 CQA task data with 3 million questions and introducing answer quality prediction based evaluation metrics, the experimental results show that the pairwise comparison based competition model significantly outperforms link analysis based approaches (PageRank and HITS) and pointwise approaches (number of best answers and best answer ratio) for estimating the expertise of active users. Furthermore, it's shown that pairwise comparison based competi-tion models have better discriminative power than other methods. It's also found that answer quality (best answer) is an important factor to estimate user expertise.
2009976	Learning online discussion structures by conditional random fields Online forum discussions are emerging as valuable information repository, where knowledge is accumulated by the interaction among users, leading to multiple threads with structures. Such replying structure in each thread conveys important information about the discussion content. Unfortunately, not all the online forum sites would explicitly record such replying relationship, making it hard to for both users and computers to digest the information buried in a thread discussion. In this paper, we propose a probabilistic model in the Conditional Random Fields framework to predict the replying structure for a threaded online discussion. Different from previous thread reconstruction methods, most of which fail to consider dependency between the posts, we cast the problem as a supervised structure learning problem to incorporate the features describing the structural dependency among the discussion content and learn their relationship. Experiment results on three different online forums show that the proposed method can well capture the replying structures in online discussion threads, and multiple tasks such as forum search and question answering can benefit from the reconstructed replying structures.
2009977	Mining topics on participations for community discovery Community discovery on large-scale linked document corpora has been a hot research topic for decades. There are two types of links. The first one, which we call d2d-link, indicates connectiveness among different documents, such as blog references and research paper citations. The other one, which we call u2u-link, represents co-occurrences or simultaneous participations of different users in one document and typically each document from u2u-link corpus has more than one user/author. Examples of u2u-link data covers email archives and research paper co-authorship networks. Community discovery in d2d-link data has achieved much success, while methods for that in u2u-link data either make no use of the textual content of the documents or make oversimplified assumptions about the users and the textual content. In this paper we propose a general approach of community discovery for u2u-link data, i.e., multiple user data, by placing topical variables on multiple authors' participations in documents. Experiments on a research proceeding co-authorship corpus and a New York Times news corpus show the effectiveness of our model.
2009979	Authorship classification: a discriminative syntactic tree mining approach In the past, there have been dozens of studies on automatic authorship classification, and many of these studies concluded that the writing style is one of the best indicators for original authorship. From among the hundreds of features which were developed, syntactic features were best able to reflect an author's writing style. However, due to the high computational complexity for extracting and computing syntactic features, only simple variations of basic syntactic features such as function words, POS(Part of Speech) tags, and rewrite rules were considered. In this paper, we propose a new feature set of k-embedded-edge subtree patterns that holds more syntactic information than previous feature sets. We also propose a novel approach to directly mining them from a given set of syntactic trees. We show that this approach reduces the computational burden of using complex syntactic structures as the feature set. Comprehensive experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate that our approach is reliable and more accurate than previous studies.
2009980	On theme location discovery for travelogue services In this paper, we aim to develop a travelogue service that discovers and conveys various travelogue digests, in form of theme locations, geographical scope, traveling trajectory and location snippet, to users. In this service, theme locations in a travelogue are the core information to discover. Thus we aim to address the problem of theme location discovery to enable the above travelogue services. Due to the inherent ambiguity of location relevance, we perform location relevance mining (LRM) in two complementary angles, relevance classification and relevance ranking, to provide comprehensive understanding of locations. Furthermore, we explore the textual (e.g., surrounding words) and geographical (e.g., geographical relationship among locations) features of locations to develop a co-training model for enhancement of classification performance. Built upon the mining result of LRM, we develop a series of techniques for provisioning of the aforementioned travelogue digests in our travelogue system. Finally, we conduct comprehensive experiments on collected travelogues to evaluate the performance of our location relevance mining techniques and demonstrate the effectiveness of the travelogue service.
2009981	Effective sentiment stream analysis with self-augmenting training and demand-driven projection How do we analyze sentiments over a set of opinionated Twitter messages? This issue has been widely studied in recent years, with a prominent approach being based on the application of classification techniques. Basically, messages are classified according to the implicit attitude of the writer with respect to a query term. A major concern, however, is that Twitter (and other media channels) follows the data stream model, and thus the classifier must operate with limited resources, including labeled data for training classification models. This imposes serious challenges for current classification techniques, since they need to be constantly fed with fresh training messages, in order to track sentiment drift and to provide up-to-date sentiment analysis. We propose solutions to this problem. The heart of our approach is a training augmentation procedure which takes as input a small training seed, and then it automatically incorporates new relevant messages to the training data. Classification models are produced on-the-fly using association rules, which are kept up-to-date in an incremental fashion, so that at any given time the model properly reflects the sentiments in the event being analyzed. In order to track sentiment drift, training messages are projected on a demand driven basis, according to the content of the message being classified. Projecting the training data offers a series of advantages, including the ability to quickly detect trending information emerging in the stream. We performed the analysis of major events in 2010, and we show that the prediction performance remains about the same, or even increases, as the stream passes and new training messages are acquired. This result holds for different languages, even in cases where sentiment distribution changes over time, or in cases where the initial training seed is rather small. We derive lower-bounds for prediction performance, and we show that our approach is extremely effective under diverse learning scenarios, providing gains that range from 7% to 58%.
2009983	Hypergeometric language models for republished article finding Republished article finding is the task of identifying instances of articles that have been published in one source and republished more or less verbatim in another source, which is often a social media source. We address this task as an ad hoc retrieval problem, using the source article as a query. Our approach is based on language modeling. We revisit the assumptions underlying the unigram language model taking into account the fact that in our setup queries are as long as complete news articles. We argue that in this case, the underlying generative assumption of sampling words from a document with replacement, i.e., the multinomial modeling of documents, produces less accurate query likelihood estimates. To make up for this discrepancy, we consider distributions that emerge from sampling without replacement: the central and non-central hypergeometric distributions. We present two retrieval models that build on top of these distributions: a log odds model and a bayesian model where document parameters are estimated using the Dirichlet compound multinomial distribution. We analyse the behavior of our new models using a corpus of news articles and blog posts and find that for the task of republished article finding, where we deal with queries whose length approaches the length of the documents to be retrieved, models based on distributions associated with sampling without replacement outperform traditional models based on multinomial distributions.
2009985	Query by document via a decomposition-based two-level retrieval approach Retrieving similar documents from a large-scale text corpus according to a given document is a fundamental technique for many applications. However, most of existing indexing techniques have difficulties to address this problem due to special properties of a document query, e.g. high dimensionality, sparse representation and semantic concern. Towards addressing this problem, we propose a two-level retrieval solution based on a document decomposition idea. A document is decomposed to a compact vector and a few document specific keywords by a dimension reduction approach. The compact vector embodies the major semantics of a document, and the document specific keywords complement the discriminative power lost in dimension reduction process. We adopt locality sensitive hashing (LSH) to index the compact vectors, which guarantees to quickly find a set of related documents according to the vector of a query document. Then we re-rank documents in this set by their document specific keywords. In experiments, we obtained promising results on various datasets in terms of both accuracy and performance. We demonstrated that this solution is able to index large-scale corpus for efficient similarity-based document retrieval.
2009989	Mining weakly labeled web facial images for search-based face annotation In this paper, we investigate a search-based face annotation framework by mining weakly labeled facial images that are freely available on the internet. A key component of such a search-based annotation paradigm is to build a database of facial images with accurate labels. This is however challenging since facial images on the WWW are often noisy and incomplete. To improve the label quality of raw web facial images, we propose an effective Unsupervised Label Refinement (ULR) approach for refining the labels of web facial images by exploring machine learning techniques. We develop effective optimization algorithms to solve the large-scale learning tasks efficiently, and conduct an extensive empirical study on a web facial image database with 400 persons and 40,000 web facial images. Encouraging results showed that the proposed ULR technique can significantly boost the performance of the promising search-based face annotation scheme.
2009996	Incremental diversification for very large sets: a streaming-based approach Result diversification is an effective method to reduce the risk that none of the returned results satisfies a user's query intention. It has been shown to decrease query abandonment substantially. On the other hand, computing an optimally diverse set is NP-hard for the usual objectives. Existing greedy diversification algorithms require random access to the input set, rendering them impractical in the context of large result sets or continuous data. To solve this issue, we present a novel diversification approach which treats the input as a stream and processes each element in an incremental fashion, maintaining a near-optimal diverse set at any point in the stream. Our approach exhibits a linear computation and constant memory complexity with respect to input size, without significant loss of diversification quality. In an extensive evaluation on several real-world data sets, we show the applicability and efficiency of our algorithm for large result sets as well as for continuous query scenarios such as news stream subscriptions.
2009999	UPS: efficient privacy protection in personalized web search In recent years, personalized web search (PWS) has demonstrated effectiveness in improving the quality of search service on the Internet. Unfortunately, the need for collecting private information in PWS has become a major barrier for its wide proliferation. We study privacy protection in PWS engines which capture personalities in user profiles. We propose a PWS framework called UPS that can generalize profiles in for each query according to user-specified privacy requirements. Two predictive metrics are proposed to evaluate the privacy breach risk and the query utility for hierarchical user profile. We develop two simple but effective generalization algorithms for user profiles allowing for query-level customization using our proposed metrics. We also provide an online prediction mechanism based on query utility for deciding whether to personalize a query in UPS. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of our framework.
2010001	Handling data sparsity in collaborative filtering using emotion and semantic based features Collaborative filtering (CF) aims to recommend items based on prior user interaction. Despite their success, CF techniques do not handle data sparsity well, especially in the case of the cold start problem where there is no past rating for an item. In this paper, we provide a framework, which is able to tackle such issues by considering item-related emotions and semantic data. In order to predict the rating of an item for a given user, this framework relies on an extension of Latent Dirichlet Allocation, and on gradient boosted trees for the final prediction. We apply this framework to movie recommendation and consider two emotion spaces extracted from the movie plot summary and the reviews, and three semantic spaces: actor, director, and genre. Experiments with the 100K and 1M MovieLens datasets show that including emotion and semantic information significantly improves the accuracy of prediction and improves upon the state-of-the-art CF techniques. We also analyse the importance of each feature space and describe some uncovered latent groups.
2010004	Learning relevance from heterogeneous social network and its application in online targeting The rise of social networking services in recent years presents new research challenges for matching users with interesting content. While the content-rich nature of these social networks offers many cues on "interests" of a user such as text in user-generated content, the links in the network, and user demographic information, there is a lack of successful methods for combining such heterogeneous data to model interest and relevance. This paper proposes a new method for modeling user interest from heterogeneous data sources with distinct but unknown importance. The model leverages links in the social graph by integrating the conceptual representation of a user's linked objects. The proposed method seeks a scalable relevance model of user interest, that can be discriminatively optimized for various relevance-centric problems, such as Internet advertisement selection, recommendation, and web search personalization. We apply our algorithm to the task of selecting relevant ads for users on Facebook's social network. We demonstrate that our algorithm can be scaled to work with historical data for all users, and learns interesting associations between concept classes automatically. We also show that using the learnt user model to predict the relevance of an ad is the single most important signal in our ranking system for new ads (with no historical clickthrough data), and overall leads to an improvement in the accuracy of the clickthrough rate prediction, a key problem in online advertising.
2010010	Multimedia answering: enriching text QA with media information Existing community question-answering forums usually provide only textual answers. However, for many questions, pure texts cannot provide intuitive information, while image or video contents are more appropriate. In this paper, we introduce a scheme that is able to enrich text answers with image and video information. Our scheme investigates a rich set of techniques including question/answer classification, query generation, image and video search reranking, etc. Given a question and the community-contributed answer, our approach is able to determine which type of media information should be added, and then automatically collects data from Internet to enrich the textual answer. Different from some efforts that attempt to directly answer questions with image and video data, our approach is built based on the community-contributed textual answers and thus it is more feasible and able to deal with more complex questions. We have conducted empirical study on more than 3,000 QA pairs and the results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.
2010011	Enhancing multi-label music genre classification through ensemble techniques In the field of Music Information Retrieval (MIR), multi-label genre classification is the problem of assigning one or more genre labels to a music piece. In this work, we propose a set of ensemble techniques, which are specific to the task of multi-label genre classification. Our goal is to enhance classification performance by combining multiple classifiers. In addition, we also investigate some existing ensemble techniques from machine learning. The effectiveness of these techniques is demonstrated through a set of empirical experiments and various related issues are discussed. To the best of our knowledge, there has been limited work on applying ensemble techniques to multi-label genre classification in the literature and we consider the results in this work as our initial efforts toward this end. The significance of our work has two folds: (1) proposing a set of ensemble techniques specific to music genre classification and (2) shedding light on further research along this direction.
2010012	Picasso - to sing, you must close your eyes and draw We study the problem of automatically assigning appropriate music pieces to a picture or, in general, series of pictures. This task, commonly referred to as soundtrack suggestion, is non-trivial as it requires a lot of human attention and a good deal of experience, with master pieces distinguished, e.g., with the Academy Award for Best Original Score. We put forward PICASSO to solve this task in a fully automated way. PICASSO makes use of genuine samples obtained from first-class contemporary movies. Hence, the training set can be arbitrarily large and is also inexpensive to obtain but still provides an excellent source of information. At query time, PICASSO employs a three-level algorithm. First, it selects for a given query image a ranking of the most similar screenshots taken, and subsequently, selects for each screenshot the most similar songs to the music played in the movie when the screenshot was taken. Last, it issues a top-K aggregation algorithm to find the overall best suitable songs available. We have created a large training set consisting of over 40,000 image/soundtrack samples obtained from 28 movies and evaluated the suitability of PICASSO by means of a user study.
2010015	Summarizing the differences in multilingual news There usually exist many news articles written in different languages about a hot news event. The news articles in different languages are written in different ways to reflect different standpoints. For example, the Chinese news agencies and the Western news agencies have published many articles to report the same news of "Liu Xiaobo's Nobel Prize" in Chinese and English languages, respectively. The Chinese news articles and the English news articles share something about the news fact in common, but they focus on different aspects in order to reflect different standpoints about the event. In this paper, we investigate the task of multilingual news summarization for the purpose of finding and summarizing the major differences between the news articles about the same event in the Chinese and English languages. We propose a novel constrained co-ranking (C-CoRank) method for addressing this special task. The C-CoRank method adds the constraints between the difference score and the common score of each sentence to the co-ranking process. Evaluation results on the manually labeled test set with 15 news topics show the effectiveness of our proposed method, and the constrained co-ranking method can outperform a few baselines and the typical co-ranking method.
2010018	Ranking related news predictions We estimate that nearly one third of news articles contain references to future events. While this information can prove crucial to understanding news stories and how events will develop for a given topic, there is currently no easy way to access this information. We propose a new task to address the problem of retrieving and ranking sentences that contain mentions to future events, which we call ranking related news predictions. In this paper, we formally define this task and propose a learning to rank approach based on 4 classes of features: term similarity, entity-based similarity, topic similarity, and temporal similarity. Through extensive evaluations using a corpus consisting of 1.8 millions news articles and 6,000 manually judged relevance pairs, we show that our approach is able to retrieve a significant number of relevant predictions related to a given topic.
2010020	From one tree to a forest: a unified solution for structured web data extraction Structured data, in the form of entities and associated attributes, has been a rich web resource for search engines and knowledge databases. To efficiently extract structured data from enormous websites in various verticals (e.g., books, restaurants), much research effort has been attracted, but most existing approaches either require considerable human effort or rely on strong features that lack of flexibility. We consider an ambitious scenario -- can we build a system that (1) is general enough to handle any vertical without re-implementation and (2) requires only one labeled example site from each vertical for training to automatically deal with other sites in the same vertical? In this paper, we propose a unified solution to demonstrate the feasibility of this scenario. Specifically, we design a set of weak but general features to characterize vertical knowledge (including attribute-specific semantics and inter-attribute layout relationships). Such features can be adopted in various verticals without redesign; meanwhile, they are weak enough to avoid overfitting of the learnt knowledge to seed sites. Given a new unseen site, the learnt knowledge is first applied to identify page-level candidate attribute values, while inevitably involve false positives. To remove noise, site-level information of the new site is then exploited to boost up the true values. The site-level information is derived in an unsupervised manner, without harm to the applicability of the solution. Promising experimental performance on 80 websites in 8 distinct verticals demonstrated the feasibility and flexibility of the proposed solution.
2010021	Improving local search ranking through external logs The signals used for ranking in local search are very different from web search: in addition to (textual) relevance, measures of (geographic) distance between the user and the search result, as well as measures of popularity of the result are important for effective ranking. Depending on the query and search result, different ways to quantify these factors exist -- for example, it is possible to use customer ratings to quantify the popularity of restaurants, whereas different measures are more appropriate for other types of businesses. Hence, our approach is to capture the different notions of distance/popularity relevant via a number of external data sources (e.g., logs of customer ratings, driving-direction requests, or site accesses). In this paper we will describe the relevant signal contained in a number of such data sources in detail and present methods to integrate these external data sources into the feature generation for local search ranking. In particular, we propose novel backoff methods to alleviate the impact of skew, noise or incomplete data in these logs in a systematic manner. We evaluate our techniques on both human-judged relevance data as well as click-through data from a commercial local search engine.
2010024	Synthesizing high utility suggestions for rare web search queries Search engines are continuously looking into methods to alleviate users' effort in finding desired information. For this, all major search engines employ query suggestions methods to facilitate effective query formulation and reformulation. Providing high quality query suggestions is a critical task for search engines and so far most research efforts have focused on tapping various information available in search query logs to identify potential suggestions. By relying on this single source of information, suggestion providing systems often restrict themselves to only previously observed query sessions. Therefore, a critical challenge faced by query suggestions provision mechanism is that of coverage, i.e., the number of unique queries for which users are provided with suggestions, while keeping the suggestion quality high. To address this problem, we propose a novel way of generating suggestions for user search queries by moving beyond the dependency on search query logs and providing synthetic suggestions for web search queries. The key challenges in providing synthetic suggestions include identifying important concepts in a query and systematically exploring related concepts while ensuring that the resulting suggestions are relevant to the user query and of high utility. We present an end-to-end system to generate synthetic suggestions that builds upon novel query-level operations and combines information available from various textual sources. We evaluate our suggestion system over a large-scale real-world dataset of query logs and show that our methods increase the coverage of query-suggestion pairs by up to 39% without compromising the quality or the utility of the suggestions.
2010026	Automatic boolean query suggestion for professional search In professional search environments, such as patent search or legal search, search tasks have unique characteristics: 1) users interactively issue several queries for a topic, and 2) users are willing to examine many retrieval results, i.e., there is typically an emphasis on recall. Recent surveys have also verified that professional searchers continue to have a strong preference for Boolean queries because they provide a record of what documents were searched. To support this type of professional search, we propose a novel Boolean query suggestion technique. Specifically, we generate Boolean queries by exploiting decision trees learned from pseudo-labeled documents and rank the suggested queries using query quality predictors. We evaluate our algorithm in simulated patent and medical search environments. Compared with a recent effective query generation system, we demonstrate that our technique is effective and general.
2010031	A novel corpus-based stemming algorithm using co-occurrence statistics We present a stemming algorithm for text retrieval. The algorithm uses the statistics collected on the basis of certain corpus analysis based on the co-occurrence between two word variants. We use a very simple co-occurrence measure that reflects how often a pair of word variants occurs in a document as well as in the whole corpus. A graph is formed where the word variants are the nodes and two word variants form an edge if they co-occur. On the basis of the co-occurrence measure, a certain edge strength is defined for each of the edges. Finally, on the basis of the edge strengths, we propose a partition algorithm that groups the word variants based on their strongest neighbors, that is, the neighbors with largest strengths. Our stemming algorithm has two static parameters and does not use any other information except the co-occurrence statistics from the corpus. The experiments on TREC, CLEF and FIRE data consisting of four European and two Asian languages show a significant improvement over no-stem strategy on all the languages. Also, the proposed algorithm significantly outperforms a number of strong stemmers including the rule-based ones on a number of languages. For highly inflectional languages, a relative improvement of about 50% is obtained compared to un-normalized words and a relative improvement ranging from 5% to 16% is obtained compared to the rule based stemmer for the concerned language.
2010033	Document clustering with universum Document clustering is a popular research topic, which aims to partition documents into groups of similar objects (i.e., clusters), and has been widely used in many applications such as automatic topic extraction, document organization and filtering. As a recently proposed concept, Universum is a collection of "non-examples" that do not belong to any concept/cluster of interest. This paper proposes a novel document clustering technique -- Document Clustering with Universum, which utilizes the Universum examples to improve the clustering performance. The intuition is that the Universum examples can serve as supervised information and help improve the performance of clustering, since they are known not belonging to any meaningful concepts/clusters in the target domain. In particular, a maximum margin clustering method is proposed to model both target examples and Universum examples for clustering. An extensive set of experiments is conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed algorithm.
2010035	Cluster-based fusion of retrieved lists Methods for fusing document lists that were retrieved in response to a query often use retrieval scores (or ranks) of documents in the lists. We present a novel probabilistic fusion approach that utilizes an additional source of rich information, namely, inter-document similarities. Specifically, our model integrates information induced from clusters of similar documents created across the lists with that produced by some fusion method that relies on retrieval scores (ranks). Empirical evaluation shows that our approach is highly effective for fusion. For example, the performance of our model is consistently better than that of the standard (effective) fusion method that it integrates. The performance also transcends that of standard fusion of re-ranked lists, where list re-ranking is based on clusters created from documents in the list.
2010038	Evaluating the synergic effect of collaboration in information seeking It is typically expected that when people work together, they can often accomplish goals that are difficult or even impossible for individuals. We consider this notion of the group achieving more than the sum of all individuals' achievements to be the synergic effect in collaboration. Similar expectation exists for people working in collaboration for information seeking tasks. We, however, lack a methodology and appropriate evaluation metrics for studying and measuring the synergic effect. In this paper we demonstrate how to evaluate this effect and discuss what it means to various collaborative information seeking (CIS) situations. We present a user study with four different conditions: single user, pair of users at the same computer, pair of users at different computers and co-located, and pair of users remotely located. Each of these individuals or pairs was given the same task of information seeking and usage for the same amount of time. We then combined the outputs of single independent users to form artificial pairs, and compared against the real pairs. Not surprisingly, participants using different computers (co-located or remotely located) were able to cover more information sources than those using a single computer (single user or a pair). But more interestingly, we found that real pairs with their own computers (co-located or remotely located) were able to cover more unique and useful information than that of the artificially created pairs. This indicates that those working in collaboration achieved something greater and better than what could be achieved by adding independent users, thus, demonstrating the synergic effect. Remotely located real teams were also able to formulate a wider range of queries than those pairs that were co-located or artificially created. This shows that the collaborators working remotely were able to achieve synergy while still being able to think and work independently. Through the experiments and measurements presented here, we have also contributed a unique methodology and an evaluation metric for CIS.
2010041	Cross-language web page classification via dual knowledge transfer using nonnegative matrix tri-factorization The lack of sufficient labeled Web pages in many languages, especially for those uncommonly used ones, presents a great challenge to traditional supervised classification methods to achieve satisfactory Web page classification performance. To address this, we propose a novel Nonnegative Matrix Tri-factorization (NMTF) based Dual Knowledge Transfer (DKT) approach for cross-language Web page classification, which is based on the following two important observations. First, we observe that Web pages for a same topic from different languages usually share some common semantic patterns, though in different representation forms. Second, we also observe that the associations between word clusters and Web page classes are a more reliable carrier than raw words to transfer knowledge across languages. With these recognitions, we attempt to transfer knowledge from the auxiliary language, in which abundant labeled Web pages are available, to target languages, in which we want classify Web pages, through two different paths: word cluster approximations and the associations between word clusters and Web page classes. Due to the reinforcement between these two different knowledge transfer paths, our approach can achieve better classification accuracy. We evaluate the proposed approach in extensive experiments using a real world cross-language Web page data set. Promising results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach that is consistent with our theoretical analyses.
2010042	No free lunch: brute force vs. locality-sensitive hashing for cross-lingual pairwise similarity This work explores the problem of cross-lingual pairwise similarity, where the task is to extract similar pairs of documents across two different languages. Solutions to this problem are of general interest for text mining in the multi-lingual context and have specific applications in statistical machine translation. Our approach takes advantage of cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) techniques to project feature vectors from one language into another, and then uses locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) to extract similar pairs. We show that effective cross-lingual pairwise similarity requires working with similarity thresholds that are much lower than in typical monolingual applications, making the problem quite challenging. We present a parallel, scalable MapReduce implementation of the sort-based sliding window algorithm, which is compared to a brute-force approach on German and English Wikipedia collections. Our central finding can be summarized as "no free lunch": there is no single optimal solution. Instead, we characterize effectiveness-efficiency tradeoffs in the solution space, which can guide the developer to locate a desirable operating point based on application- and resource-specific constraints.
2010043	An event-centric model for multilingual document similarity Document similarity measures play an important role in many document retrieval and exploration tasks. Over the past decades, several models and techniques have been developed to determine a ranked list of documents similar to a given query document. Interestingly, the proposed approaches typically rely on extensions to the vector space model and are rarely suited for multilingual corpora. In this paper, we present a novel document similarity measure that is based on events extracted from documents. An event is solely described by nearby occurrences of temporal and geographic expressions in a document's text. Thus, a document is modeled as a set of events that can be compared and ranked using temporal and geographic hierarchies. A key feature of our model is that it is term- and language-independent as temporal and geographic expressions mentioned in texts are normalized to a standard format. This also allows to determine similar documents across languages, an important feature in the context of document exploration. Our approach proves to be quite effective, including the discovery of new similarities, as our experiments using different (multilingual) corpora demonstrate.
2010046	Timestamp-based result cache invalidation for web search engines The result cache is a vital component for efficiency of large-scale web search engines, and maintaining the freshness of cached query results is the current research challenge. As a remedy to this problem, our work proposes a new mechanism to identify queries whose cached results are stale. The basic idea behind our mechanism is to maintain and compare generation time of query results with update times of posting lists and documents to decide on staleness of query results. The proposed technique is evaluated using a Wikipedia document collection with real update information and a real-life query log. We show that our technique has good prediction accuracy, relative to a baseline based on the time-to-live mechanism. Moreover, it is easy to implement and incurs less processing overhead on the system relative to a recently proposed, more sophisticated invalidation mechanism.
2010047	Energy-price-driven query processing in multi-center web search engines Concurrently processing thousands of web queries, each with a response time under a fraction of a second, necessitates maintaining and operating massive data centers. For large-scale web search engines, this translates into high energy consumption and a huge electric bill. This work takes the challenge to reduce the electric bill of commercial web search engines operating on data centers that are geographically far apart. Based on the observation that energy prices and query workloads show high spatio-temporal variation, we propose a technique that dynamically shifts the query workload of a search engine between its data centers to reduce the electric bill. Experiments on real-life query workloads obtained from a commercial search engine show that significant financial savings can be achieved by this technique.
2010051	Recommending ephemeral items at web scale We describe an innovative and scalable recommendation system successfully deployed at eBay. To build recommenders for long-tail marketplaces requires projection of volatile items into a persistent space of latent products. We first present a generative clustering model for collections of unstructured, heterogeneous, and ephemeral item data, under the assumption that items are generated from latent products. An item is represented as a vector of independently and distinctly distributed variables, while a latent product is characterized as a vector of probability distributions, respectively. The probability distributions are chosen as natural stochastic models for different types of data. The learning objective is to maximize the total intra-cluster coherence measured by the sum of log likelihoods of items under such a generative process. In the space of latent products, robust recommendations can then be derived using naive Bayes for ranking, from historical transactional data. Item-based recommendations are achieved by inferring latent products from unseen items. In particular, we develop a probabilistic scoring function of recommended items, which takes into account item-product membership, product purchase probability, and the important auction-end-time factor. With the holistic probabilistic measure of a prospective item purchase, one can further maximize the expected revenue and the more subjective user satisfaction as well. We evaluated the latent product clustering and recommendation ranking models using real-world e-commerce data from eBay, in both forms of offline simulation and online A/B testing. In the recent production launch, our system yielded 3-5 folds improvement over the existing production system in click-through, purchase-through and gross merchandising value; thus now driving 100% related recommendation traffic with billions of items at eBay. We believe that this work provides a practical yet principled framework for recommendation in the domains with affluent user self-input data.
2010052	A unified framework for recommendations based on quaternary semantic analysis Social network systems such as FaceBook and YouTube have played a significant role in capturing both explicit and implicit user preferences for different items in the form of ratings and tags. This forms a quaternary relationship among users, items, tags and ratings. Existing systems have utilized only ternary relationships such as users-items-ratings, or users-items-tags to derive their recommendations. In this paper, we show that ternary relationships are insufficient to provide accurate recommendations. Instead, we model the quaternary relationship among users, items, tags and ratings as a 4-order tensor and cast the recommendation problem as a multi-way latent semantic analysis problem. A unified framework for user recommendation, item recommendation, tag recommendation and item rating prediction is proposed. The results of extensive experiments performed on a real world dataset demonstrate that our unified framework outperforms the state-of-the-art techniques in all the four recommendation tasks.
2010058	Pseudo test collections for learning web search ranking functions Test collections are the primary drivers of progress in information retrieval. They provide yardsticks for assessing the effectiveness of ranking functions in an automatic, rapid, and repeatable fashion and serve as training data for learning to rank models. However, manual construction of test collections tends to be slow, labor-intensive, and expensive. This paper examines the feasibility of constructing web search test collections in a completely unsupervised manner given only a large web corpus as input. Within our proposed framework, anchor text extracted from the web graph is treated as a pseudo query log from which pseudo queries are sampled. For each pseudo query, a set of relevant and non-relevant documents are selected using a variety of web-specific features, including spam and aggregated anchor text weights. The automatically mined queries and judgments form a pseudo test collection that can be used for training ranking functions. Experiments carried out on TREC web track data show that learning to rank models trained using pseudo test collections outperform an unsupervised ranking function and are statistically indistinguishable from a model trained using manual judgments, demonstrating the usefulness of our approach in extracting reasonable quality training data "for free".
2010060	Parallel learning to rank for information retrieval Learning to rank represents a category of effective ranking methods for information retrieval. While the primary concern of existing research has been accuracy, learning efficiency is becoming an important issue due to the unprecedented availability of large-scale training data and the need for continuous update of ranking functions. In this paper, we investigate parallel learning to rank, targeting simultaneous improvement in accuracy and efficiency.
2010062	Time-based relevance models This paper addresses blog feed retrieval where the goal is to retrieve the most relevant blog feeds for a given user query. Since the retrieval unit is a blog, as a collection of posts, performing relevance feedback techniques and selecting the most appropriate documents for query expansion becomes challenging. By assuming time as an effective parameter on the blog posts content, we propose a time-based query expansion method. In this method, we select terms for expansion using most relevant days for the query, as opposed to most relevant documents. This provide us with more trustable terms for expansion. Our preliminary experiments on Blog08 collection shows that this method can outperform state of the art relevance feedback methods in blog retrieval.
2010072	What deliberately degrading search quality tells us about discount functions Deliberate degradation of search results is a common tool in user experiments. We degrade high-quality search results by inserting non-relevant documents at different ranks. The effect of these manipulations, on a number of commonly-used metrics, is counter-intuitive: the discount functions implicit in P@k, MRR, NDCG, and others do not account for the true relationship between rank and value to the user. We propose an alternative, based on visibility data.
2010075	Personalized social query expansion using social bookmarking systems We propose a new approach for social and personalized query expansion using social structures in the Web 2.0. While focusing on social tagging systems, the proposed approach considers (i) the semantic similarity between tags composing a query, (ii) a social proximity between the query and the user profile, and (iii) on the fly, a strategy for expanding user queries. The proposed approach has been evaluated using a large dataset crawled from del.icio.us.
2010076	What are the real differences of children's and adults' web search We present first results of a logfile analysis on web search engines for children. The aim of this research is to analyse fundamental facts about how children's web search behaviour differs from that of adults. We show differences to previous results, which are often based on small lab experiments. Our large-scale analysis suggests that children search queries are more information-oriented and shorter on average. Children indeed make a lot of spelling errors and often repeat searches and revisit web pages.
2010085	Modeling subset distributions for verbose queries Improving verbose (or long) queries poses a new challenge for search systems. Previous techniques mainly focused on two aspects, weighting the important words or phrases and selecting the best subset query. The former does not consider how words and phrases are used in actual subset queries, while the latter ignores alternative subset queries. Recently, a novel reformulation framework has been proposed to transform the original query as a distribution of reformulated queries, which overcomes the disadvantages of previous techniques. In this paper, we apply this framework to verbose queries, where a reformulated query is specified as a subset query. Experiments on TREC collections show that the query distribution based framework outperforms the state-of-the-art techniques.
2010087	Sample selection for dictionary-based corpus compression Compression of large text corpora has the potential to drastically reduce both storage requirements and per-document access costs. Adaptive methods used for general-purpose compression are ineffective for this application, and historically the most successful methods have been based on word-based dictionaries, which allow use of global properties of the text. However, these are dependent on the text complying with assumptions about content and lead to dictionaries of unpredictable size. In recent work we have described an LZ-like approach in which sampled blocks of a corpus are used as a dictionary against which the complete corpus is compressed, giving compression twice as effective than that of zlib. Here we explore how pre-processing can be used to eliminate redundancy in our sampled dictionary. Our experiments show that dictionary size can be reduced by 50% or more (less than 0.1% of the collection size) with no significant effect on compression or access speed.
2010090	Towards effective short text deep classification Recently, more and more short texts (e.g., ads, tweets) appear on the Web. Classifying short texts into a large taxonomy like ODP or Wikipedia category system has become an important mining task to improve the performance of many applications such as contextual advertising and topic detection for micro-blogging. In this paper, we propose a novel multi-stage classification approach to solve the problem. First, explicit semantic analysis is used to add more features for both short texts and categories. Second, we leverage information retrieval technologies to fetch the most relevant categories for an input short text from thousands of candidates. Finally, a SVM classifier is applied on only a few selected categories to return the final answer. Our experimental results show that the proposed method achieved significant improvements on classification accuracy compared with several existing state of art approaches.
2010092	Self-adjusting hybrid recommenders based on social network analysis Ensemble recommender systems successfully enhance recom-mendation accuracy by exploiting different sources of user prefe-rences, such as ratings and social contacts. In linear ensembles, the optimal weight of each recommender strategy is commonly tuned empirically, with limited guarantee that such weights are optimal afterwards. We propose a self-adjusting hybrid recommendation approach that alleviates the social cold start situation by weighting the recommender combination dynamically at recommendation time, based on social network analysis algorithms. We show empirical results where our approach outperforms the best static combination for different hybrid recommenders.
2010095	Collaborative cyberporn filtering with collective intelligence This paper presents a user intent method to generate blacklists for collaborative cyberporn filtering. A novel porn detection framework that finds new pornographic web pages by mining user search behaviors is proposed. It employs users' clicks in search query logs to select the suspected web pages without extra human efforts to label data for training, and determines their categories with the help of URL host name and path information, but without web page content. We adopt an MSN porn data set to explore the effectiveness of our method. This user intent approach achieves high precision, while maintaining favorably low false positive rate. In addition, real-life filtering simulation reveals that our user intent method with its accumulative update strategy achieves 43.36% of blocking rate, while maintaining a steadily less than 7% of over-blocking rate.
2010108	Effect of different docid orderings on dynamic pruning retrieval strategies Document-at-a-time (DAAT) dynamic pruning strategies for information retrieval systems such as MaxScore and Wand can increase querying efficiency without decreasing effectiveness. Both work on posting lists sorted by ascending document identifier (docid). The order in which docids are assigned -- and hence the order of postings in the posting lists -- is known to have a noticeable impact on posting list compression. However, the resulting impact on dynamic pruning strategies is not well understood. In this poster, we examine the impact on the efficiency of these strategies across different docid orderings, by experimenting using the TREC ClueWeb09 corpus. We find that while the number of postings scored by dynamic pruning strategies do not markedly vary for different docid orderings, the ordering still has a marked impact on mean query response time. Moreover, when docids are assigned by lexicographical URL ordering, the benefit to response time for is more pronounced for Wand than for MaxScore.
2010123	Identifying similar people in professional social networks with discriminative probabilistic models Identifying similar professionals is an important task for many core services in professional social networks. Information about users can be obtained from heterogeneous information sources, and different sources provide different insights on user similarity. This paper proposes a discriminative probabilistic model that identifies latent content and graph classes for people with similar profile content and social graph similarity patterns, and learns a specialized similarity model for each latent class. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work on identifying similar professionals in professional social networks, and the first work that identifies latent classes to learn a separate similarity model for each latent class. Experiments on a real-world dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed discriminative learning model.
2010124	Intent-oriented diversity in recommender systems Diversity as a relevant dimension of retrieval quality is receiving increasing attention in the Information Retrieval and Recommender Systems (RS) fields. The problem has nonetheless been approached under different views and formulations in IR and RS respectively, giving rise to different models, methodologies, and metrics, with little convergence between both fields. In this poster we explore the adaptation of diversity metrics, techniques, and principles from ad-hoc IR to the recommendation task, by introducing the notion of user profile aspect as an analogue of query intent. As a particular approach, user aspects are automatically extracted from latent item features. Empirical results support the proposed approach and provide further insights.
2010125	Disambiguating biomedical acronyms using EMIM Expanding a query with acronyms or their corresponding 'long-forms' has not been shown to provide consistent improvements in the biomedical IR literature. The major open issue with expanding acronyms in a query is their inherent ambiguity, as an acronym can refer to multiple long-forms. At the same time, a long-form identified in a query can be expanded with its acronym(s); however, some of these may be also ambiguous and lead to poor retrieval performance. In this work, we propose the use of the EMIM (Expected Mutual Information Measure) between a long-form and its abbreviated acronym to measure ambiguity. We experiment with expanding both acronyms and long-forms identified in the queries from the adhoc task of the TREC 2004 Genomics track. Our preliminary analysis shows the potential of both acronym and long-form expansions for biomedical IR.
2010129	Learning to rank from a noisy crowd We study how to best use crowdsourced relevance judgments learning to rank [1, 7]. We integrate two lines of prior work: unreliable crowd-based binary annotation for binary classification [5, 3], and aggregating graded relevance judgments from reliable experts for ranking [7]. To model varying performance of the crowd, we simulate annotation noise with varying magnitude and distributional properties. Evaluation on three LETOR test collections reveals a striking trend contrary to prior studies: single labeling outperforms consensus methods in maximizing learner accuracy relative to annotator eýort. We also see surprising consistency of the learning curve across noise distributions, as well as greater challenge with the adversarial case for multi-class labeling.
2010131	Predicting users' domain knowledge from search behaviors This study uses regression modeling to predict a user's domain knowledge level (DK) from implicit evidence provided by certain search behaviors. A user study (n=35) with recall-oriented search tasks in the genomic domain was conducted. A number of regression models of a person's DK, were generated using different behavior variable selection methods. The best model highlights three behavior variables as DK predictors: the number of documents saved, the average query length, and the average ranking position of documents opened. The model is validated using the split sampling method. Limitations and future research directions are discussed.
2010133	Detecting success in mobile search from interaction Predicting searcher success and satisfaction is a key problem in Web search, which is essential for automatic evaluating and improving search engine performance. This problem has been studied actively in the desktop search setting, but not specifically for mobile search, despite many known differences between the two modalities. As mobile devices become increasingly popular for searching the Web, improving the searcher experience on such devices is becoming crucially important. In this paper, we explore the possibility of predicting searcher success and satisfaction in mobile search with a smart phone. Specifically, we investigate client-side interaction signals, including the number of browsed pages, and touch screen-specific actions such as zooming and sliding. Exploiting this information with machine learning techniques results in nearly 80% accuracy for predicting searcher success -- significantly outperforming the previous models.
2010134	Measuring assessor accuracy: a comparison of nist assessors and user study participants In many situations, humans judging document relevance are forced to trade-off accuracy for speed. The development of better interactive retrieval systems and relevance assessing platforms requires the measurement of assessor accuracy, but to date the subjective nature of relevance has prevented such measurement. To quantify assessor performance, we define relevance to be a group's majority opinion, and demonstrate the value of this approach by comparing the performance of NIST assessors to a group of assessors representative of participants in many information retrieval user studies. Using data collected as part of a user study with 48 participants, we found that NIST assessors discriminate between relevant and non-relevant documents better than the average participant in our study, but that NIST assessors' true positive rate is no better than that of the study participants. In addition, we found NIST assessors to be conservative in their judgment of relevance compared to the average participant.
2010136	Link formation analysis in microblogs Unlike a traditional social network service, a microblogging network like Twitter is a hybrid network, combining aspects of both social networks and information networks. Understanding the structure of such hybrid networks and to predict new links are important for many tasks such as friend recommendation, community detection, and network growth models. In this paper, by analyzing data collected over time, we find that 90% of new links are to people just two hops away and dynamics of friend acquisition are also related to users' account age. Finally, we compare two popular sampling methods which are widely used for network analysis and find that ForestFire does not preserve properties required for the link prediction task.
2010141	Exploring term temporality for pseudo-relevance feedback As digital collections expand, the importance of the temporal aspect of information has become increasingly apparent. The aim of this paper is to investigate the effect of using long-term temporal profiles of terms in information retrieval by enhancing the term selection process of pseudo-relevance feedback (PRF). For this purpose, two temporal PRF approaches were introduced considering only temporal aspect and temporal along with textual aspect. Experiments used the AP88-89 and WSJ87-92 test collections with TREC Ad-Hoc Topics 51-100. Term temporal profiles are extracted from the Google Books n-grams dataset. The results show that the long-term temporal aspects of terms are capable of enhancing retrieval effectiveness.
2010142	MSSF: a multi-document summarization framework based on submodularity Multi-document summarization aims to distill the most representative information from a set of documents to generate a summary. Given a set of documents as input, most of existing multi-document summarization approaches utilize different sentence selection techniques to extract a set of sentences from the document set as the summary. The submodularity hidden in textual-unit similarity motivates us to incorporate this property into our solution to multi-document summarization tasks. In this poster, we propose a new principled and versatile framework for different multi-document summarization tasks using the submodular function [8].
2010146	Tossing coins to trim long queries Verbose web queries are often descriptive in nature where a term based search engine is unable to distinguish between the essential and noisy words, which can result in a drift from the user intent. We present a randomized query reduction technique that builds on an earlier learning to rank based approach. The proposed technique randomly picks only a small set of samples, instead of the exponentially many sub-queries, thus being fast enough to be useful for web search engines, while still covering wide sub-query space.
2010147	A comparison of time-aware ranking methods When searching a temporal document collection, e.g., news archives or blogs, the time dimension must be explicitly incorporated into a retrieval model in order to improve relevance ranking. Previous work has followed one of two main approaches: 1) a mixture model linearly combining textual similarity and temporal similarity, or 2) a probabilistic model generating a query from the textual and temporal part of a document independently. In this paper, we compare the effectiveness of different time-aware ranking methods by using a mixture model applied to all methods. Extensive evaluation is conducted using the New York Times Annotated Corpus, queries and relevance judgments obtained using the Amazon Mechanical Turk.
2010170	Crowdsourcing for information retrieval: principles, methods, and applications Crowdsourcing has emerged in recent years as a promising new avenue for leveraging today's digitally-connected, diverse, distributed workforce. Generally speaking, crowdsourcing describes outsourcing of tasks to a large group of people instead of assigning such tasks to an in-house employee or contractor. Crowdsourcing platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk and CrowdFlower have gained particular attention as active online market places for reaching and tapping into this still largely under-utilized workforce. Crowdsourcing also offers intriguing new opportunities for accomplishing different kinds of tasks or achieving broader participation than previously possible, as well as completing standard tasks more accurately in less time and at lower cost. Unlocking the potential of crowdsourcing in practice, however, requires a tri-partite understanding of principles, platforms, and best practices. We will introduce the opportunities and challenges of crowdsourcing while discussing the three issues above. This will provide a basic foundation to begin crowdsourcing in the context of one's own particular tasks
2010180	Modeling document scores for distributed information retrieval Distributed Information Retrieval (DIR), also known as Federated Search, integrates multiple searchable collections and provides direct access to them through a unified interface [3]. This is done by a centralized broker , that receives user queries, forwards them to appropriate collections and returns merged results to users. In practice, most of federated resources do not cooperate with a broker and do not provide neither their content nor the statistics used for retrieval. This is known as uncooperative DIR. In this case a broker creates a resource representation by sending sample queries to a collection and analyzing retrieved documents. This process is called query-based sampling . The key issue here is the following: 1.1 How many documents have to be retrieved from a resource in order to obtain a representative sample? Although there have been a number of attempts to address this issue it is still not solved appropriately. For a given user query resources are ranked according to their similarity to the query or based on the number of relevant documents they contain. Since resource representations are usually incomplete, the similarity or the number of relevant documents cannot be calculated precisely. Resource selection algorithms proposed in the literature estimate these numbers based on incomplete samples. However these estimates are subjects to error. In practice, inaccurate estimates that have high error should be trusted less then the more accurate estimates with low error. Unfortunately none of the existing algorithms can make the calculation of the estimation errors possible. Therefore the following questions arise: 2.1 How to estimate resource scores so that the estimation errors can be calculated? 2.2 How to use these errors in order to improve the resource selection performance? Existing results merging algorithms estimate normalized document scores based on scores of documents that appear both in a sample and in a result list. The problem similar to the resource selection one arises. The normalized document scores are only the estimates and are subjects to error. Inaccurate estimates should be trusted less then the more accurate ones. Again none of the existing algorithms provide a way for calculating these errors. Thus the two question to be address on the results merging phase are similar to the resource selection ones: 3.1 How to estimate normalized document scores so that the estimation errors can be calculated? 3.2 How to use these errors in order to improve the results merging performance? In this work we address the above issues by applying score distribution models (SDM) to different phases of DIR [2]. In particular, we discuss the SDM-based resource selection technique that allows the calculation of resource score estimation errors and can be extended in order to calculate the number of documents to be sampled from each resource for a given query. We have performed initial experiments comparing the SDM-based resource selection technique to the state-of-the-art algorithms and we are currently experimenting with the SDM-based results merging method. We plan to apply the existing score normalization techniques from meta-search to the DIR results merging problem [1]. However, the SDM-based results merging approaches require the relevance scores to be returned together with retrieved documents. It is not yet clear how to relax this strong assumption that does not always hold in practice.
2010189	A large scale machine learning system for recommending heterogeneous content in social networks The goal of the Facebook recommendation engine is to compare and rank heterogeneous types of content in order to find the most relevant recommendations based on user preference and page context. The challenges for such a recommendation engine include several aspects: 1) the online queries being processed are at very large scale; 2) with new content types and new user-generated content constantly added to the system, the candidate object set and underlying data distribution change rapidly; 3) different types of content usually have very distinct characteristics, which makes generic feature engineering difficult; and 4) unlike a search engine that can capture intention of users based on their search queries, our recommendation engine needs to focus more on users' profile and interests, past behaviors and current actions in order to infer their cognitive states. In this presentation, we would like to introduce an effective, scalable, online machine learning framework we developed in order to address the aforementioned challenges. We also want to discuss the insights, approaches and experiences we have accumulated during our research and development process.
215331	Design of reusable IR framework An abstract is not available.
215332	Parallel text retrieval on a high performance supercomputer using the Vector Space Model An abstract is not available.
215352	Searchers and searchers: differences between the most and least consistent searches An abstract is not available.
215353	Information processing in the context of medical care An abstract is not available.
215355	Towards new measures of information retrieval evaluation An abstract is not available.
215359	Efficient processing of vague queries using a data stream approach An abstract is not available.
215360	Document analysis for visualization An abstract is not available.
215361	Users' models of the information space: the case for two search models An abstract is not available.
215363	Human memory models and term association An abstract is not available.
215373	Probability kinematics in information retrieval An abstract is not available.
215375	An image retrieval model based on classical logic An abstract is not available.
215379	Applying probabilistic term weighting to OCR text in the case of a large alphabetic library catalogue An abstract is not available.
243203	The design of a high performance information filtering system A high performance information filtering system has three main requirements: it must be effective in supplying users with useful information, it must do so in a timely fashion, and it must be able to handle a large throughput of information and a large number of user profiles efficiently. These three requirements pose a difficult problem, and to our knowledge no existing system is capable of meeting all three. In this paper we describe a system which combines a number of techniques from other information retrieval and filtering systems, and is capable of providing high performance on a typical workstation platform. We provide estimates of computing resource usage, and show that our system is also scalable.
243236	An architecture for implementing extensible information-seeking environments An abstract is not available.
243239	Elicitations during information retrieval: implications for IR system design An abstract is not available.
243256	Image organization and retrieval with automatically constructed feature vectors An abstract is not available.
243265	Automatic linking of thesauri An abstract is not available.
243271	An application of plausible reasoning to information retrieval An abstract is not available.
243280	Interactive information retrieval systems: from user centered interface design to software design An abstract is not available.
243281	Panel: building and using test collections An abstract is not available.
243325	Networked information retrieval An abstract is not available.
248146	A deductive data model for query expansion An abstract is not available.
253171	Recent trends in automatic information retrieval Substantial successes were achieved in the early years in automatic indexing and retrieval using single term indexing theories with term weight assignments based on frequency considerations. The development of more refined indexing systems using thesaurus aids and automatically constructed term association maps changed the retrieval effectiveness only slightly. The recent introduction of the relevance concept in the form of probabilistic retrieval models provided a firm basis for term weighting and document ranking practices. However, the probabilistic methods were not helpful in substantially enhancing the retrieval effectiveness. At the present time, attempts are made to add artificial intelligence concepts to the document retrieval environment in the form of fancy graphics interfaces, learning systems for query and document indexing and for collection searching, extended logic models relating documents and information requests, and analysis methods based on the use of semantic maps and other kinds of knowledge structures. Using the earlier developments and evaluation results as guidelines, an attempt is made to outline the information retrieval environment of the future and to assess the usefulness of some of the currently proposed search and retrieval methods.
253175	Using structural representation of anomalous states of knowledge for choosing document retrieval strategies We report on a project which attempts to classify representations of the anomalous states of knowledge (ASKs) of users of document retrieval systems on the basis of structural characteristics of the representations, and which specifies different retrieval strategies and ranking mechanisms for each ASK class. The classification and retrieval strategy specification is based on 53 real problem statements, 35 of which have a total of 250 evaluated documents. Four facets of the ASK structures have been tentatively identified, whose combinations determine the method and order of application of five basic ranking strategies. This work is still in progress, so results presented here are incomplete.
253185	IR, NLP, AI and UFOS: or IR-relevance, natural language problems, artful intelligence and user-friendly online systems User Friendly Online Searching is examined in the context of Natural Language Processing in Information Retrieval and Artificial Intelligence. Opportunities for synergetic R & D are identified as the basis for Intelligent Information Retrieval and Artificial Retrieval Intelligence.
253186	The visual display of information in an information retrieval environment This paper gives an overview of the graphical techniques which have been used in the representation of information in a document collection environment. An assessment of the applicability of existing multivariate data graphical techniques to the vector space model is presented.
253188	Improved subject access, browsing and scanning mechanisms in modern on-line IR Focusing on communication, the paper analyses and proposes practical solutions to key problems in online IR, in particular concerned with ill defined and “muddled” information requirements, concept interpretation in searching and text representation. The need for development of new additional browsing and scanning feedback devices, based on existing methods to support searchers is emphasised. The paper points to economically feasible indexing methods fitting the potentials of current information technology and adaptable to in-house information environments: the SAP (Subject Access Project) principles. Focusing display mechanisms and the term frequency analysis feature Zoom are discussed and suggested combined into a flexible database front-end. The design principles are outlined and demonstrated in a worked example.
253196	Solving grammatical ambiguities within a surface syntactical parser for automatic indexing This paper describes linguistic tools specifically designed for performant automatic indexing of natural language texts. By performant indexing, we mean the ability of the system to extract noun phrases (considered as main conceptual frames regarding text content) without processing full syntactic analysis of sentences (surface analyzer) both with its ability in learning unknown words. The paper describes the overall principles of this parser, emphasizing the use of syntactic networks and precedence matrix to fulfil the above goals of reducing the analysis cost and infering new vocabularies without interrupting the indexing process.
253197	A design of a distributed full text retrieval system This paper describes the design of a distributed information system for full text retrieval. The system is similar in functionality to STAIRS and is being developed on a network of PC's interconnected by PC Network. The implementation is built on a generalisation of the remote procedure call concept. Communications are based upon the recent CCITT X.400 standard. Examples are given of the design strategy for a subset of the STAIRS system.
253198	A common architecture for different text processing techniques in an information retrieval environment The following paper gives an overview on a text processing software called REALIST (Retrieval Aids by Linguistics and Statistics) which integrates different text processing techniques into a common surface. It supports the user by offering the environment of a given term, using morphological, syntactic and statistic means. The user can call up the processing results, use it for indexing, classification or retrieval purposes and combine them as he wishes e.g. to set up a search logic. The text processing is done on a main frame computer, the results are transferred to a minicomputer where the evaluation is performed. REALIST is a stand alone package, fitting any existing search systems. In the retrieval context, this technique reduces connecting time and improves the search results. REALIST is able to run on English and German texts. Each REALIST component has been separately tested with good success. An integrated version is currently under test at the US Patent ad Trademark Office using 150000 English patent abstracts, and a German version is being tested with 12000 legal texts of the European Community.
253199	COREL: a conceptual retrieval system An abstract is not available.
253203	The efficiency of inverted index and cluster searches The processing time and disk space requirements of an inverted index and top-down cluster search are compared. The cluster search is shown to use both more time and more disk space, mostly due to the large number of cluster centroids needed by the search. When shorter centroids are used, the efficiency of the cluster search improves, but the inverted index search remains more efficient.
253205	On extending the vector space model for Boolean query processing An information retrieval model, named the Generalized Vector Space Model (GVSM), is extended to handle situations where queries are specified as (extended) Boolean expressions. It is shown that this unified model, unlike currently available alternatives, has the advantage of incorporating term correlations into the retrieval process. The query language extension is attractive in the sense that most of the algebraic properties of the strict Boolean language are still preserved. Although the experimental results for extended Boolean retrieval are not always better than the vector processing method, the developments here are significant in facilitating commercially available retrieval systems to benefit from the vector based methods. The proposed scheme is compared to the p-norm model advanced by Salton and coworkers. An important conclusion is that it is desirable to investigate further extensions that can offer the benefits of both proposals.
253212	IOTA: a full text information retrieval system IOTA is a prototype of an Information Retrieval System which can manage a corpus made of highly structured, full text documents. The first version presented here has intelligent capabilities related to heuristic pattern matching procedures for processing natural language queries, which involve an automatically built thesaurus. The paper emphazises the overall principles of query processing and gives hints about the underlying techniques used while constructing the thesaurus and automatically indexing highly structured documents.
253215	An information retrieval system based on artificial intelligence techniques This paper describes a possible use of Artificial Intelligence models and techniques in the design of a small Information Retrieval system. In particular, some knowledge representation models, such as semantic networks and frame-like structures, are viewed as interesting tools for the implementation of a thesaurus, and also for a description of the stored documents' contents. In addition, a parser based on the ATN (Augmented Transition Network) model which can analyze Italian sentences concerning a legal domain is described. We are including it in an user/system interface whose goal is to provide the user with the possibility of expressing search topics by using noun phrases or other linguistic expressions, rather than single words or Boolean combinations of them. Finally, some tasks requiring automated reasoning facilities are outlined. The Kernel of the system, i.e. the component which both performs traditional information retrieval and allows the insertion of new documents, is described in an appendix. It was first applied to a bibliographic database containing about a thousand references (with abstracts) of both papers and books concerned with Artificial Intelligence; now we are working on its application to a legal domain, with a database of laws, decrees and sentences concerning pollution and environmental protection.
253217	A machine learning approach in information retrieval An abstract is not available.
253218	An automatic and tunable document indexing system In this article we present an interactive automatic document indexing software together with various index tuning/optimization strategies. After stems are generated from the raw text, the initial index vocabulary is narrowed down and tuned with the use of indexing versus clustering theory relationships. The narrowed down vocabulary is further optimized with the inclusion of term phrases and virtual terms corresponding to high and low frequency terms respectively. The results of performance experimentation which proved significant improvements of index vocabulary optimization are presented. The exploitation of the term discrimination value concept in index and retrieval system tuning and optimization is discussed.
253221	Two models of retrieval with probabilistic indexing We describe two retrieval models for probabilistic indexing. The binary independence indexing (BII) model is a generalized version of the Maron & Kuhns indexing model. In this model, the indexing weight of a descriptor in a document is an estimate of the probability of relevance of this document with respect to queries using this descriptor. The retrieval-with-probabilistic-indexing (RPI) model is suited to different kinds of probabilistic indexing. Therefore we assume that each indexing model has its own concept of 'correctness' to which the probabilities relate. The concept of correctness is not necessarily identical with the concept of relevance, it is only required to depend on relevance. In addition to the probabilistic indexing weights, the RPI model provides the possibility of relevance weighting of search terms. Both retrieval models are compared in experiments, showing equally good results.
253222	Probabilistic models for document retrieval: a comparison of perfromance on exterimental and synthetic data bases Probabilistic document retrieval systems consistent with the two Poisson independence model outperforms the binary independence model if the terms are distributed as described by the model's assumptions. The Two Poisson Effectiveness Hypothesis suggests that retrieval models based upon the two Poisson model will outperform binary independent models when used on a “real-world” database, where independence and two Poisson term occurrence distributions fail to hold, because the added information obtained from incorporating term frequency information will more than compensate for the non-Poisson distributions of terms. Searches of the MED1033 database suggest that if terms are not independent and frequencies of term occurrence are not distributed in a two Poisson manner, the binary independence sequential retrieval model outperforms the two Poisson independence retrieval model.
253224	Non-binary independence model An abstract is not available.
253225	The maximum entropy principle in information retrieval Applications, assumptions and properties of the maximum entropy principle are discussed. The maximum entropy principle integrates prior estimates of relevance with the observed distribution of term combinations. The result may be a reordering of the segments of a database, compared to a naive estimate. Numerical examples obtained by solution of the non-linear equations for the dual variables are presented and discussed. * Supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grant IST-8318630.
253226	An interpretation of index term weighting schemes based on document components A theory of indexing is presented and is based on viewing a document as constituted of components. A component may be chosen as any run of text unit that can be: (a) judged as to its relevancy property; and (b) considered as independent within the document. By looking at the constituent components of a document in relation to the universe of all components from the collection, we have been able to apply Bayes' decision theory to derive the index term representation for the document, as well as attaching an initial probabilistic weight for each term based on a Principle of Document Self-Recovery. It turns out that different choices of document components, such as a word or a whole abstract, can lead to different term weighting schemes that have been introduced before and are based on probability considerations; specifically, Edmundson and Wyllys' term significance formula, Sparck Jones' inverse document frequency, and later modified by Croft and Harper into the 'combination match' formula. Thus, a unified interpretation of various probabilistic term weighting schemes appears possible.
253505	Implications of Boolean structure for probabilistic retrieval An abstract is not available.
253509	Composite document extended retrieval: an overview Experimental information retrieval (IR) systems, some dating back to the sixties, have demonstrated the viability of fully automatic document storage and retrieval methodologies with small to medium size bibliographic collections [72]. Many of these experimental systems utilize the vector space model in which each important term (such as a word stem) identifies a different dimension in a space, so that matrix methods and vector operations can be defined on queries and documents. Statistical techniques have been very effective, and probabilistic enhancements have given additional improvements [84]. However, the basic vector space model is oriented towards recording the essential information in the text of a title/abstract combination rather than describing more complex document structures. It is necessary to extend the model in order to handle composite documents. On the other hand, commonly available retrieval systems that employ Boolean logic queries and utilize inverted file storage schemes can without modification accommodate such documents, albeit with somewhat less effectiveness than is possible with more sophisticated systems. Hence, it is also of interest to consider how Boolean logic systems can be extended to give better performance, especially with composite documents, and to integrate those approaches with vector methods.
253510	Automatic assignment of soft Boolean operators The conventional bibliographic retrieval systems are based on Boolean query formulations and inverted file implementations. Such systems provide rapid responses in answer to search queries but they are not easy to use by uninitiated patrons. An extended Boolean retrieval strategy has been devised in which the Boolean operators are treated more or less strictly, depending on the setting of a special parameter, known as the p-value. The extended system is much more forgiving than the conventional system, and provides better retrieval effectiveness. In this study various problems associated with the determination of appropriate p-values are discussed, and suggestions are made for an automatic assignment of p-values. Evaluation output is included to illustrate the operations of the suggested procedures.
253514	An approach to multikey sequencing in an equiprobable keyterm retrieval situation We present a simple generalised technique, for sequencing a multi-attribute file, which can be used in a situation where the query pattern is unknown and the term content equiprobable. The method is based on constructing a short spanning path through the records thereby minimising the sum of the Hamming distances between them. Retrieval performance is simulated over a range of query expressions and results suggest a significant reduction in the number of block accesses, using this technique, as compared with records randomly distributed over the file space.
253520	Different levels of expertise for an expert system in information retrieval An abstract is not available.
253521	One-time complete indexing of text: theory and practice Indexing according to occurrences of selected word fragments, called “n-grams”, offers a significant alternative to keyword indexing and full text scanning methods in the design of information systems based on documents. Finite sets of n-grams can be selected to allow effective fixed indexing of all words, numbers, and special terms in text. The characteristics of such indexing can be modeled statistically and validated over a wide range of text. The model provides a descriptive and predictive tool for controlling precision and recall in searching and for scaling estimates of relevance to an adaptive reference noise distribution for a target collection. Special techniques such as partial inversion of index terms, probabilistic ordering of index terms, and various types of data compression allow n-gram indexing to be competitive in performance with other approaches.
253526	Concepts of the cover coefficient-based clustering methodology Document clustering has several unresolved problems. Among them are high time and space complexity, difficulty of determining similarity thresholds, order dependence, nonuniform document distribution in clusters, and arbitrariness in determination of various cluster intiators. To overcome these problems to some degree, the cover coefficient based clustering methodology has been introduced. The concepts used in this methodology have created certain new concepts, relationships, and measures such as the effect of indexing on clustering, an optimal vocabulary generation for indexing, and a new matching function. These new concepts are discussed. The result of performance experiments that show the effectiveness of the clustering methodology and the matching function are also included. In these experiments, it has been also observed that the majority of the documents obtained in a search are concentrated in a few clusters containing a low percentage of documents of the database.
253531	RUBRIC: an environment for full text information retrieval An abstract is not available.
253533	The user's mental model of an information retrieval system An empirical study was performed to train naive subjects in the use of a prototype Boolean logic-based information retrieval system on a bibliographic database. Subjects were undergraduates with little or no prior computing experience. Subjects trained with a conceptual model of the system performed better than subjects trained with procedural instructions, but only on complex, problem-solving tasks. Performance was equal on simple tasks. Differences in patterns of interaction with the system (based on a stochastic process model) showed parallel results. Most subjects were able to articulate some description of the system's operation, but few articulated a model similar to the card catalog analogy provided in training. Eleven of 43 subjects were unable to achieve minimal competency in system use. The failure rate was equal between training conditions and genders; the only differences found between those passing and failing the benchmark test were academic major and in frequency of library use.
258568	Users' perception of the performance of a filtering system An abstract is not available.
258572	How to read less and know more: approximate OCR for Thai An abstract is not available.
258589	Image retrieval by appearance An abstract is not available.
1009043	Learning phonetic similarity for matching named entity translations and mining new translations We propose a novel named entity matching model which considers both semantic and phonetic clues. The matching is formulated as an optimization problem. One major component is a phonetic matching model which exploits similarity at the phoneme level. We investigate three learning algorithms for obtaining the similarity information of basic phoneme units based on training examples. By applying this proposed named entity matching model, we also develop a mining framework for discovering new, unseen named entity translations from online daily Web news. This framework harvests comparable news in different languages using an existing bilingual dictionary. It is able to discover new name translations not found in the dictionary.
1009058	Human versus machine in the topic distillation task This paper reports on and discusses a set of user experiments using the TREC 2003 Web interactive track protocol. The focus is on comparing humans and machine algorithms in terms of performance in a topic distillation task. We also investigated the effect of the search results layout in supporting the users' effort.We have demonstrated that machines can perform nearly as well as people on the topic distillation task. Given a system tailored to the task there is significant performance improvement and finally, given a presentation that supports the task, there is strong user satisfaction.
1009062	Web taxonomy integration through co-bootstrapping We address the problem of integrating objects from a source taxonomy into a master taxonomy. This problem is not only currently pervasive on the web, but also important to the emerging semantic web. A straightforward approach to automating this process would be to learn a classifier that can classify objects from the source taxonomy into categories of the master taxonomy. The key insight is that the availability of the source taxonomy data could be helpful to build better classifiers for the master taxonomy if their categorizations have some semantic overlap. In this paper, we propose a new approach, co-bootstrapping, to enhance the classification by exploiting such implicit knowledge. Our experiments with real-world web data show substantial improvements in the performance of taxonomy integration.
1009069	Usefulness of hyperlink structure for query-biased topic distillation In this paper, we introduce an information theoretic method for estimating the usefulness of the hyperlink structure induced from the set of retrieved documents. We evaluate the effectiveness of this method in the context of an optimal Bayesian decision mechanism, which selects the most appropriate retrieval approaches on a per-query basis for two TREC tasks. The estimation of the hyperlink structure's usefulness is stable when we use different weighting schemes, or when we employ sampling of documents to reduce the computational overhead. Next, we evaluate the effectiveness of the hyperlink structure's usefulness in a realistic setting, by setting the thresholds of a decision mechanism automatically. Our results show that improvements over the baselines are obtained.
1009078	Effect of varying number of documents in blind feedback: analysis of the 2003 NRRC RIA workshop bf_numdocs experiment suite An abstract is not available.
1009081	Comparison of using passages and documents for blind relevance feedback in information retrieval This paper compares document blind feedback and passage blind feedback in Information Retrieval (IR), based on the work during the NRRC 2003 Reliable Information Access Summer workshop. The analysis of our experimental results shows overall consistency on the performance impact of using passages and documents for blind feedback. However, it is observed that the behavior of passage blind feedback, compared to document blind feedback, is both system dependent and topic dependent. The relationships between the performance impact of passage blind feedback and the number of feedback terms and the topic's average relevant document length, respectively, are examined to illustrate these dependencies.
1009083	A two-stage mixture model for pseudo feedback Pseudo feedback is a commonly used technique to improve information retrieval performance. It assumes a few top-ranked documents to be relevant, and learns from them to improve the retrieval accuracy. A serious problem is that the performance is often very sensitive to the number of pseudo feedback documents. In this poster, we address this problem in a language modeling framework. We propose a novel two-stage mixture model, which is less sensitive to the number of pseudo feedback documents than an effective existing feedback model. The new model can tolerate a more flexible setting of the number of pseudo feedback documents without the danger of losing much retrieval accuracy.
1009086	A session-based search engine In this poster, we describe a novel session-based search engine, which puts the search in context. The search engine has a number of session-based features including expansion of the current query with user query history and clickthrough data (title and summary of clicked web pages) in the same search session and the session boundary recognition through temporal closeness and probabilistic similarity between query terms. In addition, the search engine visualizes the rank change of web pages as different queries are submitted in the same search session to help the user reformulate the query.
1009088	The document as an ergodic markov chain In recent years, statistical language models are being proposed as alternative to the vector space model. Viewing documents as language samples introduces the issue of defining a joint probability distribution over the terms.The present paper models a document as the result of a Markov process. It argues that this process is ergodic, which is theoretically plausible, and easy to verify in practice.The theoretical result is that the joint distribution can be easily obtained. This can also be applied for search resolutions other than the document level. We verified this in an experiment on query expansion demonstrating both the validity and the practicability of the method. This holds a promise for general language models.
1009089	Expertise community detection Providing knowledge workers with access to experts and communities-of-practice is central to sharing expertise and crucial to organizational performance, adaptation, and even survival. This paper covers ongoing research to develop an Expert Locator prototype, a model-based system for detecting experts and broader communities-of-practice. The underlying expertise model is extensible and supports aggregation of evidence across diverse sources. The prototype is being used to locate critical expertise in key project areas, and current evaluation indicates its potential effectiveness.
1009091	Email is a stage: discovering people roles from email archives An abstract is not available.
1009093	Topic prediction based on comparative retrieval rankings A new measure, AnchorMap, is introduced to evaluate how close two document retrieval rankings are to each other. It is shown that AnchorMap scores, when run on a set of initial ranked document lists from 8 different systems, are very highly correlated with categorization of topics as easy or hard, and separately, are highly correlated with those topics on which blind feedback works. In another experiment, AnchorMap is used to compare the initial ranked document list from a single system against the ranked document list from that system after blind feedback. Again, high AnchorMap values are highly correlated with both topic difficulty and successful application of blind feedback. Both experiments are examples of using properties of a topic which are independent of relevance information to predict the actual performance of IR systems on the topic. Initial experiments to attempt to improve retrieval performance based upon AnchorMap failed; the causes for failure are discussed.
1009094	Context-based question-answering evaluation In this poster, we will present the results of efforts we have undertaken to conduct evaluations of a QA system in a real world environment and to understand the nature of the dimensions on which users evaluate QA systems when given full reign to comment on whatever dimensions they deem important.
1009095	Design of an e-book user interface and visualizations to support reading for comprehension Current e-Book browsers provide minimal support for comprehending the organization, narrative structure, and themes, of large complex books. In order to build an understanding of such books, readers should be provided with user interfaces that present, and relate, the organizational, narrative and thematic structures. We propose adapting information retrieval techniques for the purpose of discovering these structures, and sketch three distinctive visualizations for presenting these structures to the e-Book reader. These visualizations are presented within an initial design for an e-Book browser.
1009096	Toward better weighting of anchors Okapi BM25 scoring of anchor text surrogate documents has been shown to facilitate effective ranking in navigational search tasks over web data. We hypothesize that even better ranking can be achieved in certain important cases, particularly when anchor scores must be fused with content scores, by avoiding length normalisation and by reducing the attentuation of scores associated with high tf . Preliminary results are presented.
1009098	Answer models for question answering passage retrieval Answer patterns have been shown to improve the perfor-mance of open-domain factoid QA systems. Their use, however, requires either constructing the patterns manually or developing algorithms for learning them automatically. We present here a simpler approach that extends the techniques of language modeling to create answer models. These are language models trained on the correct answers to training questions. We show how they fit naturally into a probabilis-tic model for answer passage retrieval and demonstrate their effectiveness on the TREC 2002 QA Corpus.
1009099	Collaborative filing in a document repository We introduce an emergent, collaborative filing system. In such a system, an individual is allowed to organize a subset of documents in a repository into a personal hierarchy and share the hierarchy with others. The system generates a "consensus" hierarchy from all users' personal hierarchies, which provides a full, common, and emergent view of all documents. We believe that collaborative filing helps translate personal, tacit knowledge into sharable structures, which help the user as well a community of which he or she is a part. Our filing system is suitable for any documents from text to multimedia files. Initial results on an experimental website show promise. For a knowledge task involving extensive document retrieval, hierarchies are not only used frequently but are also effective in identifying high quality documents. One surprising finding is how often subjects use others' personal hierarchies, and upon close examination, social networks play a key role as well.
1009100	A study of topic similarity measures In this poster we describe an investigation of topic similarity measures. We elicit assessments on the similarity of 10 pairs of topic from 76 subjects and use these as a benchmark to assess how well each measure performs. The measures have the potential to form the basis of a predictive technique, for adaptive search systems. The results of our evaluation show that measures based on the level of correlation between topics concords most with general subject perceptions of search topic similarity.
1009101	Effectiveness of web page classification on finding list answers List question answering (QA) offers a unique challenge in effectively and efficiently locating a complete set of distinct answers from huge corpora or the Web. In TREC-12, the median average F 1 performance of list QA systems was only 6.9%. This paper exploits the wealth of freely available text and link structures on the Web to seek complete answers to list questions. We employ natural language parsing, web page classification and clustering to find reliable list answers. We also study the effectiveness of web page classification on both the recall and uniqueness of answers for web-based list QA.
1009102	Detection and translation of OOV terms prior to query time Accurate cross-language information retrieval requires that query terms be correctly translated. Several new techniques to improve the translation of out of vocabulary terms in English-Chinese cross-language information retrieval have been developed. However, these require queries and a document collection to enable translation disambiguation. Although effective, they involve much processing and searching of the Web at query time, and may not be practical in a production web search engine. In this work, we consider what tasks maybe carried out beforehand, the goal being to reduce the processing required at query time. We have successfully developed new techniques to extract and translate out of vocabulary terms using the Web and add them into a translation dictionary prior to query time.
1009103	Evaluation of the real and perceived value of automatic and interactive query expansion The paper describes a user study examining methods for improving users queries, specifically interactive and automatic query expansion and advanced search options. The user study includes subjective and objective evaluation of the effect of the above methods and a comparison between the real and perceived effect.
1009105	On evaluating web search with very few relevant documents Many common web searches by their nature have a very small number of relevant documents. Homepage and "namedpage" searching are known-item searches where there is only a single relevant document. Topic distillation is a special kind of topical relevance search where the user wishes to find a few key web sites rather than every relevant web page. Because these types of searches are so common, web search evaluations have come to focus on tasks where there are very few relevant documents. Evaluations with few relevant documents pose special challenges for current metrics. In particular, the TREC 2003 topic distillation evaluation is unable to distinguish most submitted runs from each other.
1009106	A music recommender based on audio features Many collaborative music recommender systems ( CMRS ) have succeeded in capturing the similarity among users or items based on ratings, however they have rarely considered about the available information from the multimedia such as genres, let alone audio features from the media stream. Such information is valuable and can be used to solve several problems in RS. In this paper, we design a CMRS based on audio features of the multimedia stream. In the CMRS , we provide recommendation service by our proposed method where a clustering technique is used to integrate the audio features of music into the collaborative filtering ( CF ) framework in hopes of achieving better performance. Experiments are carried out to demonstrate that our approach is feasible.
1009108	A search engine for imaged documents in PDF files Large quantities of documents in the Internet and digital libraries are simply scanned and archived in image format, many of which are packed in PDF files. The word search tool provided by Adobe Reader/Acrobat does not work for these imaged documents. In this paper, we present a search engine to deal with this issue for imaged documents in PDF files. The experimental results show an encouraging performance.
1009112	Information retrieval for language tutoring: an overview of the REAP project An abstract is not available.
1009114	Automatic recognition of reading levels from user queries An abstract is not available.
1009115	A joint framework for collaborative and content filtering This paper proposes a novel, unified, and systematic approach to combine collaborative and content-based filtering for ranking and user preference prediction. The framework incorporates all available information by coupling together multiple learning problems and using a suitable kernel or similarity function between user-item pairs. We propose and evaluate an on-line algorithm (JRank)that generalizes perceptron learning using this framework and shows significant improvement over other approaches.
1009119	Query-related data extraction of hidden web documents The larger amount of information on the Web is stored in document databases and is not indexed by general-purpose search engines (i.e., Google and Yahoo). Such information is dynamically generated through querying databases - which are referred to as Hidden Web databases. Documents returned in response to a user query are typically presented using template-generated Web pages. This paper proposes a novel approach that identifies Web page templates by analysing the textual contents and the adjacent tag structures of a document in order to extract query-related data. Preliminary results demonstrate that our approach effectively detects templates and retrieves data with high recall and precision.
1009121	Measuring ineffectiveness An evaluation methodology that targets ineffective topics is needed to support research on obtaining more consistent retrieval across topics. Using average values of traditional evaluation measures is not an appropriate methodology because it emphasizes effective topics: poorly performing topics' scores are by definition small, and they are therefore difficult to distinguish from the noise inherent in retrieval evaluation. We examine two new measures that emphasize a system's worst topics. While these measures focus on different aspects of retrieval behavior than traditional measures, the measures are less stable than traditional measures and the margin of error associated with the new measures is large relative to the observed differences in scores.
1009122	Information retrieval using hierarchical dirichlet processes An information retrieval method is proposed using a hierarchical Dirichlet process as a prior on the parameters of a set of multinomial distributions. The resulting method naturally includes a number of features found in other popular methods. Specifically, tf.idf-like term weighting and document length normalisation are recovered. The new method is compared with Okapi BM-25 [3] and the Twenty-One model [1] on TREC data and is shown to give better performance.
1009123	Broken plural detection for arabic information retrieval Due to the high number of inflectional variations of Arabic words, empirical results suggest that stemming is essential for Arabic information retrieval. However, current light stemming algorithms do not extract the correct stem of irregular (so-called broken) plurals, which constitute ~10% of Arabic texts and ~41% of plurals. Although light stemming in particular has led to improvements in information retrieval [5, 6], the effects of broken plurals on the performance of information retrieval systems has not been examined.We propose a light stemmer that incorporates a broken plural recognition component, and evaluate it within the context of information retrieval. Our results show that identifying broken plurals and reducing them to their correct stems does result in a significant improvement in the performance of information retrieval systems.
1009125	A review of relevance feedback experiments at the 2003 reliable information access (RIA) workshop. We review here the results of one of the experiments performed at the 2003 Reliable Information Access (RIA) Workshop, hosted by Mitre Corporation and the Northeast Regional Research Center (NRRC). The experiment concentrates on query expansion using relevance feedback and explores the behaviour of several information retrieval systems using variable numbers of relevant documents.
1009130	eMailSift: mining-based approaches to email classification An abstract is not available.
1009131	Constructing a text corpus for inexact duplicate detection As online document collections continue to expand, both on the Web and in proprietary environments, the need for duplicate detection becomes more critical. The goal of this work is to facilitate (a) investigations into the phenomenon of near duplicates and (b) algorithmic approaches to minimizing its negative effect on search results. Harnessing the expertise of both client-users and professional searchers, we establish principled methods to generate a test collection for identifying and handling inexact duplicate documents.
1008993	Challenges in using lifetime personal information stores Within five years, our personal computers with terabyte disk drives will be able to store everything we read, write, hear, and many of the images we see including video. Vannevar Bush outlined such a system in his famous 1945 Memex article [1]. For the last four years we have worked on MyLifeBits www.MyLifeBits.com http://www.MyLifeBits.com, a system to digitally store everything from one's life, including books, articles, personal financial records, memorabilia, email, written correspondence, photos(time, location taken), telephone calls, video, television programs, and web pages visited. We recently added content from personal devices that automatically record photos and audio.The project started with the capture of Bell's content [2], followed by an effort to explore the use of the SQL database for storage and retrieval. Work has continued along these lines to extend content capture from every useful source e.g. a meeting capture system. The second phase of the project includes the design of tools and links for annotation, collections, cluster analysis, facets for characterizing the content, creation of timelines and stories, and other inherent database related capabilities, e.g. the ability to pivot on an event or photo or person to retrieve linked information [3]. Ideally we would like to have a system that would read every document, extract meta-data(e.g. Dublin Core) and classify it using multiple ontologies, faceted classifications, or the relevant.While such a system has implications for future computing devices and their users, these systems will only exist if we can effectively utilize the vast personal stores. Although our system is exploratory, the Stuff I've Seen system [4] demonstrates the utility and necessity of easy search and access to one's own data. Other research efforts with similar goals relating to personal information include Haystack [5], LifeStreams [6], and the UK "Memories for Life" Grand Challenge.There are serious research issues beyond the problem of making the information useful through rapid and easy retrieval.The "Dear Appy" problem ("Dear Appy, My application, or platform, or media left me unreadable. Signed, Lost Data") is unsettling to archivists and computer professionals -and must be solved.Just navigating the stored life of individual would at first glance appear to take almost a lifetime to sift through. While we are making progress in the capture of less traditionally archived content(e.g. meetings, phone calls & video), automatic interpretation and index of voice are illusive. MyLifeBits is currently focused on retrieval including the hopefully automatic , addition of meta-data e.g. document type identification, high level knowledge. While such data is essential for the archivist, it is unclear how useful such meta-data is to a one's own information; without such higher level knowledge and concepts, the vast amount of raw bits may be completely unusable.The most cited problem of personal archives is the control of the content including personal security, together with joint ownership of content by other individuals and organizations. In many corporations, periodic expunging of documents is the standard. Similarly, the aspects of a person's life not available in public documents is owned by the organization and all documents may have to be tagged in such a way that it can be expunged, if necessary, when an individual is no longer part of the organization. The HPPA law in the US and even more stringent privacy laws in other counties have major implications for personal stores.
1009018	Tuning before feedback: combining ranking discovery and blind feedback for robust retrieval Both ranking functions and user queries are very important factors affecting a search engine's performance. Prior research has looked at how to improve ad-hoc retrieval performance for existing queries while tuning the ranking function, or modify and expand user queries using a fixed ranking scheme using blind feedback. However, almost no research has looked at how to combine ranking function tuning and blind feedback together to improve ad-hoc retrieval performance. In this paper, we look at the performance improvement for ad-hoc retrieval from a more integrated point of view by combining the merits of both techniques. In particular, we argue that the ranking function should be tuned first, using user-provided queries, before applying the blind feedback technique. The intuition is that highly-tuned ranking offers more high quality documents at the top of the hit list, thus offers a stronger baseline for blind feedback. We verify this integrated model in a large scale heterogeneous collection and the experimental results show that combining ranking function tuning and blind feedback can improve search performance by almost 30% over the baseline Okapi system.
1009021	Resource selection for domain-specific cross-lingual IR An under-explored question in cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) is to what degree the performance of CLIR methods depends on the availability of high-quality translation resources for particular domains. To address this issue, we evaluate several competitive CLIR methods - with different training corpora - on test documents in the medical domain. Our results show severe performance degradation when using a general-purpose training corpus or a commercial machine translation system (SYSTRAN), versus a domain-specific training corpus. A related unexplored question is whether we can improve CLIR performance by systematically analyzing training resources and optimally matching them to target collections. We start exploring this problem by suggesting a simple criterion for automatically matching training resources to target corpora. By using cosine similarity between training and target corpora as resource weights we obtained an average of 5.6% improvement over using all resources with no weights. The same metric yields 99.4% of the performance obtained when an oracle chooses the optimal resource every time.
1009141	Armadillo: harvesting information for the semantic web An abstract is not available.
1009143	Geographic information retrieval (GIR): searching where and what An abstract is not available.
1009150	An artificial intelligence approach to information retrieval (abstract only) Current approaches to information retrieval rely on the creativity of individuals to develop new algorithms. In this investigation the use of genetic algorithms (GA) and genetic programming (GP) to learn IR algorithms is examined.Document structure weighting is a technique whereby different parts of a document (title, abstract, etc.) contribute unevenly to the overall document weight during ranking. Near optimal weights can be learned with a GA. Doing so shows a statistically significant 5% relative improvement in MAP for vector space inner product and Croft's probabilistic ranking, but no improvement for BM25. Two applications of this approach are suggested: offline learning, and relevance feedback.In a second set of experiments, a new ranking function was learned using GP. This new function yields a statistically significant 11% relative improvement on unseen queries tested on the training documents. Portability tests to different collections (not used in training) demonstrate the performance of the new function exceeds vector space and probability, and slightly exceeds BM25. Learning weights for this new function is proposed.The application of genetic learning to stemming and thesaurus construction is discussed. Stemming rules such as those of the Porter algorithm are candidates for GP learning whereas synonym sets are candidates for GA learning.
1076037	Challenges in running a commercial search engine These are exciting times for Information Retrieval. Web search engines have brought IR to the masses. It now affects the lives of hundreds of millions of people, and growing, as Internet search companies launch ever more products based on techniques developed in These are exciting times for Information Retrieval. Web search engines have brought IR to the masses. It now affects the lives of hundreds of millions of people, and growing, as Internet search companies launch ever more products based on techniques developed in IR research.The real world poses unique challenges for search algorithms. They operate at unprecedented scales, and over a wide diversity of information. In addition, we have entered an unprecedented world of "Adversarial Information Retrieval". The lure of billions of dollars of commerce, guided by search engines, motivates all kinds of people to try all kinds of tricks to get their sites to the top of the search results.What techniques do people use to defeat IR algorithms? What are the evaluation challenges for a web search engine? How much impact has IR had on search engines? How does Google serve over 250 Million queries a day, often with sub-second response times? This talk will show that the world of algorithm and system design for commercial search engines can be described by two of Murphy's Laws: a) If anything can go wrong, it will, and b) If anything cannot go wrong, it will anyway.
1076046	User term feedback in interactive text-based image retrieval To alleviate the vocabulary problem, this paper investigates the role of user term feedback in interactive text-based image retrieval. Term feedback refers to the feedback from a user on specific terms regarding their relevance to a target image. Previous studies have indicated the effectiveness of term feedback in interactive text retrieval [14]. However, the term feedback has not shown to be effective in our experiments on text-based image retrieval. Our results indicate that, although term feedback has a positive effect by allowing users to identify more relevant terms, it also has a strong negative effect by providing more opportunities for users to specify irrelevant terms. To understand these different effects and their implications on the potential of term feedback, this paper further presents analysis of important factors that contribute to the utility of term feedback and discusses the outlook of term feedback in interactive text-based image retrieval.
1076052	A utility theoretic approach to determining optimal wait times in distributed information retrieval Distributed IR systems query a large number of IR servers, merge the retrieved results and display them to users. Since different servers handle collections of different sizes, have different processing and bandwidth capacities, there can be considerable heterogeneity in their response times. The broker in the distributed IR system thus has to make decisions regarding terminating searches based on perceived value of waiting -- retrieving more documents -- and the costs imposed on users by waiting for more responses. In this paper, we apply utility theory to formulate the broker's decision problem. The problem is a stochastic nonlinear program. We use Monte Carlo simulations to demonstrate how the optimal wait time may be determined in the context of a comparison shopping engine that queries multiple store websites for price and product information. We use data gathered from 30 stores for a set of 60 books. Our research demonstrates how a broker can leverage information about past retrievals regarding distributions of server response time and relevance scores to optimize its performance. Our main contribution is the formulation of the decision model for optimal wait time and proposal of a solution method. Our results suggest that the optimal wait time is highly sensitive to the manner in which users value from a set of retrieved results differs from the sum of user value from each result evaluated independently. We also find that the optimal wait time increases with the size of the distributed collections, but only if user utility from a set of results is nearly equal to the sum of utilities from each result.
1076060	An application of text categorization methods to gene ontology annotation This paper describes an application of IR and text categorization methods to a highly practical problem in biomedicine, specifically, Gene Ontology (GO) annotation. GO annotation is a major activity in most model organism database projects and annotates gene functions using a controlled vocabulary. As a first step toward automatic GO annotation, we aim to assign GO domain codes given a specific gene and an article in which the gene appears, which is one of the task challenges at the TREC 2004 Genomics Track. We approached the task with careful consideration of the specialized terminology and paid special attention to dealing with various forms of gene synonyms, so as to exhaustively locate the occurrences of the target gene. We extracted the words around the gene occurrences and used them to represent the gene for GO domain code annotation. As a classifier, we adopted a variant of k-Nearest Neighbor ( k NN) with supervised term weighting schemes to improve the performance, making our method among the top-performing systems in the TREC official evaluation. Moreover, it is demonstrated that our proposed framework is successfully applied to another task of the Genomics Track, showing comparable results to the best performing system.
1076076	Efficiently decodable and searchable natural language adaptive compression We address the problem of adaptive compression of natural language text, focusing on the case where low bandwidth is available and the receiver has little processing power, as in mobile applications. Our technique achieves compression ratios around 32% and requires very little effort from the receiver. This tradeoff, not previously achieved with alternative techniques, is obtained by breaking the usual symmetry between sender and receiver dominant in statistical adaptive compression. Moreover, we show that our technique can be adapted to avoid decompression at all in cases where the receiver only wants to detect the presence of some keywords in the document. This is useful in scenarios such as selective dissemination of information, news clipping, alert systems, text categorization, and clustering. Thanks to the asymmetry we introduce, the receiver can search the compressed text much faster than the plain text. This was previously achieved only in semistatic compression scenarios.
1076084	Relevance information: a loss of entropy but a gain for IDF? When investigating alternative estimates for term discriminativeness, we discovered that relevance information and idf are much closer related than formulated in classical literature. Therefore, we revisited the justification of idf as it follows from the binary independent retrieval (BIR) model. The main result is a formal framework uncovering the close relationship of a generalised idf and the BIR model. The framework makes explicit how to incorporate relevance information into any retrieval function that involves an idf -component.In addition to the idf -based formulation of the BIR model, we propose Poisson-based estimates as an alternative to the classical estimates, this being motivated by the superiority of Poisson-based estimates for the within-document term frequencies. The main experimental finding is that a Poisson-based idf is superior to the classical idf , where the superiority is particularly evident for long queries.
1076097	Automatic music video summarization based on audio-visual-text analysis and alignment In this paper, we propose a novel approach for automatic music video summarization based on audio-visual-text analysis and alignment. The music video is separated into the music and video tracks. For the music track, the chorus is detected based on music structure analysis. For the video track, we first segment the shots and classify the shots into close-up face shots and non-face shots, then we extract the lyrics and detect the most repeated lyrics from the shots. The music video summary is generated based on the alignment of boundaries of the detected chorus, shot class and the most repeated lyrics from the music video. The experiments on chorus detection, shot classification, and lyrics detection using 20 English music videos are described. Subjective user studies have been conducted to evaluate the quality and effectiveness of summary. The comparisons with the summaries based on our previous method and the manual method indicate that the results of summarization using the proposed method are better at meeting users' expectations.
1076098	A phonotactic-semantic paradigm for automatic spoken document classification We demonstrate a phonotactic-semantic paradigm for spoken document categorization. In this framework, we define a set of acoustic words instead of lexical words to represent acoustic activities in spoken languages. The strategy for acoustic vocabulary selection is studied by comparing different feature selection methods. With an appropriate acoustic vocabulary, a voice tokenizer converts a spoken document into a text-like document of acoustic words. Thus, a spoken document can be represented by a count vector, named a bag-of-sounds vector, which characterizes a spoken document's semantic domain. We study two phonotactic-semantic classifiers, the support vector machine classifier and the latent semantic analysis classifier, and their properties. The phonotactic-semantic framework constitutes a new paradigm in spoken document classification, as demonstrated by its success in the spoken language identification task. It achieves 18.2% error reduction over state-of-the-art benchmark performance on the 1996 NIST Language Recognition Evaluation database.
1076099	Boosted decision trees for word recognition in handwritten document retrieval Recognition and retrieval of historical handwritten material is an unsolved problem. We propose a novel approach to recognizing and retrieving handwritten manuscripts, based upon word image classification as a key step. Decision trees with normalized pixels as features form the basis of a highly accurate AdaBoost classifier, trained on a corpus of word images that have been resized and sampled at a pyramid of resolutions. To stem problems from the highly skewed distribution of class frequencies, word classes with very few training samples are augmented with stochastically altered versions of the originals. This increases recognition performance substantially. On a standard corpus of 20 pages of handwritten material from the George Washington collection the recognition performance shows a substantial improvement in performance over previous published results (75% vs 65%). Following word recognition, retrieval is done using a language model over the recognized words. Retrieval performance also shows substantially improved results over previously published results on this database. Recognition/retrieval results on a more challenging database of 100 pages from the George Washington collection are also presented.
1076102	Evaluation of resources for question answering evaluation Controlled and reproducible laboratory experiments, enabled by reusable test collections, represent a well-established methodology in modern information retrieval research. In order to confidently draw conclusions about the performance of different retrieval methods using test collections, their reliability and trustworthiness must first be established. Although such studies have been performed for ad hoc test collections, currently available resources for evaluating question answering systems have not been similarly analyzed. This study evaluates the quality of answer patterns and lists of relevant documents currently employed in automatic question answering evaluation, and concludes that they are not suitable for post-hoc experimentation. These resources, created from runs submitted by TREC QA track participants, do not produce fair and reliable assessments of systems that did not participate in the original evaluations. Potential solutions for addressing this evaluation gap and their shortcomings are discussed.
1076114	A study of the dirichlet priors for term frequency normalisation In Information Retrieval (IR), the Dirichlet Priors have been applied to the smoothing technique of the language modeling approach. In this paper, we apply the Dirichlet Priors to the term frequency normalisation of the classical BM25 probabilistic model and the Divergence from Randomness PL2 model. The contributions of this paper are twofold. First, through extensive experiments on four TREC collections, we show that the newly generated models, to which the Dirichlet Priors normalisation is applied, provide robust and effective performance. Second, we propose a novel theoretically-driven approach to the automatic parameter tuning of the Dirichlet Priors normalisation. Experiments show that this tuning approach optimises the retrieval performance of the newly generated Dirichlet Priors-based weighting models.
1076117	Gravitation-based model for information retrieval This paper proposes GBM (gravitation-based model), a physical model for information retrieval inspired by Newton's theory of gravitation. A mapping is built in this model from concepts of information retrieval (documents, queries, relevance, etc) to those of physics (mass, distance, radius, attractive force, etc). This model actually provides a new perspective on IR problems. A family of effective term weighting functions can be derived from it, including the well-known BM25 formula. This model has some advantages over most existing ones: First, because it is directly based on basic physical laws, the derived formulas and algorithms can have their explicit physical interpretation. Second, the ranking formulas derived from this model satisfy more intuitive heuristics than most of existing ones, thus have the potential to behave empirically better and to be used safely on various settings. Finally, a new approach for structured document retrieval derived from this model is more reasonable and behaves better than existing ones.
1076124	Bootstrapping dictionaries for cross-language information retrieval The bottleneck for dictionary-based cross-language information retrieval is the lack of comprehensive dictionaries, in particular for many different languages. We here introduce a methodology by which multilingual dictionaries (for Spanish and Swedish) emerge automatically from simple seed lexicons. These seed lexicons are automatically generated, by cognate mapping, from (previously manually constructed) Portuguese and German as well as English sources. Lexical and semantic hypotheses are then validated and new ones iteratively generated by making use of co-occurrence patterns of hypothesized translation synonyms in parallel corpora. We evaluate these newly derived dictionaries on a large medical document collection within a cross-language retrieval setting.
1076131	Analysis of factoid questions for effective relation extraction We present an analysis of the structured relationships observed in a randomly sampled set of question-like queries submitted to a search engine for a popular online encyclopedic document collection. Our study shows that a relatively small number of binary relationships account for most of the queries in the sample. This empirically validates an approach of analyzing query logs to identify the relationships most relevant to user needs and populating corresponding fact tables from the collection for factoid question answering. Our analysis shows that such an approach can lead to substantial coverage of user questions.
1076133	Measure-based metasearch We propose a simple method for converting many standard measures of retrieval performance into metasearch algorithms. Our focus is both on the analysis of retrieval measures themselves and on the development of new metasearch algorithms. Given the conversion method proposed, our experimental results using TREC data indicate that system-oriented measures of overall retrieval performance (such as average precision) yield good metasearch algorithms whose performance equals or exceeds that of benchmark techniques such as CombMNZ and Condorcet.
1076134	A geometric interpretation of r-precision and its correlation with average precision We consider two of the most commonly cited measures of retrieval performance: average precision and R-precision. It is well known that average precision and R-precision are highly correlated and similarly robust measures of performance, though the reasons for this are not entirely clear. In this paper, we give a geometric argument which shows that under a very reasonable set of assumptions, average precision and R-precision both approximate the area under the precision-recall curve, thus explaining their high correlation. We further demonstrate through the use of TREC data that the similarity or difference between average precision and R-precision is largely governed by the adherence to, or violation of, these reasonable assumptions.
1076135	Probabilistic hyperspace analogue to language Song and Bruza [6] introduce a framework for Information Retrieval(IR) based on Gardenfor's three tiered cognitive model; Conceptual Spaces[4]. They instantiate a conceptual space using Hyperspace Analogue to Language (HAL[3] to generate higher order concepts which are later used for ad-hoc retrieval. In this poster, we propose an alternative implementation of the conceptual space by using a probabilistic HAL space (pHAL). To evaluate whether converting to such an implementation is beneficial we have performed an initial investigation comparing the concept combination of HAL against pHAL for the task of query expansion. Our experiments indicate that pHAL outperforms the original HAL method and that better query term selection methods can improve performance on both HAL and pHAL.
1076136	Basic issues on the processing of web queries In this paper we study three basic and key issues related to Web query processing: load balance, broker behavior, and performance by individual index servers. Our study, while preliminary, does reveal interesting tradeoffs: (1) load unbalance at low query arrival rates can be controlled with a simple measure of randomizing the distribution of documents among the index servers, (2) the broker is not a bottleneck, and (3) disk utilization is higher than CPU utilization.
1076139	Surrogate scoring for improved metasearch precision We describe a method for improving the precision of metasearch results based upon scoring the visual features of documents' surrogate representations. These surrogate scores are used during fusion in place of the original scores or ranks provided by the underlying search engines. Visual features are extracted from typical search result surrogate information, such as title, snippet, URL, and rank. This approach specifically avoids the use of search engine-specific scores and collection statistics that are required by most traditional fusion strategies. This restriction correctly reflects the use of metasearch in practice, in which knowledge of the underlying search engines' strategies cannot be assumed. We evaluate our approach using a precision-oriented test collection of manually-constructed binary relevance judgments for the top ten results from ten web search engines over 896 queries. We show that our visual fusion approach significantly outperforms the rCombMNZ fusion algorithm by 5.71%, with 99% confidence, and the best individual web search engine by 10.9%, with 99% confidence.
1076140	Detecting action-items in e-mail An abstract is not available.
1076141	Characterization of a simple case of the reassignment of document identifiers as a pattern sequencing problem In this poster, we analyze recent work in the document identifiers reassignment problem. After that, we present a formalization of a simple case of the problem as a PSP (Pattern Sequencing Problem). This may facilitate future work as it opens a new research line to solve the general problem.
1076145	Search engines and how students think they work To investigate the nature of people's understandings for how search engines work, we collected data from 232 undergraduate and graduate students. Students were asked to "draw a labeled sketch of how search engines work." A reference model was constructed and each sketch was analyzed and compared against it for completeness. The paper presents preliminary results and discusses the implications for educational assessment and curriculum design on the one hand, and information system design on the other.
1076149	The impact of evaluation on multilingual text retrieval We summarize the impact of the first five years of activity of the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum (CLEF) on multilingual text retrieval system performance and show how the CLEF evaluation campaigns have contributed to advances in the state-of-the-art.
1076154	A dual index model for contextual information retrieval In this paper, we propose a dual index model for contextual IR. For each query, we search against both document level and passage level indexes, and use the corresponding merge function to update the weights for both documents and paragraphs by combining the results from both indexes according to the granularity information in metadata. Experiments on 2004 TREC data show that a significant improvement can be made by using the dual index model.
1076155	Predicting query difficulty on the web by learning visual clues We describe a method for predicting query difficulty in a precision-oriented web search task. Our approach uses visual features from retrieved surrogate document representations (titles, snippets, etc.) to predict retrieval effectiveness for a query. By training a supervised machine learning algorithm with manually evaluated queries, visual clues indicative of relevance are discovered. We show that this approach has a moderate correlation of 0.57 with precision at 10 scores from manual relevance judgments of the top ten documents retrieved by ten web search engines over 896 queries. Our findings indicate that difficulty predictors which have been successful in recall-oriented ad-hoc search, such as clarity metrics, are not nearly as correlated with engine performance in precision-oriented tasks such as this, yielding a maximum correlation of 0.3. Additionally, relying only on visual clues avoids the need for collection statistics that are required by these prior approaches. This enables our approach to be employed in environments where these statistics are unavailable or costly to retrieve, such as metasearch.
1076158	3D viewpoint-based photo search and information browsing We propose a new photo search method that uses three-dimensional (3D) viewpoints as queries. 3D viewpoint-based image retrieval is especially useful for searching collections of archaeological photographs,which contain many different images of the same object. Our method is designed to enable users to retrieve images that contain the same object but show a different view, and to browse groups of images taken from a similar viewpoint. We also propose using 3D scenes to query by example, which means that users do not have the problem of trying to formulate appropriate queries. This combination gives users an easy way of accessing not only photographs but also archived information.
1076159	Examination and enhancement of a ring-structured graphical search interface based on usability testing We evaluated the interactive retrieval functionality of the Concentric Ring View according to a series of usability studies. This is a ring structure-based graphical user interface, like a planisphere, for image retrieval with multi-faceted metadata. Attribute values for each facet are arranged on a ring, and retrieved images are displayed inside using search keys derived from the attribute values on the bottom part of the rings. By rotating the rings, users can browse retrieved images while adjusting search keys. The first usability test conducted with thirty six participants confirmed that: (i) novice users, even junior high school students, could use this interface; (ii) users could find images better than anticipated; and (iii) the interface was good at choosing the first relevant image, but users could not refine retrieval because they were unable to reuse retrieved results. To solve this problem, we added two functionalities, personal history for reuse and relevance feedback. With these improvements, we named the new version of the interface Concentric Ring View F+ . A second usability test with seven participants confirmed the effectiveness of this newer interface.
1076162	Using query term order for result summarisation We report on two experiments performed to test the importance of Term Order in automatic summarisation. Experiment one was undertaken as part of DUC 2004 to which three systems were submitted, each with a different summarisation approach. The system that used document Term Order outperformed those that did not use Term Order in the ROUGE evaluation. Experiment two made use of human evaluations of search engine results, comparing our Query Term Order summaries with a simulation of current Google search engine result summaries in terms of summary quality. Our QTO system's summaries aided users' relevance judgements to a significantly greater extent than Google's.
1076163	Profile-based event tracking In this research, we focus on tracking topics that originate and evolve from a specific event. Intuitively, a few key elements of a target event, such as date, location, and persons involved, would be enough for making a decision on whether a test story is on-topic. Consequently, a profile-based event tracking method is proposed. We attempt to build an event profile from the given on-topic stories by robust information retrieval technologies. A feature selection metric and a recognized event clause are utilized to determine most (if not all) key semantic elements of the target event. Preliminary experiments on the TDT2 mandarin corpus show that this profile-based event tracking method is promising.
1076165	Assessing the term independence assumption in blind relevance feedback When applying blind relevance feedback for ad hoc document retrieval, is it possible to identify, a priori, the set of query terms that will most improve retrieval performance? Can this complex problem be reduced into the simpler one of making independent decisions about the performance effects of each query term? Our experiments suggest that, for the selection of terms for blind relevance feedback, the term independence assumption may be empirically justified.
1076166	Revisiting the effect of topic set size on retrieval error An abstract is not available.
1076169	Translating pieces of words Translation for cross-language information retrieval need not be word-based. We show that character n-grams in one language can be 'translated' into character n-grams of another language. We demonstrate that such translations produce retrieval results on par with, and often exceeding, those of word-based and stem-based translation.
1076171	A temporally adaptive content-based relevance ranking algorithm In information retrieval relevance ranking of the results is one of the most important single tasks there are. There are many diffierent ranking algorithms based on the content of the documents or on some external properties e.g. link structure of html documents.We present a temporally adaptive content-based relevance ranking algorithm that explicitly takes into account the temporal behavior of the underlying statistical properties of the documents in the form of a statistical topic model. more we state that our algorithm can be used on top of any ranking algorithm.
1076172	Automated evaluation of search engine performance via implicit user feedback Measuring the information retrieval effectiveness of Web search engines can be expensive if human relevance judgments are required to evaluate search results. Using implicit user feedback for search engine evaluation provides a cost and time effective manner of addressing this problem. Web search engines can use human evaluation of search results without the expense of human evaluators. An additional advantage of this approach is the availability of real time data regarding system performance. Wecapture user relevance judgments actions such as print, save and bookmark, sending these actions and the corresponding document identifiers to a central server via a client application. We use this implicit feedback to calculate performance metrics, such as precision. We can calculate an overall system performance metric based on a collection of weighted metrics.
1076176	Noun sense induction using web search results This paper presents an algorithm for unsupervised noun sense induction, based on clustering of Web search results. The algorithm does not utilize labeled training instances or any other external knowledge source. Preliminary results on a small dataset show that this technique provides two advantages over other techniques in the literature: it detects real-world senses not found in dictionaries or other lexical resources, and it does not require that the number of word senses be specified in advance.
1076177	Self-organizing distributed collaborative filtering We propose a fully decentralized collaborative filtering approach that is self-organizing and operates in a distributed way. The relevances between downloading files (items) are stored locally at these items in so called item-based buddy tables and are updated each time that the items are downloaded. We then propose to use the language model to build recommendations for the different users based on the buddy tables of those items a user has downloaded previously. We have tested and compared our distributed collaborative filtering approach to centralized collaborative filtering and showed that it has similar performance. It is therefore a promising technique to facilitate recommendations in peer-to-peer networks.
1076178	Dirichlet PageRank PageRank has been known to be a successful algorithm in ranking web sources. In order to avoid the rank sink problem, PageRank assumes that a surfer, being in a page, jumps to a random page with a certain probability. In the standard PageRank algorithm, the jumping probabilities are assumed to be the same for all the pages, regardless of the page properties. This is not the case in the real world, since presumably a surfer would more likely follow the out-links of a high-quality hub page than follow the links of a low-quality one. In this poster, we propose a novel algorithm "Dirichlet PageRank" to address this problem by adapting exible jumping probabilities based on the number of out-links in a page. Empirical results on TREC data show that our method outperforms the standard PageRank algorithm.
1076179	A retrospective study of probabilistic context-based retrieval We propose a novel probabilistic retrieval model which weights terms according to their contexts in documents. The term weighting function of our model is similar to the language model and the binary independence model. The retrospective experiments (i.e., relevance information is present) illustrate the potential of our probabilistic context-based retrieval where the precision at the top 30 documents is about 43% for TREC-6 data and 52% for TREC-7 data.
1076180	Indexing emails and email threads for retrieval Electronic mail poses a number of unusual challenges for the design of information retrieval systems and test collections, including informal expression, conversational structure, variable document granularity (e.g., messages, threads, or longer-term interactions), a naturally occuring integration between free text and structural metadata, and incompletely characterized user needs. This paper reports on initial experiments with a large collection of public mailing lists from the World Wide Web consortium that will be used for the TREC 2005 Enterprise Search Track. Automatic subject-line threading and removal of duplicated text were found to have little effect in a small pilot study. Those observations motivated development of a question typology and more detailed analysis of collection characteristics; preliminary results for both are reported.
1076185	An industrial-strength content-based music recommendation system We present a metadata free system for the interaction with massive collections of music, the MusicSurfer. MusicSurfer automatically extracts descriptions related to instrumentation, rhythm and harmony from music audio signals. Together with efficient similarity metrics, the descriptions allow navigation of multimillion track music collections in a flexible and efficient way without the need of metadata or human ratings.
1076186	SPIN: searching personal information networks An abstract is not available.
1076193	UCAIR: a personalized search toolbar An abstract is not available.
1076195	Multi-faceted information retrieval system for large scale email archives An abstract is not available.
1148172	Social networks, incentives, and search The role of network structure has grown in significance over the past ten years in the field of information retrieval, stimulated to a great extent by the importance of link analysis in the development of Web search techniques [4]. This body of work has focused primarily on the network that is most clearly visible on the Web: the network of hyperlinks connecting documents to documents. But the Web has always contained a second network, less explicit but equally important, and this is the social network on its users, with latent person-to-person links encoding a variety of relationships including friendship, information exchange, and influence. Developments over the past few years --- including the emergence of social networking systems and rich social media, as well as the availability of large-scale e-mail and instant messenging datasets --- have highlighted the crucial role played by on-line social networks, and at the same time have made them much easier to uncover and analyze. There is now a considerable opportunity to exploit the information content inherent in these networks, and this prospect raises a number of interesting research challenge.Within this context, we focus on some recent efforts to formalize the problem of searching a social network. The goal is to capture the issues underlying a variety of related scenarios: a member of a social networking system such as MySpace seeks a piece of information that may be held by a friend of a friend [27, 28]; an employee in a large company searches his or her network of colleagues for expertise in a particular subject [9]; a node in a decentralized peer-to-peer file-sharing system queries for a file that is likely to be a small number of hops away [2, 6, 16, 17]; or a user in a distributed IR or federated search setting traverses a network of distributed resources connected by links that may not just be informational but also economic or contractual [3, 5, 7, 8, 13, 18, 21]. In their most basic forms, these scenarios have some essential features in common: a node in a network, without global knowledge, must find a short path to a desired "target" node (or to one of several possible target nodes).To frame the underlying problem, we go back to one of the most well-known pieces of empirical social network analysis --- Stanley Milgram's research into the small-world phenomenon, also known as the "six degrees of separation" [19, 24, 25]. The form of Milgram's experiments, in which randomly chosen starters had to forward a letter to a designated target individual, established not just that short chains connecting far-flung pairs of people are abundant in large social networks, but also that the individuals in these networks, operating with purely local information about their own friends and acquaintances, are able to actually find these chains [10]. The Milgram experiments thus constituted perhaps the earliest indication that large-scale social networks are structured to support this type of decentralized search. Within a family of random-graph models proposed by Watts and Strogatz [26], we have shown that the ability of a network to support this type of decentralized search depends in subtle ways on how its "long-range" connections are correlated with the underlying spatial or organizational structure in which it is embedded [10, 11]. Recent studies using data on communication within organizations [1] and the friendships within large on-line communities [15] have established the striking fact that real social networks closely match some of the structural features predicted by these mathematical models.If one looks further at the on-line settings that provide the initial motivation for these issues, there is clearly interest from many directions in their long-term economic implications --- essentially, the consequences that follow from viewing distributed information retrieval applications, peer-to-peer systems, or social-networking sites as providing marketplaces for information and services. How does the problem of decentralized search in a network change when the participants are not simply agents following a fixed algorithm, but strategic actors who make decisions in their own self-interest, and may demand compensation for taking part in a protocol? Such considerations bring us into the realm of algorithmic game theory, an active area of current research that uses game-theoretic notions to quantify the performance of systems in which the participants follow their own self-interest [20, 23] In a simple model for decentralized search in the presence of incentives, we find that performance depends crucially on both the rarity of the information and the richness of the network topology [12] --- if the network is too structurally impoverished, an enormous investment may be required to produce a path from a query to an answer.
1148184	Towards efficient automated singer identification in large music databases Automated singer identification is important in organising, browsing and retrieving data in large music databases. In this paper, we propose a novel scheme, called H ybrid S inger I dentifier (HSI), for automated singer recognition. HSI can effectively use multiple low-level features extracted from both vocal and non-vocal music segments to enhance the identification process with a hybrid architecture and build profiles of individual singer characteristics based on statistical mixture models. Extensive experimental results conducted on a large music database demonstrate the superiority of our method over state-of-the-art approaches.
1148185	Music structure based vector space retrieval This paper proposes a novel framework for music content indexing and retrieval. The music structure information, i.e., timing, harmony and music region content, is represented by the layers of the music structure pyramid. We begin by extracting this layered structure information. We analyze the rhythm of the music and then segment the signal proportional to the inter-beat intervals. Thus, the timing information is incorporated in the segmentation process, which we call Beat Space Segmentation . To describe Harmony Events , we propose a two-layer hierarchical approach to model the music chords. We also model the progression of instrumental and vocal content as Acoustic Events . After information extraction, we propose a vector space modeling approach which uses these events as the indexing terms. In query-by-example music retrieval, a query is represented by a vector of the statistics of the n -gram events. We then propose two effective retrieval models, a hard-indexing scheme and a soft-indexing scheme. Experiments show that the vector space modeling is effective in representing the layered music information, achieving 82.5% top-5 retrieval accuracy using 15-sec music clips as the queries. The soft-indexing outperforms hard-indexing in general.
1148187	AggregateRank: bringing order to web sites Since the website is one of the most important organizational structures of the Web, how to effectively rank websites has been essential to many Web applications, such as Web search and crawling. In order to get the ranks of websites, researchers used to describe the inter-connectivity among websites with a so-called HostGraph in which the nodes denote websites and the edges denote linkages between websites (if and only if there are hyperlinks from the pages in one website to the pages in the other, there will be an edge between these two websites), and then adopted the random walk model in the HostGraph. However, as pointed in this paper, the random walk over such a HostGraph is not reasonable because it is not in accordance with the browsing behavior of web surfers. Therefore, the derivate rank cannot represent the true probability of visiting the corresponding website.In this work, we mathematically proved that the probability of visiting a website by the random web surfer should be equal to the sum of the PageRank values of the pages inside that website. Nevertheless, since the number of web pages is much larger than that of websites, it is not feasible to base the calculation of the ranks of websites on the calculation of PageRank. To tackle this problem, we proposed a novel method named AggregateRank rooted in the theory of stochastic complement, which cannot only approximate the sum of PageRank accurately, but also have a lower computational complexity than PageRank. Both theoretical analysis and experimental evaluation show that AggregateRank is a better method for ranking websites than previous methods.
1148199	Using web-graph distance for relevance feedback in web search We study the effect of user supplied relevance feedback in improving web search results. Rather than using query refinement or document similarity measures to rerank results, we show that the web-graph distance between two documents is a robust measure of their relative relevancy. We demonstrate how the use of this metric can improve the rankings of result URLs, even when the user only rates one document in the dataset. Our research suggests that such interactive systems can significantly improve search results.
1148203	Context-sensitive semantic smoothing for the language modeling approach to genomic IR Semantic smoothing, which incorporates synonym and sense information into the language models, is effective and potentially significant to improve retrieval performance. The implemented semantic smoothing models, such as the translation model which statistically maps document terms to query terms, and a number of works that have followed have shown good experimental results. However, these models are unable to incorporate contextual information. Thus, the resulting translation might be mixed and fairly general. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel context-sensitive semantic smoothing method that decomposes a document or a query into a set of weighted context-sensitive topic signatures and then translate those topic signatures into query terms. In detail, we solve this problem through (1) choosing concept pairs as topic signatures and adopting an ontology-based approach to extract concept pairs; (2) estimating the translation model for each topic signature using the EM algorithm; and (3) expanding document and query models based on topic signature translations. The new smoothing method is evaluated on TREC 2004/05 Genomics Track collections and significant improvements are obtained. The MAP (mean average precision) achieves a 33.6% maximal gain over the simple language model, as well as a 7.8% gain over the language model with context-insensitive semantic smoothing.
1148210	Probabilistic model for definitional question answering This paper proposes a probabilistic model for definitional question answering (QA) that reflects the characteristics of the definitional question. The intention of the definitional question is to request the definition about the question target. Therefore, an answer for the definitional question should contain the content relevant to the topic of the target, and have a representation form of the definition style. Modeling the problem of definitional QA from both the topic and definition viewpoints, the proposed probabilistic model converts the task of answering the definitional questions into that of estimating the three language models: topic language model, definition language model, and general language model. The proposed model systematically combines several evidences in a probabilistic framework. Experimental results show that a definitional QA system based on the proposed probabilistic model is comparable to state-of-the-art systems.
1148220	Dynamic test collections: measuring search effectiveness on the live web Existing methods for measuring the quality of search algorithms use a static collection of documents. A set of queries and a mapping from the queries to the relevant documents allow the experimenter to see how well different search engines or engine configurations retrieve the correct answers. This methodology assumes that the document set and thus the set of relevant documents are unchanging. In this paper, we abandon the static collection requirement. We begin with a recent TREC collection created from a web crawl and analyze how the documents in that collection have changed over time. We determine how decay of the document collection affects TREC systems, and present the results of an experiment using the decayed collection to measure a live web search system. We employ novel measures of search effectiveness that are robust despite incomplete relevance information. Lastly, we propose a methodology of "collection maintenance" which supports measuring search performance both for a single system and between systems run at different points in time.
1148230	Distributed query sampling: a quality-conscious approach We present an adaptive distributed query-sampling framework that is quality-conscious for extracting high-quality text database samples. The framework divides the query-based sampling process into an initial seed sampling phase and a quality-aware iterative sampling phase. In the second phase the sampling process is dynamically scheduled based on estimated database size and quality parameters derived during the previous sampling process. The unique characteristic of our adaptive query-based sampling framework is its self-learning and self-configuring ability based on the overall quality of all text databases under consideration. We introduce three quality-conscious sampling schemes for estimating database quality, and our initial results show that the proposed framework supports higher-quality document sampling than existing approaches.
1148259	Analysis of a low-dimensional linear model under recommendation attacks Collaborative filtering techniques have become popular in the past decade as an effective way to help people deal with information overload. Recent research has identified significant vulnerabilities in collaborative filtering techniques. Shilling attacks, in which attackers introduce biased ratings to influence recommendation systems, have been shown to be effective against memory-based collaborative filtering algorithms. We examine the effectiveness of two popular shilling attacks (the random attack and the average attack) on a model-based algorithm that uses Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) to learn a low-dimensional linear model. Our results show that the SVD-based algorithm is much more resistant to shilling attacks than memory-based algorithms. Furthermore, we develop an attack detection method directly built on the SVD-based algorithm and show that this method detects random shilling attacks with high detection rates and very low false alarm rates.
1148271	News to go: hierarchical text summarization for mobile devices We present an evaluation of a novel hierarchical text summarization method that allows users to view summaries of Web documents from small, mobile devices. Unlike previous approaches, ours does not require the documents to be in HTML since it infers a hierarchical structure automatically. Currently, the method is used to summarize news articles sent to a Web mail account in plain text format. Subjects used a Web-enabled mobile phone emulator to access the account's inbox and view the summarized news articles. They then used the summaries to complete several information-seeking tasks, which involved answering factual questions about the stories. In comparing the hierarchical text summary setting to that in which subjects were given the full text articles, there was no significant difference in task accuracy or the time taken to complete the task. However, in the hierarchical summarization setting, the number of bytes transferred per user request is less than half that of the full text case. Finally, in comparing the new method to three other summarization methods, subjects achieved significantly better accuracy on the tasks when using hierarchical summaries.
1148273	Clustering of search results using temporal attributes Clustering of search results is an important feature in many of today's information retrieval applications. The notion of hit list clustering appears in Web search engines and enterprise search engines as a mechanism that allows users to further explore the coverage of a query. However, there has been little work on exposing temporal attributes for constructing and presentation of clusters. These attributes appear in documents as part of the textual content, e.g., as a date and time token or as a temporal reference in a sentence. In this paper, we outline a model and describe a prototype that shows the main ideas.
1148275	Inferring document relevance via average precision We consider the problem of evaluating retrieval systems using a limited number of relevance judgments. Recent work has demonstrated that one can accurately estimate average precision via a judged pool corresponding to a relatively small random sample of documents. In this work, we demonstrate that given values or estimates of average precision, one can accurately infer the relevances of unjudged documents. Combined, we thus show how one can efficiently and accurately infer a large judged pool from a relatively small number of judged documents, thus permitting accurate and efficient retrieval evaluation on a large scale.
1148276	Automatic construction of known-item finding test beds An abstract is not available.
1148277	Adaptive query-based sampling for distributed IR An abstract is not available.
1148282	Question classification with log-linear models Question classification has become a crucial step in modern question answering systems. Previous work has demonstrated the effectiveness of statistical machine learning approaches to this problem. This paper presents a new approach to building a question classifier using log-linear models. Evidence from a rich and diverse set of syntactic and semantic features is evaluated, as well as approaches which exploit the hierarchical structure of the question classes.
1148286	An exploratory web log study of multitasking The Web search multitasking study based on automatic task session detection procedure is described. The results of the study: 1) multitasking is very rare, 2) it usually covers only 2 task sessions, 3) it is frequently formed into a temporal inclusion of an interrupting task session into the interrupted session, 4) the quantitative characteristics of multitasking greatly differ from the characteristics of sequential execution of one and several tasks. A searcher minimizes task switching costs: he avoids multitasking and while multitasking he uses cheapest manner of task switching.
1148288	First large-scale information retrieval experiments on turkish texts We present the results of the first large-scale Turkish information retrieval experiments performed on a TREC-like test collection. The test bed, which has been created for this study, contains 95.5 million words, 408,305 documents, 72 ad hoc queries and has a size of about 800MB. All documents come from the Turkish newspaper Milliyet . We implement and apply simple to sophisticated stemmers and various query-document matching functions and show that truncating words at a prefix length of 5 creates an effective retrieval environment in Turkish. However, a lemmatizer-based stemmer provides significantly better effectiveness over a variety of matching functions.
1148289	Learning a ranking from pairwise preferences We introduce a novel approach to combining rankings from multiple retrieval systems. We use a logistic regression model or an SVM to learn a ranking from pairwise document preferences. Our approach requires no training data or relevance scores, and outperforms a popular voting algorithm.
1148293	Rpref: a generalization of Bpref towards graded relevance judgments We present rpref ; our generalization of the bpref evaluation metric for assessing the quality of search engine results, given graded rather than binary user relevance judgments.
1148295	NMF and PLSI: equivalence and a hybrid algorithm In this paper, we show that PLSI and NMF optimize the same objective function, although PLSI and NMF are different algorithms as verified by experiments. In addition, we also propose a new hybrid method that runs PLSI and NMF alternatively to achieve better solutions.
1148296	Using historical data to enhance rank aggregation Rank aggregation is a pervading operation in IR technology. We hypothesize that the performance of score-based aggregation may be affected by artificial, usually meaningless deviations consistently occurring in the input score distributions, which distort the combined result when the individual biases differ from each other. We propose a score-based rank aggregation model where the source scores are normalized to a common distribution before being combined. Early experiments on available data from several TREC collections are shown to support our proposal.
1148297	Enterprise search behaviour of software engineers Technical professionals spend ~25% of their time at work searching for information, and have specialized information needs that are not well-served by generic enterprise search tools. In this study, we investigated how a group of software engineers use a workplace search system. We identify patterns of search behaviour specific to this group and distinct from general web and intranet search patterns, and make design recommendations for search systems that will better serve the needs of this group.
1148300	Information retrieval with commonsense knowledge This paper employs ConceptNet, which covers a rich set of commonsense concepts, to retrieve images with text descriptions by focusing on spatial relationships. Evaluation on test data of the 2005 ImageCLEF shows that integrating commonsense knowledge in information retrieval is feasible.
1148305	Simple questions to improve pseudo-relevance feedback results We explore interactive methods to further improve the performance of pseudo-relevance feedback. Studies citeria suggest that new methods for tackling difficult queries are required. Our approach is to gather more information about the query from the user by asking her simple questions. The equally simple responses are used to modify the original query. Our experiments using the TREC Robust Track queries show that we can obtain a significant improvement in mean average precision averaging around 5% over pseudo-relevance feedback. This improvement is also spread across more queries compared to ordinary pseudo-relevance feedback, as suggested by geometric mean average precision.
1148306	Is XML retrieval meaningful to users?: searcher preferences for full documents vs. elements The aim of this study is to investigate whether element retrieval (as opposed to full-text retrieval) is meaningful and useful for searchers when carrying out information-seeking tasks. Our results suggest that searchers find the structural breakdown of documents useful when browsing within retrieved documents, and provide support for the usefulness of element retrieval in interactive settings.
1148307	Building a test collection for complex document information processing Research and development of information access technology for scanned paper documents has been hampered by the lack of public test collections of realistic scope and complexity. As part of a project to create a prototype system for search and mining of masses of document images, we are assembling a 1.5 terabyte dataset to support evaluation of both end-to-end complex document information processing (CDIP) tasks (e.g., text retrieval and data mining) as well as component technologies such as optical character recognition (OCR), document structure analysis, signature matching, and authorship attribution.
1148311	One-sided measures for evaluating ranked retrieval effectiveness with spontaneous conversational speech Early speech retrieval experiments focused on news broadcasts, for which adequate Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) accuracy could be obtained. Like newspapers, news broadcasts are a manually selected and arranged set of stories. Evaluation designs reflected that, using known story boundaries as a basis for evaluation. Substantial advances in ASR accuracy now make it possible to build search systems for some types of spontaneous conversational speech, but present evaluation designs continue to rely on known topic boundaries that are no longer well matched to the nature of the materials. We propose a new class of measures for speech retrieval based on manual annotation of points at which a user with specific topical interests would wish replay to begin.
1148312	Combining fields in known-item email search Emails are examples of structured documents with various fields. These fields can be exploited to enhance the retrieval effectiveness of an Information Retrieval (IR) system that mailing list archives. In recent experiments of the TREC2005 Enterprise track, various fields were applied to varying degrees of success by the participants. In his work, using a field-based weighting model, we investigate the retrieval performance attainable by each field, and examine when fields evidence should be combined or not.
1148314	Content-based video retrieval: does video's semantic visual feature matter? A new shot level video browsing method based on semantic visual features (e.g., car, mountain, and fire) is proposed to facilitate content-based retrieval. The video's binary semantic feature vector is utilized to calculate the score of similarity between two shot keyframes. The score is then used to browse the "similar" keyframes in terms of semantic visual features. A pilot user study was conducted to better understand users' behaviors in video retrieval context. Three video retrieval and browsing systems are compared: temporal neighbor, semantic visual feature, and fused browsing system. The initial results indicated that the semantic visual feature browsing was effective and efficient for Visual Centric tasks, but not for Non-visual Centric tasks.
1148316	A method of rating the credibility of news documents on the web We propose a method to rate the credibility of news articles using three clues: (1) commonality of the contents of articles among different news publishers; (2) numerical agreement versus contradiction of numerical values reported in the articles; and (3) objectivity based on subjective speculative phrases and news sources. We tested this method on news stories taken from seven different news sites on the Web. The average agreement between the system-produced "credibility" and the manual judgments of three human assessors on the 52 sample articles was 69.1%. The limitations of the current approach and future directions are discussed.
1148317	An analysis of the coupling between training set and neighborhood sizes for the k NN classifier We consider the relationship between training set size and the parameter k for the k -Nearest Neighbors ( k NN) classifier. When few examples are available, we observe that accuracy is sensitive to k and that best k tends to increase with training size. We explore the subsequent risk that k tuned on partitions will be suboptimal after aggregation and re-training. This risk is found to be most severe when little data is available. For larger training sizes, accuracy becomes increasingly stable with respect to k and the risk decreases.
1148319	Unity: relevance feedback using user query logs The exponential growth of the Web and the increasing ability of web search engines to index data have led to a problem of plenty. The number of results returned per query is typically in the order of millions of documents for many common queries. Although there is the benefit of added coverage for every query, the problem of ranking these documents and giving the best results gets worse. The problem is even more difficult in case of temporal and ambiguous queries. We try to address this problem using feedback from user query logs. We leverage a technology called Units for generating query refinements which are shown as Also try queries on Yahoo! Search. We consider these refinements as sub-concepts which help define user intent and use them to improve search relevance. The results obtained via live testing on Yahoo! Search are encouraging.
1148322	Give me just one highly relevant document: P-measure We introduce an evaluation metric called P-measure for the task of retrieving <ione highly relevant document. It models user behaviour in practical tasks such as known-item search, and is more stable and sensitive than Reciprocal Rank which cannot handle graded relevance.
1148323	Feature diversity in cluster ensembles for robust document clustering The performance of document clustering systems depends on employing optimal text representations, which are not only difficult to determine beforehand, but also may vary from one clustering problem to another. As a first step towards building robust document clusterers, a strategy based on feature diversity and cluster ensembles is presented in this work. Experiments conducted on a binary clustering problem show that our method is robust to near-optimal model order selection and able to detect constructive interactions between different document representations in the test bed.
1148327	Early precision measures: implications from the downside of blind feedback We report the statistically significant mean impacts of blind feedback, as implemented by 7 participants for the 2003 Reliable Information Access (RIA) Workshop, on 30 retrieval measures, including several primary recall measures not originally reported. We find that blind feedback was detrimental to measures focused on the first relevant item even when it boosted "early precision" measures such as mean Precision@10, implying that the conventional reporting of ad hoc precision needs enhancement.
1148329	Strict and vague interpretation of XML-retrieval queries Structural hints in XML-retrieval queries can be used to specify both the granularity of the search result (the target element) and where in a document to search (support elements). These hints might be interpreted either strictly or vaguely, but does it matter if an XML search engine interprets these in one way and the user in another? The performance of all runs submitted to INEX 2005 content and structure (CAS) tasks were measured for each of four different interpretations of CAS. Runs that perform well for one interpretation of target elements do so regardless of the interpretation of support elements; but how to interpret the target element does matter. This suggests that to perform well on all CAS queries it is necessary to know how the target structure specification should be interpreted. We extend the NEXI query language to include this, and hypothesize that using this will increase the overall performance of search engines.
1148332	A study of real-time query expansion effectiveness In this poster, we describe the study of an interface technique that provides a list of suggested additional query terms as a searcher types a search query, in effect offering interactive query expansion (IQE) options while the query is formulated. Analysis of the results shows that offering IQE during query formulation leads to better quality initial queries, and an increased uptake of query expansion. These findings have implications for how IQE should be offered in retrieval interfaces.
1148334	Measuring similarity of semi-structured documents with context weights In this work, we study similarity measures for text-centric XML documents based on an extended vector space model, which considers both document content and structure. Experimental results based on a benchmark showed superior performance of the proposed measure over the baseline which ignores structural knowledge of XML documents.
1148336	Concept-based biomedical text retrieval One challenging problem for biomedical text retrieval is to find accurate synonyms or name variants for biomedical entities. In this paper, we propose a new concept-based approach to tackle this problem. In this approach, a set of concepts instead of keywords will be extracted from a query first. Then these concepts will be used for retrieval purpose. The experiment results show that the proposed approach can boost the retrieval performance and it generates very good results on 2005 TREC Genomics data sets.
1148341	A platform for Okapi-based contextual information retrieval We present an extensible java-based platform for contextual retrieval based on the probabilistic information retrieval model. Modules for dual indexes, relevance feedback with blind or machine learning approaches and query expansion with context are integrated into the Okapi system to deal with the contextual information. This platform allows easy extension to include other types of contextual information.
1148345	Searching for expertise using the terrier platform An abstract is not available.
122865	Combining model-oriented and description-oriented approaches for probabilistic indexing An abstract is not available.
122867	Generative models for bitmap sets with compression applications: (extended abstract) An abstract is not available.
122868	Posting compression in dynamic retrieval environments An abstract is not available.
122870	The CORE electronic chemistry library An abstract is not available.
122871	Retrieval algorithm effectiveness in a wide area network information filter An abstract is not available.
122872	Distributed representations in a text based information retrieval system: a new way of using the vector space model An abstract is not available.
122875	A case-based architecture for a dialogue manager for information-seeking processes An abstract is not available.
122876	Addressing the requirements of a dynamic corporate textual information base An abstract is not available.
122878	Querying office systems about document roles An abstract is not available.
122881	Preference structure, inference and set-oriented retrieval An abstract is not available.
122886	Retrieving software objects in an example-based programming environment An abstract is not available.
122888	Incorporating a semantic analysis into a document retrieval strategy An abstract is not available.
122891	Image query processing based on multi-level signatures An abstract is not available.
122893	Automatic generation of “hyper-paths” in information retrieval systems: a stochastic and an incremental algorithms An abstract is not available.
122894	Creating segmented databases from free text for text retrieval An abstract is not available.
1277764	Laplacian optimal design for image retrieval Relevance feedback is a powerful technique to enhance Content-Based Image Retrieval (CBIR) performance. It solicits the user's relevance judgments on the retrieved images returned by the CBIR systems. The user's labeling is then used to learn a classifier to distinguish between relevant and irrelevant images. However, the top returnedimages may not be the most informative ones. The challenge is thus to determine which unlabeled images would be the most informative (i.e., improve the classifier the most) if they were labeled and used as training samples. In this paper, we propose a novel active learning algorithm, called Laplacian Optimal Design (LOD), for relevance feedback image retrieval. Our algorithm is based on aregression model which minimizes the least square error on the measured (or, labeled) images and simultaneously preserves the local geometrical structure of the image space. Specifically, we assume that if two images are sufficiently close to each other, then their measurements (or, labels) are close as well. By constructing a nearest neighbor graph, the geometrical structure of the image space can be described by the graph Laplacian. We discuss how results from the field of optimal experimental design may be used to guide our selection of a subset of images, which gives us the most amount of information. Experimental results on Corel database suggest that theproposed approach achieves higher precision in relevance feedback image retrieval.
1277782	Multiple-signal duplicate detection for search evaluation We consider the problem of duplicate document detection for search evaluation. Given a query and a small number of web results for that query, we show how to detect duplicate web documents with precision ~0.91 and recall ~77. In contrast, Charikar's algorithm, designed for duplicate detection in an indexing pipeline, achieves precision ~0.91 but with a recall of ~0.58. Our improvement in recall while maintaining high precision comes from combining three ideas. First, because we are only concerned with duplicate detection among results for the same query, the number of pairwise comparisons is small. Therefore we can afford to compute multiple pairwise signals for each pair of documents. A model learned with standard machine-learning techniques improves recall to ~0.68 with precision ~0.90. Second, most duplicate detection has focused on text analysis of the HTML contents of a document. In some web pages the HTML is not a good indicator of the final contents of the page. We use extended fetching techniques to fill in frames and execute Java script. Including signals based on our richer fetches further improves the recall to ~0.75 and the precision to ~0.91. Finally, we also explore using signals based on the query. Comparing contextual snippets based on the richer fetches improves the recall to ~0.77. We show that the overall accuracy of this final model approaches that of human judges.
1277786	Supporting multiple information-seeking strategies in a single system framework This paper reports on an experiment comparing the retrieval effectiveness of an interactive information retrieval (IIR) system which adapts to support different information seeking strategies, with that of a standard baseline IIR system. The experiment, with 32 subjects each searching on 8 different topics, indicates that using the integrated IIR system resulted in significantly better performance, including user satisfaction with search results, significantly more effective interaction, and significantly better usability than using the baseline system.
1277799	Deconstructing nuggets: the stability and reliability of complex question answering evaluation A methodology based on "information nuggets" has recently emerged as the de facto standard by which answers to complex questions are evaluated. After several implementations in the TREC question answering tracks, the community has gained a better understanding of its many characteristics. This paper focuses on one particular aspect of the evaluation: the human assignment of nuggets to answer strings, which serves as the basis of the F-score computation. As a byproduct of the TREC 2006 ciQA task, identical answer strings were independently evaluated twice, which allowed us to assess the consistency of human judgments. Based on these results, we explored simulations of assessor behavior that provide a method to quantify scoring variations. Understanding these variations in turn lets researchers be more confident in their comparisons of systems.
1277800	Interesting nuggets and their impact on definitional question answering Current approaches to identifying definitional sentences in the context of Question Answering mainly involve the use of linguistic or syntactic patterns to identify informative nuggets. This is insufficient as they do not address the novelty factor that a definitional nugget must also possess. This paper proposes to address the deficiency by building a "Human Interest Model" from external knowledge. It is hoped that such a model will allow the computation of human interest in the sentence with respect to the topic. We compare and contrast our model with current definitional question answering models to show that interestingness plays an important factor in definitional question answering.
1277804	On the robustness of relevance measures with incomplete judgments We investigate the robustness of three widely used IR relevance measures for large data collections with incomplete judgments. The relevance measures we consider are the bpref measure introduced by Buckley and Voorhees [7], the inferred average precision (infAP) introduced by Aslam and Yilmaz [4], and the normalized discounted cumulative gain (NDCG) measure introduced by Järvelin and Kekäläinen [8]. Our main results show that NDCG consistently performs better than both bpref and infAP. The experiments are performed on standard TREC datasets, under different levels of incompleteness of judgments, and using two different evaluation methods, namely, the Kendall correlation measures order between system rankings and pairwise statistical significance testing; the latter may be of independent interest.
1277829	Updating collection representations for federated search To facilitate the search for relevant information across a setof online distributed collections, a federated information retrieval system typically represents each collection, centrally, by a set of vocabularies or sampled documents. Accurate retrieval is therefore related to how precise each representation reflects the underlying content stored in that collection. As collections evolve over time, collection representations should also be updated to reflect any change, however, a current solution has not yet been proposed. In this study we examine both the implications of out-of-date representation sets on retrieval accuracy, as well as proposing three different policies for managing necessary updates. Each policyis evaluated on a testbed of forty-four dynamic collections over an eight-week period. Our findings show that out-of-date representations significantly degrade performance overtime, however, adopting a suitable update policy can minimise this problem.
1277840	A new approach for evaluating query expansion: query-document term mismatch The effectiveness of information retrieval (IR) systems is influenced by the degree of term overlap between user queries and relevant documents. Query-document term mismatch, whether partial or total, is a fact that must be dealt with by IR systems. Query Expansion (QE) is one method for dealing with term mismatch. IR systems implementing query expansion are typically evaluated by executing each query twice, with and without query expansion, and then comparing the two result sets. While this measures an overall change in performance, it does not directly measure the effectiveness of IR systems in overcoming the inherent issue of term mismatch between the query and relevant documents, nor does it provide any insight into how such systems would behave in the presence of query-document term mismatch. In this paper, we propose a new approach for evaluating query expansion techniques. The proposed approach is attractive because it provides an estimate of system performance under varying degrees of query-document term mismatch, it makes use of readily available test collections, and it does not require any additional relevance judgments or any form of manual processing.
1277844	Enhancing relevance scoring with chronological term rank We introduce a new relevance scoring technique that enhances existing relevance scoring schemes with term position information. This technique uses chronological term rank (CTR) which captures the positions of terms as they occur in the sequence of words in a document. CTR is both conceptually and computationally simple when compared to other approaches that use document structure information, such as term proximity, term order and document features. CTR works well when paired with Okapi BM25. We evaluate the performance of various combinations of CTR with Okapi BM25 in order to identify the most effective formula. We then compare the performance of the selected approach against the performance of existing methods such as Okapi BM25, pivoted length normalization and language models. Significant improvements are seen consistently across a variety of TREC data and topic sets, measured by the major retrieval performance metrics. This seems to be the first use of this statistic for relevance scoring. There is likely to be greater retrieval improvements possible using chronological term rank enhanced methods in future work.
1277848	Improving text classification for oral history archives with temporal domain knowledge This paper describes two new techniques for increasing the accuracy oftopic label assignment to conversational speech from oral history interviews using supervised machine learning in conjunction with automatic speech recognition. The first, time-shifted classification, leverages local sequence information from the order in which the story is told. The second, temporal label weighting, takes the complementary perspective by using the position within an interview to bias label assignment probabilities. These methods, when used in combination, yield between 6% and 15% relative improvements in classification accuracy using a clipped R-precision measure that models the utility of label sets as segment summaries in interactive speech retrieval applications.
1277849	Indexing confusion networks for morph-based spoken document retrieval In this paper, we investigate methods for improving the performance of morph-based spoken document retrieval in Finnish by extracting relevant index terms from confusion networks. Our approach uses morpheme-like subword units ("morphs") for recognition and indexing. This alleviates the problem of out-of-vocabulary words, especially with inflectional languages like Finnish. Confusion networks offer a convenient representation of alternative recognition candidates by aligning mutually exclusive terms and by giving the posterior probability of each term. The rank of the competing terms and their posterior probability is used to estimate term frequency for indexing. Comparing against 1-best recognizer transcripts, we show that retrieval effectiveness is significantly improved. Finally, the effect of pruning in recognition is analyzed, showing that when recognition speed is increased, the reduction in retrieval performance due to the increase in the 1-best error rate can be compensated by using confusion networks.
1277852	Detecting, categorizing and clustering entity mentions in Chinese text The work presented in this paper is motivated by the practical need for content extraction, and the available data source and evaluation benchmark from the ACE program. The Chinese Entity Detection and Recognition (EDR) task is of particular interest to us. This task presents us several language-independent and language-dependent challenges, e.g. rising from the complication of extraction targets and the problem of word segmentation, etc. In this paper, we propose a novel solution to alleviate the problems special in the task. Mention detection takes advantages of machine learning approaches and character-based models. It manipulates different types of entities being mentioned and different constitution units (i.e. extents and heads) separately. Mentions referring to the same entity are linked together by integrating most-specific-first and closest-first rule based pairwise clustering algorithms. Types of mentions and entities are determined by head-driven classification approaches. The implemented system achieves ACE value of 66.1 when evaluated on the EDR 2005 Chinese corpus, which has been one of the top-tier results. Alternative approaches to mention detection and clustering are also discussed and analyzed.
1277859	Using gradient descent to optimize language modeling smoothing parameters An abstract is not available.
1277860	Locality discriminating indexing for document classification This paper introduces a locality discriminating indexing (LDI) algorithm for document classification. Based on the hypothesis that samples from different classes reside in class-specific manifold structures, LDI seeks for a projection which best preserves the within-class local structures while suppresses the between-class overlap. Comparative experiments show that the proposed method isable to derives compact discriminating document representations for classification.
1277863	Revisiting the dependence language model for information retrieval In this paper, we revisit the dependence language modelfor information retrieval proposed in [1], and show that thismodel is deficient from a theoretical point of view. We thenpropose a new model, well founded theoretically, for integratingdependencies between terms in the language model.This new model is simpler, yet more general, than the oneproposed in [1], and yields similar results in our experiments,on both syntactic and semantic dependencies.
1277864	Quantify query ambiguity using ODP metadata Query ambiguity prevents existing retrieval systems from returning reasonable results for every query. As there is already lots of work done on resolving ambiguity, vague queries could be handled using corresponding approaches separately if they can be identified in advance. Quantification of the degree of (lack of) ambiguity laysthe groundwork for the identification. In this poster, we propose such a measure using query topics based on the topic structure selected from the Open Directory Project (ODP) taxonomy. We introduce clarity score to quantify the lack of ambiguity with respect to data sets constructed from the TREC collections and the rank correlation test results demonstrate a strong positive association between the clarity scores and retrieval precisions for queries.
1277869	Exploration of the tradeoff between effectiveness and efficiency for results merging in federated search Federated search is the task of retrieving relevant documents from different information resources. One of the main research problems in federated search is to combine the results from different sources into a single ranked list. Recent work proposed a regression based method to download some documents from each ranked list of the different sources, calculated comparable scores for the documents and estimated mapping functions that transform source-specific scores into comparable scores. Experiments have shown that downloading more documents improves the accuracy of results merging. However downloading more documents increases the computation and communication costs. This paper proposes a utility based optimization method that enables the system to automatically decide on the desired number of training documents to download according to the user's need for effectiveness and efficiency.
1277871	An effective snippet generation method using the pseudo relevance feedback technique A (page or web) snippet is document excerpts allowing a user to understand if a document is indeed relevant without accessing it. This paper proposes an effective snippet generation method. The pseudo relevance feedback technique and text summarization techniques are applied to salient sentences extraction for generating good quality snippets. In the experimental results, the proposed method showed much better performance than other methods including Google and Naver.
1277872	Probability ranking principle via optimal expected rank This paper presents a new perspective of the probability ranking principle (PRP) by defining retrieval effectiveness in terms of our novel expected rank measure of a set of documents for a particular query. This perspective is based on preserving decision preferences, and it imposes weaker conditions on PRP than the utility-theoretic perspective of PRP.
1277874	Confluence : enhancing contextual desktop search We present Confluence , an enhancement to a desktop file search tool called Confluence which extracts conceptual relationships between files by their temporal access patterns in the file system. A limitation of a purely file-based approach is that as file operations are increasingly abstracted by applications, their correlation to a user's activity weakens and thereby reduces the applicability of their temporal patterns. To deal with this problem, we augment the file event stream with a stream of window focus events from the UI layer. We present 3 algorithms that analyze this new stream, extracting the user's task information which informs the existing Confluence algorithms. We present results and conclusions from a preliminary user study on Confluence.
1277877	Where to start reading a textual XML document? In structured information retrieval, the aim is to exploit document structure to retrieve relevant components, allowing the user to go straight to the relevant material. This paper looks at the so-called best entry points (BEPs), which are intended to give the user the best starting point to access the relevant information in the document. We examine the relationship between BEPs and relevant components in the INEX 2006 ad hoc assessments. Our main findings are the following: First, although documents are short, assessors often choose the best entry point some distance from the start of the document. Second, many of the best entry points coincide with the first relevant character in relevant documents, showing a strong relation between the BEP and relevant text. Third, we find browsing BEPs in articles with a single relevant passages, and container BEPs or context BEPs in articles with more relevant passages.
1277879	Intra-assessor consistency in question answering In this paper we investigate the consistency of answer assessment in a complex question answering task examining features of assessor consistency, types of answers and question type.
1277880	Towards robust query expansion: model selection in the language modeling framework We propose a language-model-based approach for addressing the performance robustness problem -- with respect to free-parameters' values -- of pseudo-feedback-based query-expansion methods. Given a query, we create a set of language models representing different forms of its expansion by varying the parameters' values of some expansion method; then, we select a single model using criteria originally proposed for evaluating the performance of using the original query, or for deciding whether to employ expansion at all. Experimental results show that these criteria are highly effective in selecting relevance language models that are not only significantly more effective than poor performing ones, but that also yield performance that is almost indistinguishable from that of manually optimized relevance models.
1277883	Evaluating discourse-based answer extraction for why -question answering An abstract is not available.
1277885	Lexical analysis for modeling web query reformulation Modeling Web query reformulation processes is still an unsolved problem. In this paper we argue that lexical analysis is highly beneficial for this purpose. We propose to use the variation in Query Clarity, as well as the Part-Of-Speech pattern transitions as indicators of user's search actions. Experiments with a log of 2.4 million queries showed our techniques to be more flexible than the current approaches, while also providing us with interesting insights into user's Web behavioral patterns.
1277886	Bridging the digital divide: understanding information access practices in an indian village community For digital library and information retrieval technologies to provide solutions for bridging the digital divide in developing countries, we need to understand the information access practices of remote and often poor communities in these countries. We must understand the information needs of these communities, and the best means to provide them access to relevant information. To this end, we investigated the current information access practices in an Indian village.
1277887	BordaConsensus: a new consensus function for soft cluster ensembles Consensus clustering is the task of deriving a single labeling by applying a consensus function on a cluster ensemble. This work introduces BordaConsensus, a new consensus function for soft cluster ensembles based on the Borda voting scheme. In contrast to classic, hard consensus functions that operate on labelings, our proposal considers cluster membership information, thus being able to tackle multiclass clustering problems. Initial small scale experiments reveal that, compared to state-of-the-art consensus functions, BordaConsensus constitutes a good performance vs. complexity trade-off.
1277890	Evaluating relevant in context: document retrieval with a twist The Relevant in Context retrieval task is document or article retrieval with a twist, where not only the relevant articles should be retrieved but also the relevant information within each article (captured by a set of XML elements) should be correctly identified. Our main research question is: how to evaluate the Relevant in Context task? We propose a generalized average precision measure that meets two main requirements: i) the score reflects the ranked list of articles inherent in the result list, and at the same time ii) the score also reflects how well the retrieved information per article (i.e., the set of elements) corresponds to the relevant information. The resulting measure was used at INEX 2006.
1277891	IDF revisited: a simple new derivation within the Robertson-Spärck Jones probabilistic model There have been a number of prior attempts to theoretically justify the effectiveness of the inverse document frequency (IDF). Those that take as their starting point Robertson and Sparck Jones's probabilistic model are based on strong or complex assumptions. We show that a more intuitively plausible assumption suffices. Moreover, the new assumption, while conceptually very simple, provides a solution to an estimation problem that had been deemed intractable by Robertson and Walker (1997).
1277892	Validity and power of t-test for comparing MAP and GMAP We examine the validity and power of the t-test, Wilcoxon test, and sign test in determining whether or not the difference in performance between two IR systems is significant. Empirical tests conducted on subsets of the TREC2004 Robust Retrieval collection indicate that the p-values computed by these tests for the difference in mean average precision (MAP) between two systems are very accurate fora wide range of sample sizes and significance estimates. Similarly, these tests have good power, with the t-test proving superior overall. The t-test is also valid for comparing geometric mean average precision (GMAP), exhibiting slightly superior accuracy and slightly inferior power than for MAPcomparison.
1277899	VideoReach: an online video recommendation system This paper presents a novel online video recommendation system called VideoReach , which alleviates users' efforts on finding the most relevant videos according to current viewings without a sufficient collection of user profiles as required in traditional recommenders. In this system, video recommendation is formulated as finding a list of relevant videos in terms of multimodal relevance (i.e. textual, visual, and aural relevance) and user click-through. Since different videos have different intra-weights of relevance within an individual modality and inter-weights among different modalities, we adopt relevance feedback to automatically find optimal weights by user click-though, as well as an attention fusion function to fuse multimodal relevance. We use 20 clips as the representative test videos, which are searched by top 10 queries from more than 13 k online videos, and report superior performance compared with an existing video site.
1277903	A multi-criteria content-based filtering system In this paper we present a novel filtering system, based on a new model which reshapes the aims of content-based filtering. The filtering system has been developed within the EC project PENG, aimed at providing news professionals, such as journalists, with a system supporting both filtering and retrieval capabilities. In particular, we suggest that in tackling the problem of information overload, it is necessary for filtering systems to take into account multiple aspects of incoming documents in order to estimate their relevance to a user's profile, and in order to help users better understand documents, as distinct from solely attempting to either select relevant material from a stream, or block inappropriate material. Aiming to so this, a filtering model based on multiple criteria has been defined, based on the ideas gleamed in the project requirements stage. The filtering model is briefly described in this paper.
1277904	Boosting static pruning of inverted files This paper revisits the static term-based pruning technique presented in Carmel et al., SIGIR 2001 for ad-hoc retrieval, addressing different issues concerning its algorithmic design not yet taken into account. Although the original technique is able to retain precision when a considerable part of the inverted file is removed, we show that it is possible to improve precision in some scenarios if some key design features are properly selected.
1277908	A comparison of pooled and sampled relevance judgments Test collections are most useful when they are reusable, that is, when they can be reliably used to rank systems that did not contribute to the pools. Pooled relevance judgments for very large collections may not be reusable for two easons: they will be very sparse and not sufficiently complete, and they may be biased in the sense that theywill unfairly rank some class of systems. The TREC 2006 terabyte track judged both a pool and a deep random sample in order to measure the effects of sparseness and bias.
1277910	Estimating collection size with logistic regression Collection size is an important feature to represent the content summaries of a collection, and plays a vital role in collection selection for distributed search. In uncooperative environments, collection size estimation algorithms are adopted to estimate the sizes of collections with their search interfaces. This paper proposes heterogeneous capture (HC) algorithm, in which the capture probabilities of documents are modeled with logistic regression. With heterogeneous capture probabilities, HC algorithm estimates collection size through conditional maximum likelihood. Experimental results on real web data show that our HC algorithm outperforms both multiple capture-recapture and capture history algorithms.
1277911	Selection and ranking of text from highly imperfect transcripts for retrieval of video content In the domain of video content retrieval, we present an approach for selecting words and phrases from highly imperfect automatically generated transcripts. Extracted terms are ranked according to their descriptiveness and presented to the user in a multimedia browser interface. We use sense querying from the WordNet lexical database for our method of text selection and ranking. Evaluation of 679 video summarization tasks from 442 users shows that the method of ranking and emphasizing terms according to descriptiveness results in higher accuracy responses in less time compared to the baseline of no ranking.
1277915	Fine-grained named entity recognition and relation extraction for question answering An abstract is not available.
1277916	World knowledge in broad-coverage information filtering An abstract is not available.
1277917	The influence of basic tokenization on biomedical document retrieval Tokenization is a fundamental preprocessing step in Information Retrieval systems in which text is turned into index terms. This paper quantifies and compares the influence of various simple tokenization techniques on document retrieval effectiveness in two domains: biomedicine and news. As expected, biomedical retrieval is more sensitive to small changes in the tokenization method. The tokenization strategy can make the difference between a mediocre and well performing IR system, especially in the biomedical domain.
1277918	Using clustering to enhance text classification This paper addresses the problem of learning to classify textsby exploiting information derived from clustering both training and testing sets. The incorporation of knowledge resulting from clustering into the feature space representation of the texts is expected to boost the performance of a classifier. Experiments conducted on several widely used datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm especially for small training sets.
1277919	A fact/opinion classifier for news articles Many online news/blog aggregators like Google, Yahoo and MSN allow users to browse/search many hundreds of news sources. This results in dozens, often hundreds, of stories about the same event. While the news aggregators cluster these stories, allowing the user to efficiently scan the major news items at any given time, they do not currently allow alternative browsing mechanisms within the clusters. Furthermore, their intra-cluster ranking mechanisms are often based on a notion of authority/popularity of the source. In many cases, this leads to the classic power law phenomenon -- the popular stories/sources are the ones that are already popular/authoritative, thus reinforcing one dominant viewpoint. Ideally, these aggregators would exploit the availability of the tremendous number of sources to identify the various dominant threads or viewpoints about a story and highlight these threads for the users. This paper presents an initial limited approach to such an interface: it classifies articles into two categories: fact and opinion. We show that the combination of (i) a classifier trained on a small (140K) training set of editorials/reports and (ii) an interactive user interface that ameliorates classification errors by re-ordering the presentation can be effective in highlighting different underlying viewpoints in a story-cluster. We briefly discuss the classifier used here, the training set and the UI and report on some initial anecdotal user feedback and evaluation.
1277920	Matching resumes and jobs based on relevance models We investigate the difficult problem of matching semi-structured resumes and jobs in a large scale real-world collection. We compare standard approaches to Structured Relevance Models (SRM), an extensionof relevance-based language model for modeling and retrieving semi-structured documents. Preliminary experiments show that the SRM approach achieved promising performance and performed better than typical unstructured relevance models.
1277922	A comparison of sentence retrieval techniques Identifying redundant information in sentences is useful for several applications such as summarization, document provenance, detecting text reuse and novelty detection. The task of identifying redundant information in sentences is defined as follows: Given a query sentence the task is to retrieve sentences from a given collection that express all or some subset of the information present in the query sentence. Sentence retrieval techniques rank sentences based on some measure of their similarity to a query. The effectiveness of such techniques depends on the similarity measure used to rank sentences. An effective retrieval model should be able to handle low word overlap between query and candidate sentences and go beyond just word overlap. Simple language modeling techniques like query likelihood retrieval have outperformed TF-IDF and word overlap based methods for ranking sentences. In this paper, we compare the performance of sentence retrieval using different language modeling techniques for the problem of identifying redundant information.
1277923	High-dimensional visual vocabularies for image retrieval In this paper we formulate image retrieval by text query as a vector space classification problem. This is achieved by creating a high-dimensional visual vocabulary that represents the image documents in great detail. We show how the representation of these image documents enables the application of well known text retrieval techniques such as Rocchio tf-idf and naíve Bayes to the semantic image retrieval problem. We tested these methods on a Corel images subset and achieve state-of-the-art retrieval performance using the proposed methods.
1277926	Finding similar experts The task of finding people who are experts on a topic has recently received increased attention. We introduce a different expert finding task for which a small number of example experts is given (instead of a natural language query), and the system's task is to return similar experts . We define, compare, and evaluate a number of ways of representing experts, and investigate how the size of theinitial example set affects performance. We show that morefine-grained representations of candidates result in higher performance, and larger sample sets as input lead to improved precision.
1277930	Random walk term weighting for information retrieval We present a way of estimating term weights for Information Retrieval (IR), using term co-occurrence as a measure of dependency between terms.We use the random walk graph-based ranking algorithm on a graph that encodes terms and co-occurrence dependencies in text, from which we derive term weights that represent a quantification of how a term contributes to its context. Evaluation on two TREC collections and 350 topics shows that the random walk-based term weights perform at least comparably to the traditional tf-idf term weighting, while they outperform it when the distance between co-occurring terms is between 6 and 30 terms.
1277931	Comparing query logs and pseudo-relevance feedbackfor web-search query refinement Query logs and pseudo-relevance feedback (PRF) offer ways in which terms to refine Web searchers' queries can be selected, offered to searchers, and used to improve search effectiveness. In this poster we present a study of these techniques that aims to characterize the degree of similarity between them across a set of test queries, and the same set broken out by query type. The results suggest that: (i) similarity increases with the amount of evidence provided to the PRF algorithm, (ii) similarity is higherwhen titles/snippets are used for PRF than full-text, and (iii) similarity is higher for navigational than informational queries. The findings have implications for the combined usage of query logs and PRF in generating query refinement alternatives.
1277934	Power and bias of subset pooling strategies We define a method to estimate the random and systematic errors resulting from incomplete relevance assessments.Mean Average Precision (MAP) computed over a large number of topics with a shallow assessment pool substantially outperforms -- for the same adjudication effort MAP computed over fewer topics with deeper pools, and P@k computed with pools of the same depth. Move-to-front pooling,previously reported to yield substantially better rank correlation, yields similar power, and lower bias, compared tofixed-depth pooling.
1277935	Problems with Kendall's tau This poster describes a potential problem with a relatively well used measure in Information Retrieval research: Kendall's Tau rank correlation coefficient. The coefficient is best known for its use in determining the similarity of test collections when ranking sets of retrieval runs. Threshold values for the coefficient have been defined and used in a number of published studies in information retrieval. However, this poster presents results showing that basing decisions on such thresholds is not as reliableas has been assumed.
1277947	Using similarity links as shortcuts to relevant web pages Successful navigation from a relevant web page to other relevant pages depends on the page linking to other relevant pages. We measured the distance to travel from relevant page to relevant page and found a bimodal distribution of distances peaking at 4 and 15 hops. In an attempt to make it easier to navigate among relevant pages, we added content similarity links to pages. With these additional links, significantly more relevant documents were close to each other. A browser plug-in or other tool that provides links to pages similar to a given page should increase the ability of web users to find relevant pages via navigation.
1277949	TimedTextRank: adding the temporal dimension to multi-document summarization Graph-ranking based algorithms (e.g. TextRank) have been proposed for multi-document summarization in recent years. However, these algorithms miss an important dimension, the temporal dimension, for summarizing evolving topics. For an evolving topic, recent documents are usually more important than earlier documents because recent documents contain much more novel information than earlier documents and a novelty-oriented summary should be more appropriate to reflect the changing topic. We propose the TimedTextRank algorithm to make use of the temporal information of documents based on the graph-ranking based algorithm. A preliminary study is performed to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed TimedTextRank algorithm for dynamic multi-document summarization.
1277950	Winnowing wheat from the chaff: propagating trust to sift spam from the web The Web today includes many pages intended to deceive search engines, and attain an unwarranted result ranking. Since the links among web pages are used to calculate authority, ranking systems would benefit from knowing which pages contain content to be trusted and which do not. We propose and compare various trust propagation methods to estimate the trustworthiness of each page. We find that a non-trust-preserving propagation method is able to achieve close to a fifty percent improvement over TrustRank in separating spam from non-spam pages.
1277955	Using collaborative queries to improve retrieval for difficult topics We describe a preliminary analysis of queries created by 81 users for 4 topics from the TREC Robust Track. Our goal was to explore the potential benefits of using queries created by multiple users on retrieval performance for difficult topics. We first examine the overlap in users' queries and the overlap in results with respect to different queries for the same topic. We then explore the potential benefits of combining users' queries in various ways. Our results provide some evidence that having access to multiple users' queries can improve retrieval for individual searchers and for difficult topics.
1277956	Retrieval of discussions from enterprise mailing lists Mailing list archives in an enterprise are a valuable source for employees to dig into the past proceedings of the organization that could be relevant to their present task. Going through the proceedings of discussions about certain topics might be cumbersome and regular search techniques might not work in this context due to the genre that the documents belong to. In this paper, we propose methods, based on theory of subjectivity, to retrieve email messages that could contain argumentative discussions about the topic that the user is interested in.
1277961	Large-scale cluster-based retrieval experiments on Turkish texts We present cluster-based retrieval (CBR) experiments on the largest available Turkish document collection. Our experiments evaluate retrieval effectiveness and efficiency on both an automatically generated clustering structure and a manual classification of documents. In particular, we compare CBR effectiveness with full-text search (FS) and evaluate several implementation alternatives for CBR. Our findings reveal that CBR yields comparable effectiveness figures with FS. Furthermore, by using a specifically tailored cluster-skipping inverted index we significantly improve in-memory query processing efficiency of CBR in comparison to other traditional CBR techniques and even FS.
1277968	X-Site: a workplace search tool for software engineers Professionals in the workplace need high-precision search tools capable of retrieving information that is useful and appropriate to the task at hand. One approach to identifying content, which is not only relevant but also useful, is to make use of the task context of the search. We present X-Site, an enterprise search engine for the software engineering domain that exploits relationships between user's tasks and document genres in the collection to improve retrieval precision.
1277971	Radio Oranje: searching the queen's speech(es) The 'Radio Oranje' demonstrator shows an attractive multimedia user experience in the cultural heritage domain based on a collection of mono-media audio documents. It supports online search and browsing of the collection using indexing techniques, specialized content visualizations and a related photo database.
1277976	Search results using timeline visualizations An abstract is not available.
1277977	Wikipedia in the pocket: indexing technology for near-duplicate detection and high similarity search We develop and implement a new indexing technology which allows us to use complete (and possibly very large) documents as queries, while having a retrieval performance comparable to a standard term query. Our approach aims at retrieval tasks such as near duplicate detection and high similarity search. To demonstrate the performance of our technology we have compiled the search index "Wikipedia in the Pocket", which contains about 2 million English and German Wikipedia articles. 1 This index--along with a search interface--fits on a conventional CD (0.7 gigabyte). The ingredients of our indexing technology are similarity hashing and minimal perfect hashing.
1277985	People search in the enterprise An abstract is not available.
1277987	Attention-based information retrieval In the proposed PhD thesis, it will be examined how attention data from the user, especially generated by an eye tracker, can be exploited in order to enhance and personalize information retrieval methods.
133171	Measuring the informativeness of a retrieval process Evaluation of information retrieval systems should be based on measures of the information provided by the retrieval process, “informativeness” measures which take into account the interactive and full-text nature of present-day systems and the different types of questions which are asked of them. Desirable properties for an informativeness measure are developed, including context sensitivity, user centrality, and logarithmic response. A hypergraph-based framework for measuring the informativeness of a retrieval process is presented and a measure developed which satisfies the desired properties. The measure is compared to previously developed information measures and illustrated via an application.
133175	Automatic document classification: natural language processing, statistical analysis, and expert system techniques used together In this paper we describe an automated method of classifying research project descriptions: a human expert classifies a sample set of projects into a set of disjoint and pre-defined classes, and then the computer learns from this sample how to classify new projects into these classes. Both textual and non-textual information associated with the projects are used in the learning and classification phases. Textual information is processed by two methods of analysis: a natural language analysis followed by a statistical analysis. Non-textual information is processed by a symbolic learning technique. We present the results of some experiments done on real data: two different classifications of our research projects.
133179	Term position ranking: some new test results Presents seven sets of laboratory results testing variables in term position ranking which produce a phrase effect by weighting the distance between proximate terms. Results of the 73 tests conducted by this project are included, covering variant term position algorithms, sentence boundaries, stopword counting, every pairs testing, field selection, and combinations of algorithm including collection frequency, record frequency and searcher weighted. The discussion includes the results of tests by Fagan and by Croft, the need for term stemming, proximity as a precision device, comparisons with Boolean, and the quality of test collections.
133186	A textual object management system Computer programs that access significant amounts of text usually include code that manipulates the textual objects that comprise it. Such programs include electronic mail readers, typesetters and, in particular, full-text information retrieval systems. Such code is often unsatisfying in that access to textual objects is either efficient, or flexible, but not both. A programming language like Awk or Perl provides very general facilities for describing textual objects, but at the cost of rescanning the text for every textual object. At the other extreme, full-text information retrieval systems usually offer access to a very limited number of kinds of textual objects, but this access is very efficient. The system described in this paper is a programming tool for managing textual objects. It provides a great deal of flexibility, giving access to very complex document structure, with a large number of constituent kinds of textual objects. Further, it provides access to these objects very efficiently, both in terms of time and auxiliary space, by being very careful to access secondary storage only when absolutely necessary.
133190	An analysis of vector space models based on computational geometry This paper analyzes the properties, structures and limitations of vector-based models for information retrieval from the computational geometry point of view. It is shown that both the pseudo-cosine and the standard vector space models can be viewed as special cases of a generalized linear model. More importantly, both the necessary and sufficient conditions have been identified, under which ranking functions such as the inner-product, cosine, pseudo-cosine, Dice, covariance and product-moment correlation measures can be used to rank the documents. The structure of the solution region for acceptable ranking is analyzed and an algorithm for finding all the solution vectors is suggested.
133195	N-Poisson document modelling This paper is a report of a study investigating the validity of the Multiple Poisson ( nP ) model of word distribution in document collections. An nP distribution is a mixture of n Poisson distributions with different means. We describe a practical algorithm for determining if a certain word is distributed acording to an nP distribution and computing the distribution parameters. The algorithm was applied to every word in four different document collections. It was found that over 70% of frequently occurring words and terms indeed behave according to the nP distributions. The results indicate that the proportion of nP words depends on the collection size, document length and the frequency of the individual words. Most of the nP words recognised are distributed according to the mixture of relatively few single Poisson distributions (two, three or four). There is an indication that the number of single Poisson components in the mixture of relatively few single Poisson distributions (two, three or four). There is an indication that the number of single Poisson components in the mixture depends on the collection frequency of words.
133197	An incrementally extensible document retrieval system based on linguistic and logical principles Most natural language based document retrieval systems use the syntax structures of constituent phrases of documents as index terms. Many of these systems also attempt to reduce the syntactic variability of natural language by some normalisation procedure applied to these syntax structures. However, the retrieval performance of such systems remains fairly disappointing. Some systems therefore use a meaning representation language to index and retrieve documents. In this paper, a system is presented that uses Horn Clause Logic as meaning representation language, employs advanced techniques from natural Language Processing to achieve incremental extensibility, and uses methods from Logic Programming to achieve robustness in the face of insufficient data.
133203	A loosely-coupled integration of a text retrieval system and an object-oriented database system Document management systems are needed for many business applications. This type of system would combine the functionality of a database system, (for describing, storing and maintaining documents with complex structure and relationships) with a text retrieval system (for effective retrieval based on full text). The retrieval model for a document management system is complicated by the variety and complexity of the objects that are represented. In this paper, we describe an approach to complex object retrieval using a probabilistic inference net model, and an implementation of this approach using a loose coupling of an object-oriented database system (IRIS) and a text retrieval system based on inference nets (INQUERY). The resulting system is used to store long, structured documents and can retrieve document components (sections, figures, etc.) based on their contents or the contents of related components. The lessons learnt from the implementation are discussed.
133207	Design of an OPAC database to permit different subject searching accesses in a multi-disciplines universities library catalogue database This paper presents searching approaches and user interface capabilities of DUO, an Online Public Access Catalogue (OPAC) designed to permit the users of three Universities of the Northeast of Italy different subject searching accesses to the co-operative multi-disciplines library catalogue database. The co-operative catalogue database is managed by one of the software systems developed under the italian national project for library automation: the SBN project. Since the SBN database has not been designed to be efficiently accessed for end-user searches, the DUO database has been designed to avoid duplication of the SBN database data and to be usable for making efficient subjects accesses to the catalogue documents. The DUO design choices are presented, in particular the main choice of designing a “virtual” document that corresponds to each SBN document and that has unstructured data usable for subject search purposes. The paper presents a new kind of user-OPAC dialogue that makes available to the user different search approaches and on-line dictionaries. In particular the user during the interaction with the search tool can represent his information needs with the support of interface capabilities that are based on retrieval path history, and words and codes on-line dictionaries. DUO is the first Italian OPAC that has been made openly available to users of universities and research institutions. For this reason, it is also the first time that OPAC log data is going to be collected in Italy. This work mainly intends to make a modern OPAC available to the users of a SBN catalogue database, but it is going to permit also to build up a knowledge on OPAC usage in Italy.
133208	Searching for historical word-forms in a database of 17th-century English text using spelling-correction methods This paper discusses the application of algorithmic spelling-correction techniques to the identification of those words in a database of 17 th century English text that are most similar to a query word in modern English. The experiments have used n -gram matching, non-phonetic coding and dynamic programming methods for spelling correction, and have demonstrated that high-recall searches can be carried out, although some of the searches are very demanding of computational resources. The methods are, in principle, applicable to historical texts in many languages and from many diffeent periods.
133209	A faster algorithm for constructing minimal perfect hash functions Our previous research on one-probe access to large collections of data indexed by alphanumeric keys has produced the first practical minimal perfect hash functions for this problem. Here, a new algorithm is described for quickly finding minimal perfect hash functions whose specification space is very close to the theoretical lower bound, i.e., around 2 bits per key. The various stages of processing are detailed, along with analytical and empirical results, including timing for a set of over 3.8 million keys that was processed on a NeXTstation in about 6 hours.
133211	Frame-sliced partitioned parallel signature files The retrieval capabilities of the signature file access method have become very attractive for many data processing applications dealing with both formatted and unformatted data. However, performance is still a problem, mainly when large files are used and fast response required. In this paper, a high performance signature file organization is proposed, integrating the latest developments both in storage structure and parallel computing architectures. It combines horizontal and vertical approaches to the signature file fragmentation. In this way, a new, mixed decomposition scheme, particularly suitable for parallel implementation, is achieved. The organization, based on this fragmentation scheme, is called Fragmented Signature File . Performance analysis shows that this organization provides very good and relatively stable performance, covering the full range of possible queries. For the same degree of parallelism, it outperforms any other parallel signature file organization that has been defined so far. The proposed method also has other important advantages concerning processing of dynamic files, adaptability to the number of available processors, load balancing, and, to some extent, fault-tolerant query processing.
133212	Cognitive differences in end user searching of a CD-ROM index Cognitive abilities of fifty university students were tested using eight tests from the Kit of Factor-Referenced Cognitive Tests. All students searched for references on the same topic using a standard computerized index, and performance in the searches was analyzed using a variety of measures. Effects for cognitive differences, as well as for differences in demographic characteristics and knowledge, were identified using multiple regression. Perceptual speed had an effect on the quality of searches, and logical reasoning, verbal comprehension, and spatial scanning abilities influenced search tactics. It is suggested that information retrieval systems can be made more accessible to users with different levels of cognitive abilities through improvements that will assist users to scan lists of terms, choose appropriate vocabulary for searching, and select useful references.
1390338	On iterative intelligent medical search Searching for medical information on the Web has become highly popular, but it remains a challenging task because searchers are often uncertain about their exact medical situations and unfamiliar with medical terminology. To address this challenge, we have built an intelligent medical Web search engine called iMed, which uses medical knowledge and an interactive questionnaire to help searchers form queries. This paper focuses on iMed's iterative search advisor, which integrates medical and linguistic knowledge to help searchers improve search results iteratively. Such an iterative process is common for general Web search, and especially crucial for medical Web search, because searchers often miss desired search results due to their limited medical knowledge and the task's inherent difficulty. iMed's iterative search advisor helps the searcher in several ways. First, relevant symptoms and signs are automatically suggested based on the searcher's description of his situation. Second, instead of taking for granted the searcher's answers to the questions, iMed ranks and recommends alternative answers according to their likelihoods of being the correct answers. Third, related MeSH medical phrases are suggested to help the searcher refine his situation description. We demonstrate the effectiveness of iMed's iterative search advisor by evaluating it using real medical case records and USMLE medical exam questions.
1390342	Towards breaking the quality curse.: a web-querying approach to web people search. Searching for people on the Web is one of the most common query types to the web search engines today. However, when a person name is queried, the returned webpages often contain documents related to several distinct namesakes who have the queried name. The task of disambiguating and finding the webpages related to the specific person of interest is left to the user. Many Web People Search (WePS) approaches have been developed recently that attempt to automate this disambiguation process. Nevertheless, the disambiguation quality of these techniques leaves a major room for improvement. This paper presents a new server-side WePS approach. It is based on collecting co-occurrence information from theWeb and thus it uses theWeb as an external data source. A skyline-based classification technique is developed for classifying the collected co-occurrence information in order to make clustering decisions. The clustering technique is specifically designed to (a) handle the dominance that exists in data and (b) to adapt to a given clustering quality measure. These properties allow the framework to get a major advantage in terms of result quality over all the latest WePS techniques we are aware of, including all the 18 methods covered in the recent WePS competition [2].
1390344	Enhancing web search by promoting multiple search engine use Any given Web search engine may provide higher quality results than others for certain queries. Therefore, it is in users' best interest to utilize multiple search engines. In this paper, we propose and evaluate a framework that maximizes users' search effective-ness by directing them to the engine that yields the best results for the current query. In contrast to prior work on meta-search, we do not advocate for replacement of multiple engines with an aggregate one, but rather facilitate simultaneous use of individual engines. We describe a machine learning approach to supporting switching between search engines and demonstrate its viability at tolerable interruption levels. Our findings have implications for fluid competition between search engines.
1390348	Retrieval sensitivity under training using different measures Various measures, such as binary preference (bpref), inferred average precision (infAP), and binary normalised discounted cumulative gain (nDCG) have been proposed as alternatives to mean average precision (MAP) for being less sensitive to the relevance judgements completeness. As the primary aim of any system building is to train the system to respond to user queries in a more robust and stable manner, in this paper, we investigate the importance of the choice of the evaluation measure for training, under different levels of evaluation incompleteness. We simulate evaluation incompleteness by sampling from the relevance assessments. Through large-scale experiments on two standard TREC test collections, we examine retrieval sensitivity when training - i.e. if a training process, based on any of the four discussed measures has an impact on the final retrieval performance. Experimental results show that training by bpref, infAP and nDCG provides significantly better retrieval performance than training by MAP when relevance judgements completeness is extremely low. When relevance judgements completeness increases, the measures behave more similarly.
1390368	Knowledge transformation from word space to document space In most IR clustering problems, we directly cluster the documents, working in the document space, using cosine similarity between documents as the similarity measure. In many real-world applications, however, we usually have knowledge on the word side and wish to transform this knowledge to the document (concept) side. In this paper, we provide a mechanism for this knowledge transformation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first model for such type of knowledge transformation. This model uses a nonnegative matrix factorization model X = FSG T , where X is the word document semantic matrix, F is the posterior probability of a word belonging to a word cluster and represents knowledge in the word space, G is the posterior probability of a document belonging to a document cluster and represents knowledge in the document space, and S is a scaled matrix factor which provides a condensed view of X . We show how knowledge on words can improve document clustering, i.e, knowledge in the word space is transformed into the document space. We perform extensive experiments to validate our approach.
1390370	A study of learning a merge model for multilingual information retrieval This paper proposes a learning approach for the merging process in multilingual information retrieval (MLIR). To conduct the learning approach, we also present a large number of features that may influence the MLIR merging process; these features are mainly extracted from three levels: query, document, and translation. After the feature extraction, we then use the FRank ranking algorithm to construct a merge model; to our knowledge, this practice is the first attempt to use a learning-based ranking algorithm to construct a merge model for MLIR merging. In our experiments, three test collections for the task of crosslingual information retrieval (CLIR) in NTCIR3, 4, and 5 are employed to assess the performance of our proposed method; moreover, several merging methods are also carried out for a comparison, including traditional merging methods, the 2-step merging strategy, and the merging method based on logistic regression. The experimental results show that our method can significantly improve merging quality on two different types of datasets. In addition to the effectiveness, through the merge model generated by FRank, our method can further identify key factors that influence the merging process; this information might provide us more insight and understanding into MLIR merging.
1390371	Bilingual topic aspect classification with a few training examples This paper explores topic aspect (i.e., subtopic or facet) classification for English and Chinese collections. The evaluation model assumes a bilingual user who has found documents on a topic and identified a few passages in each language on aspects of that topic. Additional passages are then automatically labeled using a k-Nearest-Neighbor classifier and local (i.e., result set) Latent Semantic Analysis. Experiments show that when few training examples are available in either language, classification using training examples from both languages can often achieve higher effectiveness than using training examples from just one language. When the total number of training examples is held constant, classification effectiveness correlates positively with the fraction of same-language training examples in the training set. These results suggest that supervised classification can benefit from hand-annotating a few same-language examples, and that when performing classification in bilingual collections it is useful to label some examples in each language.
1390372	Crosslingual location search Address geocoding, the process of finding the map location for a structured postal address, is a relatively well-studied problem. In this paper we consider the more general problem of crosslingual location search, where the queries are not limited to postal addresses, and the language and script used in the search query is different from the one in which the underlying data is stored. To the best of our knowledge, our system is the first crosslingual location search system that is able to geocode complex addresses. We use a statistical machine transliteration system to convert location names from the script of the query to that of the stored data. However, we show that it is not sufficient to simply feed the resulting transliterations into a monolingual geocoding system, as the ambiguity inherent in the conversion drastically expands the location search space and significantly lowers the quality of results. The strength of our approach lies in its integrated, end-to-end nature: we use abstraction and fuzzy search (in the text domain) to achieve maximum coverage despite transliteration ambiguities, while applying spatial constraints (in the geographic domain) to focus only on viable interpretations of the query. Our experiments with structured and unstructured queries in a set of diverse languages and scripts (Arabic, English, Hindi and Japanese) searching for locations in different regions of the world, show full crosslingual location search accuracy at levels comparable to that of commercial monolingual systems. We achieve these levels of performance using techniques that may be applied to crosslingual searches in any language/script, and over arbitrary spatial data.
1390382	Learning to rank with ties Designing effective ranking functions is a core problem for information retrieval and Web search since the ranking functions directly impact the relevance of the search results. The problem has been the focus of much of the research at the intersection of Web search and machine learning, and learning ranking functions from preference data in particular has recently attracted much interest. The objective of this paper is to empirically examine several objective functions that can be used for learning ranking functions from preference data. Specifically, we investigate the roles of ties in the learning process. By ties, we mean preference judgments that two documents have equal degree of relevance with respect to a query. This type of data has largely been ignored or not properly modeled in the past. In this paper, we analyze the properties of ties and develop novel learning frameworks which combine ties and preference data using statistical paired comparison models to improve the performance of learned ranking functions. The resulting optimization problems explicitly incorporating ties and preference data are solved using gradient boosting methods. Experimental studies are conducted using three publicly available data sets which demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed new methods.
1390390	Exploiting correlated keywords to improve approximate information filtering Information filtering, also referred to as publish/subscribe, complements one-time searching since users are able to subscribe to information sources and be notified whenever new documents of interest are published. In approximate information filtering only selected information sources, that are likely to publish documents relevant to the user interests in the future, are monitored. To achieve this functionality, a subscriber exploits statistical metadata to identify promising publishers and index its continuous query only in those publishers. The statistics are maintained in a directory, usually on a per-keyword basis, thus disregarding possible correlations among keywords. Using this coarse information, poor publisher selection may lead to poor filtering performance and thus loss of interesting documents. 1 Based on the above observation, this work extends query routing techniques from the domain of distributed information retrieval in peer-to-peer (P2P) networks, and provides new algorithms for exploiting the correlation among keywords in a filtering setting. We develop and evaluate two algorithms based on single-key and multi-key statistics and utilize two different synopses (Hash Sketches and KMV synopses) to compactly represent publishers. Our experimental evaluation using two real-life corpora with web and blog data demonstrates the filtering effectiveness of both approaches and highlights the different tradeoffs.
1390397	A lattice-based approach to query-by-example spoken document retrieval Recent efforts on the task of spoken document retrieval (SDR) have made use of speech lattices: speech lattices contain information about alternative speech transcription hypotheses other than the 1-best transcripts, and this information can improve retrieval accuracy by overcoming recognition errors present in the 1-best transcription. In this paper, we look at using lattices for the query-by-example spoken document retrieval task - retrieving documents from a speech corpus, where the queries are themselves in the form of complete spoken documents (query exemplars). We extend a previously proposed method for SDR with short queries to the query-by-example task. Specifically, we use a retrieval method based on statistical modeling: we compute expected word counts from document and query lattices, estimate statistical models from these counts, and compute relevance scores as divergences between these models. Experimental results on a speech corpus of conversational English show that the use of statistics from lattices for both documents and query exemplars results in better retrieval accuracy than using only 1-best transcripts for either documents, or queries, or both. In addition, we investigate the effect of stop word removal which further improves retrieval accuracy. To our knowledge, our work is the first to have used a lattice-based approach to query-by-example spoken document retrieval.
1390411	Separate and inequal: preserving heterogeneity in topical authority flows Web pages, like people, are often known by others in a variety of contexts. When those contexts are sufficiently distinct, a page's importance may be better represented by multiple domains of authority, rather than by one that indiscriminately mixes reputations. In this work we determine domains of authority by examining the contexts in which a page is cited. However, we find that it is not enough to determine separate domains of authority; our model additionally determines the local flow of authority based upon the relative similarity of the source and target authority domains. In this way, we differentiate both incoming and outgoing hyperlinks by topicality and importance rather than treating them indiscriminately. We find that this approach compares favorably to other topical ranking methods on two real-world datasets and produces an approximately 10% improvement in precision and quality of the top ten results over PageRank.
1390413	Exploring traversal strategy for web forum crawling In this paper, we study the problem of Web forum crawling. Web forum has now become an important data source of many Web applications; while forum crawling is still a challenging task due to complex in-site link structures and login controls of most forum sites. Without carefully selecting the traversal path, a generic crawler usually downloads many duplicate and invalid pages from forums, and thus wastes both the precious bandwidth and the limited storage space. To crawl forum data more effectively and efficiently, in this paper, we propose an automatic approach to exploring an appropriate traversal strategy to direct the crawling of a given target forum. In detail, the traversal strategy consists of the identification of the skeleton links and the detection of the page-flipping links . The skeleton links instruct the crawler to only crawl valuable pages and meanwhile avoid duplicate and uninformative ones; and the page-flipping links tell the crawler how to completely download a long discussion thread which is usually shown in multiple pages in Web forums. The extensive experimental results on several forums show encouraging performance of our approach. Following the discovered traversal strategy, our forum crawler can archive more informative pages in comparison with previous related work and a commercial generic crawler.
1390421	Automatically identifying localizable queries Personalization of web search results as a technique for improving user satisfaction has received notable attention in the research community over the past decade. Much of this work focuses on modeling and establishing a profile for each user to aid in personalization. Our work takes a more query-centric approach. In this paper, we present a method for efficient, automatic identification of a class of queries we define as localizable from a web search engine query log. We determine a set of relevant features and use conventional machine learning techniques to classify queries. Our experiments find that our technique is able to identify localizable queries with 94% accuracy.
1390427	Spectral geometry for simultaneously clustering and ranking query search results How best to present query search results is an important problem in search engines and information retrieval systems. When a single query retrieves many results, simply showing them as a long list will provide users with poor overview. Nowadays, ranking and clustering query search results have been two useful separate post-processing techniques to organize retrieved documents. In this paper, we proposed a spectral analysis method based on the content similarity networks to integrate the clustering and ranking techniques for improving literature search. The new approach organizes all these search results into categories intelligently and simultaneously rank the results in each category. A variety of theoretical and empirical studies have demonstrated that the presented method performs well in real applications, especially in biomedical literature retrieval. Moreover, any free text information can be analyzed with the new method, i.e., the proposed approach can be applied to various information systems, such as Web search engines and literature search service.
1390429	A comparative evaluation of different link types on enhancing document clustering With a growing number of works utilizing link information in enhancing document clustering, it becomes necessary to make a comparative evaluation of the impacts of different link types on document clustering. Various types of links between text documents, including explicit links such as citation links and hyperlinks, implicit links such as co-authorship links, and pseudo links such as content similarity links, convey topic similarity or topic transferring patterns, which is very useful for document clustering. In this study, we adopt a Relaxation Labeling (RL)-based clustering algorithm, which employs both content and linkage information, to evaluate the effectiveness of the aforementioned types of links for document clustering on eight datasets. The experimental results show that linkage is quite effective in improving content-based document clustering. Furthermore, a series of interesting findings regarding the impacts of different link types on document clustering are discovered through our experiments.
1390442	trNon-greedy active learning for text categorization using convex ansductive experimental design In this paper we propose a non-greedy active learning method for text categorization using least-squares support vector machines (LSSVM). Our work is based on transductive experimental design (TED), an active learning formulation that effectively explores the information of unlabeled data. Despite its appealing properties, the optimization problem is however NP-hard and thus--like most of other active learning methods--a greedy sequential strategy to select one data example after another was suggested to find a suboptimum. In this paper we formulate the problem into a continuous optimization problem and prove its convexity, meaning that a set of data examples can be selected with a guarantee of global optimum. We also develop an iterative algorithm to efficiently solve the optimization problem, which turns out to be very easy-to-implement. Our text categorization experiments on two text corpora empirically demonstrated that the new active learning algorithm outperforms the sequential greedy algorithm, and is promising for active text categorization applications.
1390443	Classifiers without borders: incorporating fielded text from neighboring web pages Accurate web page classification often depends crucially on information gained from neighboring pages in the local web graph. Prior work has exploited the class labels of nearby pages to improve performance. In contrast, in this work we utilize a weighted combination of the contents of neighbors to generate a better virtual document for classification. In addition, we break pages into fields, finding that a weighted combination of text from the target and fields of neighboring pages is able to reduce classification error by more than a third. We demonstrate performance on a large dataset of pages from the Open Directory Project and validate the approach using pages from a crawl from the Stanford WebBase. Interestingly, we find no value in anchor text and unexpected value in page titles (and especially titles of parent pages) in the virtual document.
1390448	Intuition-supporting visualization of user's performance based on explicit negative higher-order relevance Modeling the beyond-topical aspects of relevance are currently gaining popularity in IR evaluation. For example, the discounted cumulated gain (DCG) measure implicitly models some aspects of higher-order relevance via diminishing the value of relevant documents seen later during retrieval (e.g., due to information cumulated, redundancy, and effort). In this paper, we focus on the concept of negative higher-order relevance (NHOR) made explicit via negative gain values in IR evaluation. We extend the computation of DCG to allow negative gain values, perform an experiment in a laboratory setting, and demonstrate the characteristics of NHOR in evaluation. The approach leads to intuitively reasonable performance curves emphasizing, from the user's point of view, the progression of retrieval towards success or failure. We discuss normalization issues when both positive and negative gain values are allowed and conclude by discussing the usage of NHOR to characterize test collections.
1390450	Relevance judgments between TREC and Non-TREC assessors This paper investigates the agreement of relevance assessments between official TREC judgments and those generated from an interactive IR experiment. Results show that 63% of documents judged relevant by our users matched official TREC judgments. Several factors contributed to differences in the agreements: the number of retrieved relevant documents; the number of relevant documents judged; system effectiveness per topic and the ranking of relevant documents.
1390451	Evaluation measures for preference judgments There has been recent interest in collecting user or assessor preferences, rather than absolute judgments of relevance, for the evaluation or learning of ranking algorithms. Since measures like precision, recall, and DCG are defined over absolute judgments, evaluation over preferences will require new evaluation measures that explicitly model them. We describe a class of such measures and compare absolute and preference measures over a large TREC collection.
1390454	Comparing metrics across TREC and NTCIR:: the robustness to pool depth bias An abstract is not available.
1390456	Precision-at-ten considered redundant Information retrieval systems are compared using evaluation metrics, with researchers commonly reporting results for simple metrics such as precision-at-10 or reciprocal rank together with more complex ones such as average precision or discounted cumulative gain. In this paper, we demonstrate that complex metrics are as good as or better than simple metrics at predicting the performance of the simple metrics on other topics. Therefore, reporting of results from simple metrics alongside complex ones is redundant.
1390459	A longitudinal study of real-time search assistance adoption We present findings from a log based study designed to track the adoption of features of a new real-time query refinement interface deployed on the Yahoo search engine. Several trends from the first four months are noted and discussed.
1390460	TopicRank: bringing insight to users An abstract is not available.
1390461	Talking the talk vs. walking the walk: salience of information needs in querying vs. browsing Traditional information retrieval models assume that users express their information needs via text queries ( i.e. , their "talk"). In this poster, we consider Web browsing behavior outside of interactions with retrieval systems ( i.e. , users' "walk") as an alternative source of signal describing users' information needs, and compare it to the query-expressed information needs on a large dataset. Our findings demonstrate that information needs expressed in different behavior modalities are largely non-overlapping, and that past behavior in each modality is the most accurate predictor of future behavior in that modality. Results also show that browsing data provides a stronger source of signal than search queries due to its greater volume, which explains previous work that has found implicit behavioral data to be a valuable source of information for user modeling and personalization.
1390465	A topical PageRank based algorithm for recommender systems In this paper, we propose a Topical PageRank based algorithm for recommender systems, which aim to rank products by analyzing previous user-item relationships, and recommend top-rank items to potentially interested users. We evaluate our algorithm on MovieLens dataset and empirical experiments demonstrate that it outperforms other state-of-the-art recommending algorithms.
1390469	Task-aware search personalization Search personalization has been pursued in many ways, in order to provide better result rankings and better overall search experience to individual users [5]. However, blindly applying personalization to all user queries, for example, by a background model derived from the user's long-term query-and-click history, is not always appropriate for aiding the user in accomplishing her actual task. User interests change over time, a user sometimes works on very different categories of tasks within a short timespan, and history-based personalization may impede a user's desire of discovering new topics. In this paper we propose a personalization framework that is selective in a twofold sense. First, it selectively employs personalization techniques for queries that are expected to benefit from prior history information, while refraining from undue actions otherwise. Second, we introduce the notion of tasks representing different granularity levels of a user profile, ranging from very specific search goals to broad topics, and base our reasoning selectively on query-relevant user tasks. These considerations are cast into a statistical language model for tasks, queries, and documents, supporting both judicious query expansion and result re-ranking. The effectiveness of our method is demonstrated by an empirical user study.
1390472	Exploiting subjectivity analysis in blogs to improve political leaning categorization In this paper, we address a relatively new and interesting text categorization problem: classify a political blog as either liberal or conservative , based on its political leaning. Our subjectivity analysis based method is twofold: 1) we identify subjective sentences that contain at least two strong subjective clues based on the General Inquirer dictionary; 2) from subjective sentences identified, we extract opinion expressions and other features to build political leaning classifiers. Experimental results with a political blog corpus we built show that by using features from subjective sentences can significantly improve the classification performance. In addition, by extracting opinion expressions from subjective sentences, we are able to reveal opinions that are characteristic of a specific political leaning to some extent.
1390476	To tag or not to tag -: harvesting adjacent metadata in large-scale tagging systems We present HAMLET, a suite of principles, scoring models and algorithms to automatically propagate metadata along edges in a document neighborhood. As a showcase scenario we consider tag prediction in community-based Web 2.0 tagging applications. Experiments using real-world data demonstrate the viability of our approach in large-scale environments where tags are scarce. To the best of our knowledge, HAMLET is the first system to promote an efficient and precise reuse of shared metadata in highly dynamic, large-scale Web 2.0 tagging systems.
1390478	On the evolution of the yahoo! answers QA community While question answering communities have been gaining popularity for several years, we wonder if the increased popularity actually improves or degrades the user experience. In addition, automatic QA systems, which utilize different sources such as search engines and social media, are emerging rapidly. QA communities have already created abundant resources of millions of questions and hundreds of millions of answers. The question whether they will continue to serve as an effective source is of information for web search and question answering is of vital importance. In this poster, we investigate the temporal evolution of a popular QA community - Yahoo! Answers, with respect to its effectiveness in answering three basic types of questions: factoid, opinion and complex questions. Our experiments show that Yahoo! Answers keeps growing rapidly, while its overall quality as an information source for factoid question-answering degrades. However, instead of answering factoid questions, it might be more effective to answer opinion and complex questions.
1390479	Detecting synonyms in social tagging systems to improve content retrieval Collaborative tagging used in online social content systems is naturally characterized by many synonyms, causing low precision retrieval. We propose a mechanism based on user preference profiles to identify synonyms that can be used to retrieve more relevant documents by expanding the user's query. Using a popular online book catalog we discuss the effectiveness of our method over usual similarity based expansion methods.
1390482	Semi-supervised spam filtering: does it work? The results of the 2006 ECML/PKDD Discovery Challenge suggest that semi-supervised learning methods work well for spam filtering when the source of available labeled examples differs from those to be classified. We have attempted to reproduce these results using data from the 2005 and 2007 TREC Spam Track, and have found the opposite effect: methods like self-training and transductive support vector machines yield inferior classifiers to those constructed using supervised learning on the labeled data alone. We investigate differences between the ECML/PKDD and TREC data sets and methodologies that may account for the opposite results.
1390483	Limits of opinion-finding baseline systems In opinion-finding, the retrieval system is tasked with retrieving not just relevant documents, but which also express an opinion towards the query target entity. Most opinion-finding systems are based on a two-stage approach, where initially the system aims to retrieve relevant documents, which are then re-ranked according to the extent to which they are detected to be of an opinionated nature. In this work, we investigate how the underlying 'baseline' retrieval system performance affects the overall opinion-finding performance. We apply two effective opinion-finding techniques to all the baseline runs submitted to the TREC 2007 Blog track, and draw new insights and conclusions.
1390484	Web query translation via web log mining This paper describes a method to automatically acquire query translation pairs by mining web click-through data. The extraction requires no crawling or Chinese words segmentation, and can capture popular translations. Experimental results on a real click-through data show that only 17.4% of the extracted queries are in the dictionary, and our method can achieve 62.2% (in top-1) to 80.0% (in top-5) precision in translating web queries. Moreover, the extracted translations are semantically relevant to the source query, which is particularly useful for Cross-Lingual Information Retrieval (CLIR).
1390485	Analyzing web text association to disambiguate abbreviation in queries We introduce a statistical model for abbreviation disambiguation in Web search, based on analysis of Web data resources, including anchor text, click log and query log. By combining evidence from multiple sources, we are able to accurately disambiguate the abbreviation in queries. Experiments on real Web search queries show promising results.
1390488	Guide focused crawler efficiently and effectively using on-line topical importance estimation Focused crawling is a critical technique for topical resource discovery on the Web. We propose a new frontier prioritizing algorithm, namely, the OTIE (On-line Topical Importance Estimation) algorithm, which efficiently and effectively combines link-based and content-based analysis to evaluate the priority of an uncrawled URL in the frontier. We then demonstrate OTIE's advantages over traditional prioritizing algorithms by real crawling experiments.
1390492	Query preprocessing: improving web search through a Vietnamese word tokenization approach In this poster paper, we propose a novel approach to improve web search relevancy by tokenizing a Vietnamese query text prior submitting it to a search engine. Evaluations demonstrate its effectiveness and practical value.
1390494	AdImage: video advertising by image matching and ad scheduling optimization With the prevalence of recording devices and the ease of media sharing, consumers are embracing huge amounts of Internet videos. There arise the needs for effective video advertisement systems following their phenomenal success in text. We propose a novel advertising system, AdImage , which automatically associates relevant ads by matching characteristic images, referred to as adImages (analogous to adWords) here. The proposed image matching method is invariant to certain distortions commonly observed in shared videos. AdImage also avoids the pitfalls of poor tagging qualities in shared videos and provides a brand-new venue to specify ad targets by image objects. Moreover, we formulate the image matching scores and the parameterized bidding information as a nonlinear optimization problem for maximizing the system revenues and user perception.
1390495	Bag-of-visual-words expansion using visual relatedness for video indexing Bag-of-visual-words (BoW) has been popular for visual classification in recent years. In this paper, we propose a novel BoW expansion method to alleviate the effect of visual word correlation problem. We achieve this by diffusing the weights of visual words in BoW based on visual word relatedness, which is rigorously defined within a visual ontology. The proposed method is tested in video indexing experiment on TRECVID-2006 video retrieval benchmark, and an improvement of 7% over the traditional BoW is reported.
1390497	Term clouds as surrogates for user generated speech User generated spoken audio remains a challenge for Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) technology and content-based audio surrogates derived from ASR-transcripts must be error robust. An investigation of the use of term clouds as surrogates for podcasts demonstrates that ASR term clouds closely approximate term clouds derived from human-generated transcripts across a range of cloud sizes. A user study confirms the conclusion that ASR-clouds are viable surrogates for depicting the content of podcasts.
1390498	A faceted interface for multimedia search With the rapid increase in online video services, video retrieval systems are becoming increasingly important search tools to many users in many different fields. In this poster we present a novel video retrieval interface, which supports the creation of multiple search "facets", to aid users carrying out complex, multi-faceted search tasks. The interface allows multiple searches to be executed and viewed simultaneously, and allows material to be reorganized between the facets. An experiment is presented which compares the faceted interface to a tabbed interface similar to that on modern web browsers, and some preliminary results are given.
1390501	Product retrieval for grocery stores We introduce a grocery retrieval system that maps shopping lists written in natural language into actual products in a grocery store. We have developed the system using nine months of shopping basket data from a large Finnish supermarket. To evaluate the system, we used 70 real shopping lists gathered from customers of the supermarket. Our system achieves over 80% precision for products at rank one, and the precision is around 70% for products at rank 5.
1390502	A reranking model for genomics aspect search In this paper, we propose a reranking model to improve the aspect-level performance in the biomedical domain. This model iteratively computes the maximum hidden aspect for every retrieved passage and then reranks these passages from aspect subsets. The experimental results show the improvements of the aspect-level performance up to 27.14% for 2006 Genomics topics and 27.09% for 2007 Genomics topics.
1390504	Kleio: a knowledge-enriched information retrieval system for biology Kleio is an advanced information retrieval (IR) system developed at the UK National Centre for Text Mining (NaCTeM) 1 . The system offers textual and metadata searches across MEDLINE and provides enhanced searching functionality by leveraging terminology management technologies.
1390506	How medical expertise influences web search interaction Domain expertise can have an important influence on how people search. In this poster we present findings from a log-based study into how medical domain experts search the Web for information related to their expertise, as compared with non-experts. We find differences in sites visited, query vocabulary, and search behavior. The findings have implications for the automatic identification of domain experts from interaction logs, and the use of domain knowledge in applications such as query suggestion or page recommendation to support non-experts.
1390508	Exploiting sequential dependencies for expert finding We propose an expert finding method based on assumption of sequential dependence between a candidate expert and the query terms in the scope of a document. We assume that the strength of relation of a candidate to the document's content depends on its position in this document with respect to the positions of the query terms. The experiments on the official Enterprise TREC data demonstrate the advantage of our method over the method based on independence of query terms and persons in a document.
1390509	Modeling expert finding as an absorbing random walk We introduce a novel approach to expert finding based on multi-step relevance propagation from documents to related candidates. Relevance propagation is modeled with an absorbing random walk. The evaluation on the two official Enterprise TREC data sets demonstrates the advantage of our method over the state-of-the-art method based on one-step propagation.
1390514	A method for transferring retrieval scores between collections with non-overlapping vocabularies We present a method for projecting retrieval scores across two corpora with a shared, parallel corpus.
1390518	Don't have a stemmer?: be un+concern+ed The choice of indexing terms used to represent documents crucially determines how e ective subsequent retrieval will be. IR systems commonly use rule-based stemmers to normalize surface word forms to combat the problem of not finding documents that contain words related to query terms by inflectional or derivational morphology. But such stemmers are not available in all languages. In this paper we explore the effectiveness of unsupervised morphological segmentation as an alternative to stemming using test sets in thirteen European languages. We find that unsupervised segmentation is significantly better than unnormalized words, in several cases by more than 20%. However, rule-based stemming, if available, is better in low complexity languages. We also compare these methods to the use of character n-grams, finding that on average n-grams yield the best performance.
1390519	Parsimonious concept modeling An abstract is not available.
1390520	Parsimonious relevance models We describe a method for applying parsimonious language models to re-estimate the term probabilities assigned by relevance models. We apply our method to six topic sets from test collections in five different genres. Our parsimonious relevance models (i) improve retrieval effectiveness in terms of MAP on all collections, (ii) significantly outperform their non-parsimonious counterparts on most measures, and (iii) have a precision enhancing effect, unlike other blind relevance feedback methods.
1390521	Author-topic evolution analysis using three-way non-negative Paratucker Analyzing three-way data has attracted a lot of attention recently due to the intrinsic rich structures in real-world datasets. The PARATUCKER model has been proposed to combine the axis capabilities of the Parafac model and the structural generality of the Tucker model. However, no algorithms have been developed for fitting the PARATUCKER model. In this paper, we propose TANPT algorithm to solve the PARATUCKER model. We apply the algorithm for temporal relation co-clustering on author-topic evolution. Experiments on DBLP datasets demonstrate its effectiveness.
1390523	Measuring concept relatedness using language models Over the years, the notion of concept relatedness has attracted considerable attention. A variety of approaches, based on ontology structure, information content, association, or context have been proposed to indicate the relatedness of abstract ideas. We propose a method based on the cross entropy reduction between language models of concepts which are estimated based on document-concept assignments. The approach shows improved or competitive results compared to state-of-the-art methods on two test sets in the biomedical domain.
1390524	Query-drift prevention for robust query expansion Pseudo-feedback-based automatic query expansion yields effective retrieval performance on average, but results in performance inferior to that of using the original query for many information needs. We address an important cause of this robustness issue, namely, the query drift problem , by fusing the results retrieved in response to the original query and to its expanded form. Our approach posts performance that is significantly better than that of retrieval based only on the original query and more robust than that of retrieval using the expanded query.
1390531	Generalising multiple capture-recapture to non-uniform sample sizes Algorithms in distributed information retrieval often rely on accurate knowledge of the size of a collection. The "multiple capture-recapture" method of Shokouhi et al. is one of the more reliable algorithms for determining collection size, but it relies on samples with a uniform number of documents. Such uniform samples are often hard to obtain in a working system. A simple generalisation of multiple capture-recapture does not rely on uniform sample sizes. Simulations show it is as accurate as the original method even when sample sizes vary considerably, making it a useful technique in real tools.
1390532	Predicting when browsing context is relevant to search We investigate a representative case of sudden information need change of Web users. By analyzing search engine query logs, we show that the majority of queries submitted by users after browsing documents in the news domain are related to the most recently browsed document. We investigate ways of identifying whether a query is a good candidate for contextualization conditioned on the most recently browsed document by a user. We build a successful classifier for this task, which achieves 96% precision at 90% recall.
1390535	Proximity-aware scoring for XML retrieval Proximity-aware scoring functions lead to significant effectiveness improvements for text retrieval. For XML IR, we can sometimes enhance the retrieval quality by exploiting knowledge about the document structure combined with established text IR methods. This paper introduces modified proximity scores that take the document structure into account and demonstrates the effect for the INEX benchmark.
1390536	Locating relevant text within XML documents Traditional document retrieval has shown to be a competitive approach in XML element retrieval, which is counter-intuitive since the element retrieval task requests all and only relevant document parts to be retrieved. This paper conducts a comparative analysis of document and element retrieval, highlights the relative strengths and weaknesses of both approaches, and explains the relative effectiveness of document retrieval approaches at element retrieval tasks.
1390537	A flexible extension of XPath to improve XML querying This work presents a flexible XML selection language, FleXPath which allows the formulation of flexible constraints on both structure and content of XML documents. Some experimental results, obtained with a preliminary prototype, are described in order to show that the idea promises good results.
1390538	Combining document- and paragraph-based entity ranking We study entity ranking on the INEX entity track and propose a simple graph-based ranking approach that enables to combine scores on document and paragraph level. The combined approach improves the retrieval results not only on the INEX testset, but similarly on TREC's expert finding task.
1390539	Re-ranking search results using document-passage graphs We present a novel passage -based approach to re-ranking documents in an initially retrieved list so as to improve precision at top ranks. While most work on passage-based document retrieval ranks a document based on the query similarity of its constituent passages, our approach leverages information about the centrality of the document passages with respect to the initial document list. Passage centrality is induced over a bipartite document-passage graph, wherein edge weights represent document-passage similarities. Empirical evaluation shows that our approach yields effective re-ranking performance. Furthermore, the performance is superior to that of previously proposed passage-based document ranking methods.
1390542	On multiword entity ranking in peer-to-peer search Previously [2], we postulated the advantage of using entity extraction to implement a new Peer-to-Peer (P2P) search framework for reducing network traffic and providing a trade off between precision and recall. We now propose an entity ranking method designed for the 'short documents' characteristic of P2P, which significantly improves both precision and recall in 'top results' P2P search. We construct a dynamic entity corpus using n-grams statistics and metadata, study its reliability, and use it to identify correlations between user query terms.
1390546	Improving text classification accuracy using topic modeling over an additional corpus The World Wide Web has many document repositories that can act as valuable sources of additional data for various machine learning tasks. In this paper, we propose a method of improving text classification accuracy by using such an additional corpus that can easily be obtained from the web. This additional corpus can be unlabeled and independent of the given classification task. The method proposed here uses topic modeling to extract a set of topics from the additional corpus. Those extracted topics then act as additional features of the data of the given classification task. An evaluation on the RCV1 dataset shows significant improvement over a baseline method.
1390547	An algorithm for text categorization A novel and efficient learning algorithm is proposed for the binary linear classification problem. The algorithm is trained using the Rocchio's relevance feedback technique and builds a classifier by the intermediate hyperplane of two common tangent hyperplanes for the given category and its complement. Experimental results presented are very encouraging and justify the need for further research.
1390548	Hypergraph partitioning for document clustering: a unified clique perspective Hypergraph partitioning has been considered as a promising method to address the challenges of high dimensionality in document clustering. With documents modeled as vertices and the relationship among documents captured by the hyperedges, the goal of graph partitioning is to minimize the edge cut. Therefore, the definition of hyperedges is vital to the clustering performance. While several definitions of hyperedges have been proposed, a systematic understanding of desired characteristics of hyperedges is still missing. To that end, in this paper, we first provide a unified clique perspective of the definition of hyperedges, which serves as a guide to define hyperedges. With this perspective, based on the concepts of hypercliques and shared (reverse) nearest neighbors, we propose three new types of clique hyperedges and analyze their properties regarding purity and size issues. Finally, we present an extensive evaluation using real-world document datasets. The experimental results show that, with shared (reverse) nearest neighbor based hyperedges, the clustering performance can be improved significantly in terms of various external validation measures without the need for fine tuning of parameters.
1390549	Pagerank based clustering of hypertext document collections Clustering hypertext document collection is an important task in Information Retrieval. Most clustering methods are based on document content and do not take into account the hyper-text links. Here we propose a novel PageRank based clustering (PRC) algorithm which uses the hypertext structure. The PRC algorithm produces graph partitioning with high modularity and coverage. The comparison of the PRC algorithm with two content based clustering algorithms shows that there is a good match between PRC clustering and content based clustering.
1390561	Fine-grained relevance feedback for XML retrieval This demonstration presents an XML IR system that allows users to give feedback of different granularities and types, using Dempster-Shafer theory of evidence to compute expanded and reweighted queries.
290989	Modeling and combining evidence provided by document relationships using probabilistic argumentation systems An abstract is not available.
290992	Experiments in Japanese text retrieval and routing using the NEAT system An abstract is not available.
291043	Visual interactions with a multidimensional ranked list An abstract is not available.
291047	The WebCluster project. Using clustering for mediating access to the World Wide Web An abstract is not available.
291054	Interactive multidimensional document visualization An abstract is not available.
291059	Four text classification algorithms compared on a Dutch corpus An abstract is not available.
291066	Multilingual keyword extraction for term suggestion An abstract is not available.
345559	INSYDER — an information assistant for business intelligence The WWW is the most important resource for external business information. This paper presents a tool called INSYDER, an information assistant for finding and analysis business information from the WWW. INSYDER is a system using different agents for crawling the Web, evaluating and visualising the results. These agents, the used visualisations, and a first summary of user studies are presented.
345563	Automatic adaptation of proper noun dictionaries through cooperation of machine learning and probabilistic methods The recognition of Proper Nouns (PNs) is considered an important task in the area of Information Retrieval and Extraction. However the high performance of most existing PN classifiers heavily depends upon the availability of large dictionaries of domain-specific Proper Nouns, and a certain amount of manual work for rule writing or manual tagging. Though it is not a heavy requirement to rely on some existing PN dictionary (often these resources are available on the web), its coverage of a domain corpus may be rather low, in absence of manual updating. In this paper we propose a technique for the automatic updating of an PN Dictionary through the cooperation of an inductive and a probabilistic classifier. In our experiments we show that, whenever an existing PN Dictionary allows the identification of 50% of the proper nouns within a corpus, our technique allows, without additional manual effort, the successful recognition of about 90% of the remaining 50%.
345573	Document filtering method using non-relevant information profile Document filtering is a task to retrieve documents relevant to a user's profile from a flow of documents. Generally, filtering systems calculate the similarity between the profile and each incoming document, and retrieve documents with similarity higher than a threshold. However, many systems set a relatively high threshold to reduce retrieval of non-relevant documents, which results in the ignorance of many relevant documents. In this paper, we propose the use of a non-relevant information profile to reduce the mistaken retrieval of non-relevant documents. Results from experiments show that this filter has successfully rejected a sufficient number of non-relevant documents, resulting in an improvement of filtering performance.
345587	Hill climbing algorithms for content-based retrieval of similar configurations The retrieval of stored images matching an input configuration is an important form of content-based retrieval. Exhaustive processing (i.e., retrieval of the best solutions) of configuration similarity queries is, in general, exponential and fast search for sub-optimal solutions is the only way to deal with the vast (and ever increasing) amounts of multimedia information in several real-time applications. In this paper we discuss the utilization of hill climbing heuristics that can provide very good results within limited processing time. We propose several heuristics, which differ on the way that they search through the solution space, and identify the best ones depending on the query and image characteristics. Finally we develop new algorithms that take advantage of the specific structure of the problem to improve performance.
345608	Document classification on neural networks using only positive examples (poster session) In this paper, we show how a simple feed-forward neural network can be trained to filter documents when only positive information is available, and that this method seems to be superior to more standard methods, such as tf-idf retrieval based on an “average vector”. A novel experimental finding that retrieval is enhanced substantially in this context by carrying out a certain kind of uniform transformation (“Hadamard”) of the information prior to the training of the network.
345615	Generation of user profiles for information filtering — research agenda (poster session) In information filtering (IF) systems, user long-term needs we expressed as user profiles. The quality of a user profile has a major impact on the performance of IF systems. The focus of the proposed research is on the study of user profile generation and update. The paper introduces methods for user profile generation, and proposes a research agenda for their comparison and evaluation.
345621	The use of phrases from query texts in information retrieval (poster session) An abstract is not available.
345625	The effect of query type on subject searching behavior of image databases (poster session): an exploratory study An abstract is not available.
345630	Auto-construction of a live thesaurus from search term logs for interactive Web search (poster session) The purpose of this paper is to present an on-going research that is intended to construct a live thesaurus directly from search term logs of real-world search engines. Such a thesaurus designed can contain representative search terms, their frequency in use, the corresponding subject categories, the associated and relevant terms, and the hot visiting Web sites/pages the search terms may reach.
345636	Multimedia information retrieval from recorded presentations (poster session) In presentation recording special effort is usually put into the automation of the production process, that is in automatically creating high quality data files without much or any need for manual recording and post-editing [5]. With the advent of such systems and their usage in classroom teaching, at conferences, etc., there is an increasing need for techniques and abilities which enable users to search in those documents and to localize some specific information. In this paper we describe how we integrated information retrieval techniques into the Authoring on the Fly (AOF) system, an approach for automatic presentation recording. We have chosen the AOF system for two reasons. On the one hand, it is a well-established way for presentation recording, used by various universities and institutions 1 . On the other hand it is general enough to illustrate typical problems and challenges a developer is facing when designing a system for information retrieval from multimedia data streams which occur in the presentation recording scenario.
345638	Influence of speech recognition errors on topic detection (poster session) We investigate the effect of speech-recognition errors on a system for the unsupervised, nearly synchronous clustering of broadcast news stories, using the TDT (Topic Detection and Tracking) Corpora. Two questions are addressed: (1) Are speech recognition errors detrimental to the performance of the system? (2) Can a background collection of contemporaneous clean text improve performance? We investigate both the large-cluster and small-cluster limits.
345648	Theme-based retrieval of Web news (poster session) We present our framework for classification of Web news, based on support vector machines, and some of the initial measurements of its accuracy.
345650	Stemming and its effects on TFIDF ranking (poster session) An abstract is not available.
345656	On the design and evaluation of a multi-dimensional approach to information retrieval (poster session) We present a method of searching text collections that takes advantage of hierarchrical information within documents and integrates searches of structured and unstructured data. We show that Multidimensional databases (MDB), designed for accessing data along hierarchical dimensions, are effective for information retrieval. We demonstrate a method of using On-Line Analytic Processing (OLAP) techniques on a text collection. This combines traditional information retrieval and the slicing, dicing, drill-down, and roll-up of OLAP. We demonstrate use of a prototype for searching documents from the TREC collection.
345660	Learning probabilistic models of the Web (poster session) In the World Wide Web, myriads of hyperlinks connect documents and pages to create an unprecedented, highly complex graph structure - the Web graph. This paper presents a novel approach to learning probabilistic models of the Web, which can be used to make reliable predictions about connectivity and information content of Web documents. The proposed method is a probabilistic dimension reduction technique which recasts and unites Latent Semantic Analysis and Kleinberg's Hubs-and-Authorities algorithm in a statistical setting. This meant to be a first step towards the development of a statistical foundation for Web—related information technologies. Although this paper does not focus on a particular application, a variety of algorithms operating in the Web/Internet environment can take advantage of the presented techniques, including search engines, Web crawlers, and information agent systems.
345663	Towards an adaptive and task-specific ranking mechanism in Web searching (poster session) An abstract is not available.
345671	Managing photos with AT&T Shoebox (demonstration session) An abstract is not available.
345674	TimeMine (demonstration session): visualizing automatically constructed timelines An abstract is not available.
345675	The Cambridge University Multimedia Document Retrieval demo system (demonstration session) An abstract is not available.
345541	A novel method for the evaluation of Boolean query effectiveness across a wide operational range Traditional methods for the system-oriented evaluation of Boolean IR system suffer from validity and reliability problems. Laboratory-based research neglects the searcher and studies suboptimal queries. Research on operational systems fails to make a distinction between searcher performance and system performance. This approach is neither capable of measuring performance at standard points of operation (e.g. across R0.0-R1.0). A new laboratory-based evaluation method for Boolean IR systems is proposed. It is based on a controlled formulation of inclusive query plans, on an automatic conversion of query plans into elementary queries, and on combining elementary queries into optimal queries at standard points of operation. Major results of a large case experiment are reported. The validity, reliability, and efficiency of the method are considered in the light of empirical and analytical test data.
345553	Multiple evidence combination in image retrieval: Diogenes searches for people on the Web In this work, we examine evidence combination mechanisms for classifying multimedia information. In particular, we examine linear and Dempster-Shafer methods of evidence combination in the context of identifying personal images on the World Wide Web. An automatic web search engine named Diogenes 1 searches the web for personal images and combines different pieces of evidence for identification. The sources of evidence consist of input from face detection/recognition and text/HTML analysis modules. A degree of uncertainty is involved with both of these sources. Diogenes automatically determines the uncertainty locally for each retrieval and uses this information to set a relative significance for each evidence. To our knowledge, Diogenes is the first image search engine using Dempster-Shafer evidence combination based on automatic object recognition and dynamic local uncertainty assessment. In our experiments Diogenes comfortably outperformed some well known commercial and research prototype image search engines for celebrity image queries.
342777	Efficient variants of Huffman codes in high level languages Although it is well-known that Huffman Codes are optimal for text compression in a character-per-character encoding scheme, they are seldom used in practical situations since they require a bit-per-bit decoding algorithm, which has to be written in some assembly language, and will perform rather slowly. A number of methods are presented that avoid these difficulties. The decoding algorithms efficiently process the encoded string on a byte-per-byte basis, are faster than the original algorithm, and can be programmed in any high level language. This is achieved at the cost of storing some tables in the internal memory, but with no loss in the compression savings of the optimal Huffman codes. The internal memory space needed can be reduced either at the cost of increased processing time, or by using non-binary Huffman codes, which give sub-optimal compression. Experimental results for English and Hebrew text are also presented.
312673	Content-based retrieval using heuristic search An abstract is not available.
312678	Context-sensitive vocabulary mapping with a spreading activation network An abstract is not available.
312688	Adaptive cluster-based browsing using incrementally expanded queries and its effects (poster abstract) An abstract is not available.
312690	A comparison of query translation methods for English-Japanese cross-language information retrieval (poster abstract) An abstract is not available.
312692	Estimating precision by random sampling (poster abstract) An abstract is not available.
312693	Evaluating a visualisation of image similarity (poster abstract) An abstract is not available.
312701	Improving retrieval on imperfect speech transcriptions (poster abstract) An abstract is not available.
312703	Information seeking at different stages of the R&D research process (poster abstract) An abstract is not available.
312727	Music retrieval as text retrieval (poster abstract): simple yet effective An abstract is not available.
312730	NACSIS test collection workshop (NTCIR-1) (poster abstract) An abstract is not available.
312733	Query expansion method based on word contribution (poster abstract) An abstract is not available.
312737	Searching on the Web (poster abstract): two types of expertise An abstract is not available.
312741	Statistical phrases for vector-space information retrieval (poster abstract) An abstract is not available.
312749	Visual MeSH An abstract is not available.
312755	Ant World (demonstration abstract) An abstract is not available.
312759	CueVideo (demonstration abstract): automated video/audio indexing and browsing An abstract is not available.
312774	WebCluster, a tool for mediated information access (demonstration abstract) An abstract is not available.
312654	Using a belief revision operator for document ranking in extended Boolean models An abstract is not available.
312661	Information retrieval based on context distance and morphology An abstract is not available.
312662	Partial replica selection based on relevance for information retrieval An abstract is not available.
277434	Real life information retrieval (panel): commercial search engines An abstract is not available.
511708	Automated monitoring to support the analysis and evaluation of information systems This paper is based on, and extracted in part from, a much more expanded and detailed manuscript entitled "Monitoring and Evaluation of On-Line Information System Usage", accepted for publication in Information Processing and Management.
511713	The economic implementation of experimental retrieval techniques on a very large scale using an intelligent terminal The results and achievements of research in information retrieval have had little influence on the types of retrieval mechanism implemented in the large commercial on-line retrieval systems. Commercial systems still use simple Boolean techniques while experiments have shown that other techniques, such as those making use of relevance information, perform better. Reasons for this are suggested. A strategy is described for the implementation of high-powered techniques which overcomes this problem - an intelligent terminal is used in conjunction with an existing commercial I. R. system. The added processing capability permits the implementation of more sophisticated retrieval techniques very cheaply. Retrieval methods that can be implemented on such a terminal used in this way are described.Particular emphasis is placed upon the practical implementation of a term weighting scheme based on relevance feedback information which generates a ranked list of documents in answer to a query.
511716	Message extraction through estimated relevance METER is a text analysis and retrieval system for non-expert computer users to exploit statistical associations between index terms of documents. It will run on a DEC PDP-11/45 minicomputer with continually changing collections of up to 20,000 documents at a time. A scaled version of METER with all major features of the full system has been implemented on a DEC PDP-11/70 as an experimental test bed for evaluation and comparison of associative retrieval algorithms. Although the basic structure of METER is similar to earlier statistical systems for retrospective document searches, the severe requirements of frequent updates of a document collection, of running on a small processor, and of meeting needs of users with little technical training have led to some novel developments. Among these are an update procedure that draws as much as possible on intermediate results from previous updates and a user interface that provides for control over the process of retrieval without calling for knowledge of how that process works.
511760	Incorporating different search models into one document retrieval system Many effective search strategies derived from different models are available for document retrieval systems. However, it does not appear that there is a single most effective strategy. Instead, different strategies perform optimally under different conditions. This paper outlines the design of an adaptive document retrieval system that chooses the best search strategy for a particular situation and user. In order to be able to support a variety of search strategies, a general network representation of the documents and terms in the database is proposed. This network representation leads to efficient methods of generating and using document and term classifications.One of the most desirable features of an adaptive system would be the ability to learn from experience. A method of incorporating this learning ability into the system is described. The adaptive control strategy for choosing search strategies enables the system to base its actions on a number of factors, including a model of the current user.Finally, some ideas for a flexible interface for casual users are suggested. Part of this interface is the heuristic search, which is used when searches based on formal models have failed. The heuristic search provides a browsing capability for the user.
511762	Performance measurement in a fuzzy retrieval environment We shall consider retrieval performance measures for generalized (non-Boolean) queries and indexing functions. The meanings of recall and precision in such a generalized system will be discussed. Finally, we shall explore the meaning and difficulty of using such measures to compare Boolean and non-Boolean retrieval systems.
511764	Simulation of user judgments in bibliographic retrieval systems The general model and simulation algorithms for bibliographic retrieval systems presented in an earlier paper are expanded. The new model integrates the physical as well as the logical and semantic elements of these systems. A modified algorithm is developed for the simulation of user relevance judgments, and is validated, by means of recall-precision curves and a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of recall, for two test collections. Other approaches to goodness-of-fit testing are suggested.
511775	Expert/consultation system for a retrieval data-base with semantic network of concepts This paper describes a development and implementation of an expert/consultation system for a retrieval data-base, that interfaces between the user and a retrieval system. The system's objective is to perform the information consultant's job in assisting a user to select the right vocabulary terms for his query. It is particularly useful for a novice user of a controlled-vocabulary, index-based retrieval system, who is not familiar with the vocabulary and the system Thesaurus. The user will enter his terms/keywords, that represent his information need, and the system will apply search procedures on its knowledge-base, and will find relevant concepts to be used as query-terms. The system is interactive; it can explain to the user why/how a concept was discovered/suggested, and it can back-track and try to find alternatives in case the user rejects a suggested concept. Two versions of the system were developed, utilizing two search and interaction strategies. Experiments will be conducted with the two alternatives in order to find out user preference and to compare performance. Performance will also be compard with an alternative "conventional" approach, which is an On-Line-Thesarus - developed as part of this study.
511797	Applications for information retrieval techniques in the office An abstract is not available.
511799	Intelligent information systems Natural language processing techniques developed for Artificial Intelligence programs can aid in constructing powerful information retrieval systems in at least two areas. Automatic construction of new concepts allows a large body of information to be organized compactly and in a manner that allows a wide range of queries to be answered. Also, using natural language processing techniques to conceptually analyze the documents being stored in a system greatly expands the effectiveness of queries about given pieces of text. However, only robust conceptual analysis methods are adequate for such systems. This paper will discuss approaches to both concept learning, in the form of Generalization-Based Memory, and powerful, robust text processing achieved by Memory-Based Understanding. These techniques have been implemented in the computer systems IPP, a program that reads, remembers and generalizes from news stories about terrorism, and RESEARCHER, currently in the prototype stage, that operates in a very different domain (technical texts, patent abstracts in particular).
511800	Using discourse analysis for the design of information retrieval interaction mechanisms An abstract is not available.
511803	Natural language grammars for an information system The User Specialty Languages (USL) System is an applications independent natural language interface to a Relational Database System. It provides non DP-trained people with a tool to introduce, query, manipulate and analyse the data stored in a Relational Database via natural language. USL interfaces with different languages; in the present paper the grammar developed for Spanish is presented, and compared with the German grammar which was previously implemented and upon which it is based. Their main differences are pointed out, and the generality of the system to deal with other natural languages shown.
511806	Evaluation of the 2-Poisson model as a basis for using term frequency data in searching The early work on the probabilistic models of retrieval assumed that the document representation is binary, indicating only the presence or absence of index terms. The 2-Poisson (TP) model which was proposed as a model of how the occurrence frequency of specialty words in a collection is distributed, has since been used to develop retrieval strategies that incorporate term frequency information. This work investigates the use of the TP model, in this context, further. It is shown that the search effectiveness, when no relevance information is assumed, can be further enhanced by using this model. Furthermore, when the term weights proposed in this work are used in conjunction with weights known as term significance weights, the results are very encouraging.
511809	A study of the overlap among document representations Most previous investigations comparing the performance of different representations have used recall and precision as performance measures. However, there is evidence to show that these measures are insensitive to an important difference between representations. To explain, two representations may perform similarly on these measures, while retrieving very different sets of documents. Equivalence of representations should be decided on the basis of similarity in performance and similarity in the documents retrieved. This study compared the performance of four representations in the PsycAbs database. In addition, overlap between retrieved sets was also computed where overlap is the proportion of retrieved documents that are the same for pairs of document representations. Results indicate that for any two representations considered, performance values differed slightly while overlap scores were also low, thus supporting the evidence that recall and precision as performance measures mask differences between the sets of retrieved documents. Results are interpreted to propose an optimal ordering of the representations and to examine the contribution of each representation given this combination.
511810	A clustering scheme In this paper, a new clustering algorithm has been described. The algorithm proposed determines both the number of clusters in a collection, and the number of elements in each cluster before beginning the final clustering process. The complexity assessment of the algorithm and the implementation issues are also emphasized.
511811	The normalized recall and related measures The normalized recall is one of the most popular evaluation measures for information retrieval systems. In this paper an overview of its development is given. It is then shown that the normalized recall is closely related to other measures such as the CRE-measure and the expected search length. Some implications are analysed.
511813	User interfaces to information systems: choices vs. commands Do users prefer selection from a menu or specification of keywords to retrieve documents? We tried two experiments, one using an on-line library catalog and the other an on-line news wire. In the first, library users could either issue keyword commands to see book catalog entries, or choose categories from a menu following the Dewey Decimal classification of the books. In the second, news wire users could read Associated Press news stories either by posting a keyword profile against which all stories were matched, or by selecting them from a menu of current news items. For the library users, keyword searches were clearly preferred, by votes of 3 and 4 to 1; for the news stories, retrieval by keyword search is 50% less common than menu choice.We suggest that the difference is based on the degree of user foreknowledge of the data base and its organization. Menu-type interfaces tell the user what is available. If the user already knows, as in the library where a majority of the users have a particular book in mind, then the menu is merely time-consuming. But when the user does not know what is available (almost the definition of "news" is that it is new, and unpredictable), the menu is valuable because it displays the choice.
511816	Transaction log analysis online catalogs From November 1981 to April 1983, OCLC's Office of Research has been conducting research into online public access catalogs (OPACs). This project has been funded in part by the Council on Library Resources, Inc. as an attempt to provide new insight into the use of online catalogs by obtaining information which may serve as input for better system design of OPACs, utilizing not only desired user features but also more effective searching.The overall study is concerned with the patron and the system and consists of three major parts. The first is the study of current use of online catalogs, i.e., the actual use - what is really happening. The second element is concerned with the perceived patron use of the catalogs and involves the use of questionnaires and focus group interviews at the participating institutions. The third part is an application of the findings from the first two parts.This paper focuses on the current utilization of OPACs. The methodology chosen to employ is to obtain machine-readable transaction logs, via tapes, from the online catalogs and subsequently analyzing these transactions by stochastic search pattern development and mathematical models utilizing Markov chain analysis and the development of transition probability matrices.
511818	End user behavior on an online information retrieval system: a computer monitoring study We report on a computer monitoring study of users of the Ohio State University Libraries' online catalog, an established and heavily used information retrieval system. To our knowledge, this is the first monitoring study of an online catalog performed without system-defined user sessions. Online catalogs represent a class of retrieval systems which are designed for end users, require little or no formal training, and replace an existing manual system. The study characterizes user behavior in terms of types of searches done, patterns of use, time spent on searching, errors, and system problems. Preliminary results suggest that users have much shorter sessions than on other types of retrieval systems. Patterns of use vary between campus libraries, academic quarters, and between short and long sessions. Results of the study will be applied to improving the user interface and other system features.
564402	Topic difference factor extraction between two document sets and its application to text categorization To improve performance in text categorization, it is important to extract distinctive features for each class. This paper proposes topic difference factor analysis (TDFA) as a method to extract projection axes that reflect topic differences between two document sets. Suppose all sentence vectors that compose each document are projected onto projection axes. TDFA obtains the axes that maximize the ratio between the document sets as to the sum of squared projections by solving a generalized eigenvalue problem. The axes are called topic difference factors (TDF's). By applying TDFA to the document set that belongs to a given class and a set of documents that is misclassified as belonging to that class by an existent classifier, we can obtain features that take large values in the given class but small ones in other classes, as well as features that take large values in other classes but small ones in the given class. A classifier was constructed applying the above features to complement the kNN classifier. As the results, the micro averaged F 1 measure for Reuters-21578 improved from 83.69 to 87.27%.
564417	Set-based model: a new approach for information retrieval The objective of this paper is to present a new technique for computing term weights for index terms, which leads to a new ranking mechanism, referred to as set-based model. The components in our model are no longer terms, but termsets. The novelty is that we compute term weights using a data mining technique called association rules, which is time efficient and yet yields nice improvements in retrieval effectiveness. The set-based model function for computing the similarity between a document and a query considers the termset frequency in the document and its scarcity in the document collection. Experimental results show that our model improves the average precision of the answer set for all three collections evaluated. For the TReC-3 collection, our set-based model led to a gain, relative to the standard vector space model, of 37% in average precision curves and of 57% in average precision for the top 10 documents. Like the vector space model, the set-based model has time complexity that is linear in the number of documents in the collection.
564420	Inverted file search algorithms for collaborative filtering This paper explores the possibility of using a disk based inverted file structure for collaborative filtering. Our hypothesis is that this allows for faster calculation of predictions and also that early termination heuristics may be used to further speed up the filtering process and perhaps even improve the quality of the predictions. In an experiment on the EachMovie dataset this was tested. Our results indicate that searching the inverted file structure is many times faster than general in-memory vector search, even for very large profiles. The Continue termination heuristics produces the best ranked predictions in our experiments, and Quit is the top performer in terms of speed.
564435	Robust temporal and spectral modeling for query By melody Query by melody is the problem of retrieving musical performances from melodies. Retrieval of real performances is complicated due to the large number of variations in performing a melody and the presence of colored accompaniment noise. We describe a simple yet effective probabilistic model for this task. We describe a generative model that is rich enough to capture the spectral and temporal variations of musical performances and allows for tractable melody retrieval. While most of previous studies on music retrieval from melodies were performed with either symbolic (e.g. MIDI) data or with monophonic (single instrument) performances, we performed experiments in retrieving live and studio recordings of operas that contain a leading vocalist and rich instrumental accompaniment. Our results show that the probabilistic approach we propose is effective and can be scaled to massive datasets.
564438	Using self-supervised word segmentation in Chinese information retrieval We propose a self-supervised word-segmentation technique for Chinese information retrieval. This method combines the advantages of traditional dictionary based approaches with character based approaches, while overcoming many of their shortcomings. Experiments on TREC data show comparable performance to both the dictionary based and the character based approaches. However, our method is language independent and unsupervised, which provides a promising avenue for constructing accurate multilingual information retrieval systems that are flexible and adaptive.
564441	Task orientation in question answering An abstract is not available.
564442	Experiments in high-dimensional text categorization We present results for automated text categorization of the Reuters-810000 collection of news stories. Our experiments use the entire one-year collection of 810,000 stories and the entire subject index. We divide the data into monthly groups and provide an initial benchmark of text categorization performance on the complete collection. Experimental results show that efficient sparse-feature implementations of linear methods and decision trees, using a global unstemmed dictionary, can readily handle applications of this size. Predictive performance is approximately as strong as the best results for the much smaller older Reuters collections. Detailed results are provided over time periods. It is shown that a smaller time horizon does not diminish predictive quality, implying reduced demands for retraining when sample size is large.
564443	The relationship between ASK and relevance criteria An abstract is not available.
564444	ICA and SOM in text document analysis In this study we show experimental results on using Independent Component Analysis (ICA) and the Self-Organizing Map (SOM) in document analysis. Our documents are segments of spoken dialogues carried out over the telephone in a customer service, transcribed into text. The task is to analyze the topics of the discussions, and to group the discussions into meaningful subsets. The quality of the grouping is studied by comparing to a manual topical classification of the documents.
564445	Improving hierarchical text classification using unlabeled data An abstract is not available.
564447	Amilcare: adaptive information extraction for document annotation An abstract is not available.
564448	The impact of corpus size on question answering performance Using our question answering system, questions from the TREC 2001 evaluation were executed over a series of Web data collections, with the sizes of the collections increasing from 25 gigabytes up to nearly a terabyte.
564451	The web retrieval task and its evaluation in the third NTCIR workshop This paper gives an overview of the evaluation method used for the Web Retrieval Task in the Third NTCIR Workshop, which is currently in progress. In the Web Retrieval Task, we try to assess the retrieval effectiveness of each Web search engine system using a common data set, and attempt to build a re-usable test collection suitable for evaluating Web search engine systems. With these objectives, we have built 100-gigabyte and 10-gigabyte document sets, mainly gathered from the '.jp' domain. Relevance judgment is performed on the retrieved documents, which are written in Japanese or English.
564455	User-centered interface design for cross-language information retrieval This paper reports on the user-centered design methodology and techniques used for the elicitation of user requirements and how these requirements informed the first phase of the user interface design for a Cross-Language Information Retrieval System. We describe a set of factors involved in analysis of the data collected and, finally discuss the implications for user interface design based on the findings.
564456	Implementation of relevance feedback for content-based music retrieval based on user prefences An abstract is not available.
564458	A visualisation tool for topic tracking analysis and development Topic Detection and Tracking (TDT) research explores the development of algorithms to detect novel events and track their development over time for online reports. Development of these methods requires careful evaluation and analysis. Traditional reductive methods of evaluation only represent some of the available information of algorithm behaviour. We describe a visualisation tool for topic tracking which makes it easy to analysis and compare the temporal behaviour of tracking algorithms.
564462	The boomerang effect: retrieving scientific documents via the network of references and citations An abstract is not available.
564463	A logistic regression approach to distributed IR This poster session examines a probabilistic approach to distributed information retrieval using a Logistic Regression algorithm for estimation of collection relevance. The algorithm is compared to other methods for distributed search using test collections developed for distributed search evaluation.
564465	A critical examination of TDT's cost function Topic Detection and Tracking (TDT) tasks are evaluated using a cost function. The standard TDT cost function assumes a constant probability of relevance P (rel) across all topics. In practice, P (rel) varies widely across topics. We argue using both theoretical and experimental evidence that the cost function should be modified to account for the varying P (rel).
564470	Experiments on data fusion using headline information This poster describes initial work exploring a relatively unexamined area of data fusion: fusing the results of retrieval systems whose collections have no overlap between them. Many of the effective meta-search/data fusion strategies gain much of their success from exploiting document overlap across the source systems being merged. When the intersection of the collections is the empty set, the strategies generally degrade to a simpler form. In order to address such situations, two strategies were examined: re-ranking of merged results using a locally run search on the text fragments returned by the source search engines; and re-ranking based on cross document similarity, again using text fragments presented in the retrieved list. Results, from experiments, which go beyond previous work, indicate that both strategies improve fusion effectiveness.
564472	Topic structure modeling In this paper, we present a method based on document probes to quantify and diagnose topic structure, distinguishing topics as monolithic, structured, or diffuse. The method also yields a structure analysis that can be used directly to optimize filter (classifier) creation. Preliminary results illustrate the predictive value of the approach on TREC/Reuters-96 topics.
564479	User interface effects in past batch versus user experiments An abstract is not available.
564482	Probabilistic multimedia retrieval We present a framework in which probabilistic models for textual and visual information retrieval can be integrated seamlessly. The framework facilitates searching for imagery using textual descriptions and visual examples simultaneously. The underlying Language Models for text and Gaussian Mixture Models for images have proven successful in various retrieval tasks.
564483	Chinese keyword extraction based on max-duplicated strings of the documents The corpus analysis methods in Chinese keyword extraction look on the corpus as a single sample of language stochastic process. But the distributions of keywords in the whole corpus and in each document are very different from each other. The extraction based on global statistical information only can get significant keywords in the whole corpus. Max-duplicated strings contain the local significant keywords in each document. In this paper, we designed an efficient algorithm to extract the max-duplicated strings by building PAT-tree for the document, so that the keywords can be picked out from the max-duplicated strings by their SIG values in the corpus.
564485	Correlating multilingual documents via bipartite graph modeling There is enormous amount of multilingual documents from various sources and possibly from different countries describing a single event or a set of related events. It is desirable to construct text mining methods that can compare and highlight similarities and differences of those multilingual documents. We discuss our ongoing research that seeks to model a pair of multilingual documents as a weighted bipartite graph with the edge weights computed by means of machine translation. We use spectral method to identify dense subgraphs of the weighted bipartite graph which can be considered as corresponding to sentences that correlate well in textual contents. We illustrate our approach using English and German texts.
564489	UTACLIR -: general query translation framework for several language pairs An abstract is not available.
564490	HyREX: hyper-media retrieval engine for XML An abstract is not available.
564491	Query performance analyser -: a web-based tool for IR research and instruction The Interactive Query Performance Analyser (QPA) for information retrieval systems is a Web-based tool for analysing and comparing the performance of individual queries. On top of a standard test collection, it gives an instant visualisation of the performance achieved in a given search topic by any user-generated query. In addition to experimental IR research, QPA can be used in user training to demonstrate the characteristics of and compare differences between IR systems and searching strategies. The first prototype (versions 3.0 and 3.5) of the Query Performance Analyser was developed at the Department of Information Studies, University of Tampere, to serve as a tool for rapid query performance analysis, comparison and visualisation [4,5]. Later, it has been applied to interactive optimisation of queries [2,3]. The analyser has served also in learning environments for IR [1].The demonstration is based on the newest version of the Query Performance Analyser (v. 5.1). It is interfaced to a traditional Boolean IR system (TRIP) and a probabilistic IR system (Inquery) providing access to the TREC collection and two Finnish test collections. Version 5.1 supports multigraded relevance scales, new types of performance visualisations, and query conversions based on mono- and multi-lingual dictionaries. The motivation in developing the analyser is to emphasise the necessity of analysing the behaviour of individual queries. Information retrieval experiments usually measure the average effectiveness of IR methods developed. The analysis of individual queries is neglected although test results may contain individual test topics where general findings do not hold. For the real user of an IR system, the study of variation in results is even more important than averages.
564495	Hierarchical approach to term suggestion device Our demonstration shows the hierarchy system working on a locally run search engine. Hierarchies are dynamically generated from the retrieved documents, and visualised on the menus. When a user selects a term from the hierarchy, the documents linked to the term are listed, and the term is then added to the initial query to rerun a search. Through the demonstration we illustrate how hierarchical presentation of expansion terms is achieved, and how our approach supports users to articulate their information needs using the hierarchy.
564496	Translingual vocabulary mappings for multilingual information access An abstract is not available.
383960	Using event segmentation to improve indexing of consumer photographs Automatic albuming --- the automatic organization of photographs, either as an end in itself or for use in other applications -- is an application that promises to be of great assistance to photographers. Relatively sophisticated image content analysis techniques have been used for image indexing, organization and retrieval. In this paper, we describe a method of organizing photographs into events using spoken photograph captions. The results of this process can be used to improve image indexing and retrieval.
383964	Meta-scoring: automatically evaluating term weighting schemes in IR without precision-recall In this paper, we present a method that can automatically evaluate performance of different term weighting schemes in information retrieval without resorting to precision-recall based on human relevance judgments. Specifically, the problem is: given two document-term matrixes generated from two different term weighting schemes, can we tell which term weighting scheme will performance better than the other? We propose a meta-scoring function, which takes as input the document-term matrix generated by some term weighting scheme and computes a goodness score from the document-term matrix. In our experiments, we found out that this score is highly correlated with the precision-recall measurement for all the collections and term weighting schema we tried. Thus, we conclude that our meta-scoring function can be a substitute for the precision-recall measurement that needs relevance judgments of human subject. Furthermore, this meta-scoring function is not limited only to text information retrieval can be applied to fields such as image and DNA retrieval.
383993	Evaluating a content based image retrieval system Content Based Image Retrieval (CBIR) presents special challenges in terms of how image data is indexed, accessed, and how end systems are evaluated. This paper discusses the design of a CBIR system that uses global colour as the primary indexing key, and a user centered evaluation of the systems visual search tools. The results indicate that users are able to make use of a range of visual search tools, and that different tools are used at different points in the search process. The results also show that the provision of a structured navigation and browsing tool can support image retrieval, particularly in situations in which the user does not have a target image in mind. The results are discussed in terms of their implications for the design of visual search tools, and their implications for the use of user-centered evaluation for CBIR systems.
384015	Intelligent information triage In many applications, large volumes of time-sensitive textual information require triage: rapid, approximate prioritization for subsequent action. In this paper, we explore the use of prospective indications of the importance of a time-sensitive document, for the purpose of producing better document filtering or ranking. By prospective, we mean importance that could be assessed by actions that occur in the future. For example, a news story may be assessed (retrospectively) as being important, based on events that occurred after the story appeared, such as a stock price plummeting or the issuance of many follow-up stories. If a system could anticipate (prospectively) such occurrences, it could provide a timely indication of importance. Clearly, perfect prescience is impossible. However, sometimes there is sufficient correlation between the content of an information item and the events that occur subsequently. We describe a process for creating and evaluating approximate information-triage procedures that are based on prospective indications. Unlike many information-retrieval applications for which document labeling is a laborious, manual process, for many prospective criteria it is possible to build very large, labeled, training corpora automatically. Such corpora can be used to train text classification procedures that will predict the (prospective) importance of each document. This paper illustrates the process with two case studies, demonstrating the ability to predict whether a news story will be followed by many, very similar news stories, and also whether the stock price of one or more companies associated with a news story will move significantly following the appearance of that story. We conclude by discussing how the comprehensibility of the learned classifiers can be critical to success.}
384028	Searcher performance in question answering There are many tasks that require information finding. Some can be largely automated, and others greatly benefit from successful interaction between system and searcher. We are interested in the task of answering questions where some synthesis of information is required-the answer would not generally be given from a single passage of a single document. We investigate whether variation in the way a list of documents is delivered affected searcher performance in the question answering task. We will show that there is a significant difference in performance using a list customized to the task type, compared with a standard web-engine list. This indicates that paying attention to the task and the searcher interaction may provide substantial improvement in task performance.
384029	Toward an improved concept-based information retrieval system This paper presents a novel information retrieval system that includes 1) the addition of concepts to facilitate the identification of the correct word sense, 2) a natural language query interface, 3) the inclusion of weights and penalties for proper nouns that build upon the Okapi weighting scheme, and 4) a term clustering technique that exploits the spatial proximity of search terms in a document to further improve the performance. The effectiveness of the system is validated by experimental results.
384030	Metasearch consistency We investigate the performance of metasearch algorithms in terms of how much they improve consistency . We find that three different metasearch algorithms, each over three datasets, usually improve the consistency of search results; sometimes the improvement is dramatic. Furthermore, consistency tends to improve when performance improves.
384032	Selecting expansion terms in automatic query expansion An abstract is not available.
384034	Analyses of multiple-evidence combinations for retrieval strategies An abstract is not available.
384035	Flexible pseudo-relevance feedback using optimization tables An abstract is not available.
384037	Quantifying the utility of parallel corpora Our English-Chinese cross-language IR system is trained from parallel corpora; we investigate its performance as a function of training corpus size for three different training corpora. We find that the performance of the system as trained on the three parallel corpora can be related by a simple measure, namely the out-of-vocabulary rate of query words.
384039	Probabilistic combination of content and links Previous research has shown that citations and hypertext links can be usefully combined with document content to improve retrieval. Links can be used in many ways, e.g., link topology can be used to identify important pages, anchor text can be used to augment the text of cited pages, and activation can be spread to linked pages. This paper introduces a probabilistic model that integrates content matching and these three uses of link information in a single unified framework. Experiments with a web collection show benefits for link information especially for general queries.
384041	Structure and content-based segmentation of speech transcripts algorithm for the segmentation of an audio/video source into topically cohesive segments based on automatic speech recognition (ASR) transcriptions is presented. A novel two-pass algorithm is described that combines a boundary-based method with a content-based method. In the first pass, the temporal proximity and the rate of arrival of ngram features is analyzed in order to compute an initial segmentation. In the content- based second pass, changes in content-bearing words are detected by using the ngram features as queries in an information-retrieval system. The second pass validates the initial segments and merges them as needed. Feasibility of the segmentation task can vary enormously depending on the structure of the audio content, and the accuracy of ASR. For real-world corporate training data our method identifies, at worst, a single salient segment of the audio and, at best, a high-level table-of-contents. We illustrate the algorithm in detail with some examples and validate the results with segmentation boundaries generated manually.
384062	Query-biased web page summarisation: a task-oriented evaluation We present a system that offers a new way of assessing web document relevance and new approach to the web-based evaluation of such a system. Provisionally named WebDocSum, the system is a query-biased web page summariser that aims to provide an alternative to the short, irrelevant abstracts typical of many web search result lists. Based on an initial evaluation the system appears to be more useful in helping users gauge document relevance than the traditional ranked titles/abstracts approach.
384065	Generic topic segmentation of document texts Topic segmentation is an important initial step in many text-based tasks. A hierarchical representation of a texts topics is useful in retrieval and allows judging relevancy at different levels of detail. This short paper describes research on generic algorithms for topic detection and segmentation that are applicable on texts of heterogeneous types and domains.
384070	Feature selection for polyphonic music retrieval An abstract is not available.
384071	Automatic information extraction from web pages Many web pages have implicit structure. In this paper, we show the feasibility of automatically extracting data from web pages by using approximate matching techniques. This can be applied to generate automatic wrappers or to notify/display web page differences, web page change monitoring, etc.
384072	Automatic web search query generation to create minority language corpora The Web is a valuable source of language specific resources but collecting, organizing and utilizing this information is difficult. We describe CorpusBuilder, an approach for automatically generating Web-search queries to collect documents in a minority language. It differs from pseudo-relevance feedback in that retrieved documents are labeled by an automatic language classifier as relevant or irrelevant and a subset of documents is used to generate new queries. We experiment with various query-generation methods and query-lengths to find inclusion/exclusion terms that are helpful for finding documents in the target language and find that using odds-ratio scores calculated over the documents acquired so far was one of the most consistently accurate query-generation methods. We also describe experiments using a handful of words elicited from a user instead of initial documents and show that the methods perform similarly. Applying the same approach to multiple languages show that our system generalizes to a variety of languages.
384080	A method based on the chi-square test for document classification We introduce a method for document classification based on using the chi-square test to identify characteristic vocabulary of document classes.
384083	Query clustering using content words and user feedback Query clustering is crucial for automatically discovering frequently asked queries (FAQs) or most popular topics on a question-answering search engine. Due to the short length of queries, the traditional approaches based on keywords are not suitable for query clustering. This paper describes our attempt to cluster similar queries according to their contents as well as the document click information in the user logs.
384091	iFind: a web image search engine An abstract is not available.
384095	The HySpirit retrieval platform An abstract is not available.
636821	Monitoring and evaluation of information systems via transaction log analysis Transaction log analysis represents a powerful methodology which allows examination of both user commands and system responses when conducting an online information search. Machine-readable transaction log tapes from online catalogs are obtained and subsequently analyzed using stochastic pattern developments within parsed user sessions, mathematical models utilizing Markov chain analysis and the development of state transition probability matrices, which illustrate the probability of proceeding from one user or system state to another state. The objective of monitoring information systems and using transaction log analysis is to discover the extent to which systems are used and to determine the actual user patterns when conducting an information search. This in turn can aid in the evaluation of such systems and assist in the improvement of existing and future systems. Such analysis can assist in system design, while the predictive power of the methodology may allow real-time aids to be developed.As examples of the use of the methodology, patron use and system response patterns from several online public catalogs have been obtained by transaction log tapes. This paper presents an overview of the methodology, results obtained, and efforts that are being conducted within OCLC's Office of Research.
636829	MARS: a retrieval tool on the basis of morphological analysis In this paper we present the system MARS which has been designed for potential database users working with retrieval systems. It is an instrument that is to assist the retriever in specifying the search queries. MARS is an aid for increasing termprecision as well as for finding previously unknown terms which are morphologically related to user search terms. This is achieved by way of linguistic procedures as opposed to conventional mechanical operations such as truncation etc. The morpheme lexicon and the morphological decomposition procedures are described briefly. MARS was put to the test in a real-world situation the results of which will be presented.
636671	A term weighting model based on utility theory An abstract is not available.
636672	A comparison of two weighting schemes for Boolean retrieval An abstract is not available.
636678	Representation of knowledge in a legal information retrieval system An abstract is not available.
636679	Retrieving time information from natural-language texts An abstract is not available.
636682	The fact database: a system based on inferential methods An abstract is not available.
636683	Methods for the administration of textual data in database systems An abstract is not available.
636684	Problems in the simulation of bibliographic retrieval systems An abstract is not available.
636685	Measurement-theoretical investigation of the MZ-metric An abstract is not available.
636689	Browsing through databases An abstract is not available.
636690	A probabilistic algorithm for nearest neighbour searching An abstract is not available.
636691	A model of a document-clustering-based information retrieval system with a Boolean search request formulation An abstract is not available.
636692	'Memex' as an image of potentiality in information retrieval research and development An abstract is not available.
636718	An intelligent terminal for implementing relevance feedback on large operational retrieval systems Research has shown that document retrieval based on weighting functions and incorporating relevance feedback may be more effective than retrieval based on Boolean combinations. These novel methods have not been adopted by the large operational systems. In this paper, a software implementation of an 'intelligent terminal' is described. It overcomes many of the objections to non-Boolean retrieval. It is linked to an operational database via EURONET, and includes such features as the weighting of search terms, the construction and submission of search statements in the Common Command Language of EURONET, and the use of relevance feedback information to improve retrieval.
636721	On the architecture of a system integrating data base management and information retrieval The data model, i.e. data structures and operations needed for a system integrating the management of formated textual data (DBMIRS) are discussed. It is investigated how this data model fits into the ANSI-SPARC three schema architecture for data base management systems. The conclusion is that the DBMIRS should be regarded to be a new external data model. This would require only small changes to the concepts discussed so far for the conceptual and internal level. The advantages of this approach are:- The dichotomy between IRS and DBMS does not further exist.- The main part of the software can be used for IR systems as well as DB systems.- IR research can concentrate on the problems inherent in the retrieval of texts, e.g. automatic indexing, relevance feedback techniques.
636722	Probabilistic approaches to the document retrieval problem An abstract is not available.
636723	The unified probabilistic model for IR An abstract is not available.
636724	Explanation and generalization of vector models in information retrieval An abstract is not available.
636727	A decision theory approach to optimal automatic indexing A decision theory approach to the development of retrieval systems is presented. Within this framework, optimalindexing is defined. Both the searching and the indexing problem turn out to have a common structure which is described using the concept of a 'recognition problem'. A knowledge based approach to an approximately optimalindexing, strictly related to the information need of user is outlined. The theory and the used approximation methods are illustrated by a brief description of WAI/AIR projects and some of their results.
636729	Techniques for measuring the stability of clustering: a comparative study Among the significant factors in assessing the suitability of a clustering technique to a given application is its stability; that is, how sensitive the algorithm is to perturbations in the input data. A number of techniques that appear to be suitable for measuring the stability of clustering have been published in the literature. The details about each of these measures, such as a description of the steps involved in their computation and an identification of precisely what they measure, are presented. These measures are considered in the context of analysing the stability characteristics of clustering techniques and are compared using a framework developed for this purpose. The question of generalizing some of these measures is addressed and the measures are also analyzed to identify conditions under which they can be reduced to one another.
636731	From research to application: the cite natural language information retrieval system Large operational information retrieval systems typically employ inverted file structures and Boolean logic operators for efficient text retrieval. These systems require considerable user training for effective use. As a consequence, searching is commonly performed by professional intermediaries on behalf of end users.By contrast, many small scale experimental retrieval systems incorporate desirable user interface features, such as natural (English) language querying, ranked output and relevance feedback.The author describes the design and implementation of a natural language search interface to MEDLINE, the National library of Medicines largest and most heavily used data base. The CITE (Current Information Transfer in English) prototype system is a large-scale, weighted logic information retrieval system with natural language query input, ranked search output, dynamic user feedback and automatic associative vocabulary mapping capahilities.
62461	Concept based retrieval in classical IR systems This paper describes some aspects of a project with the aim of developing a user-friendly interface to a classical Information Retrieval (IR) System in order to improve the effectiveness of retrieval. The character by character approach to IR has been abandoned in favor of an approach based on the meaning of both the queries and the texts containing the information to be sought. The concept space, locally derived from a thesaurus, is used to represent a query as well as documents retrieved in atomic concept units. Dependencies between the search terms are taken into account. The meanings of the query and the retrieved documents (results of Elementary Logical Conjuncts (ELCs)) are compared. The ranking method on the semantical level is used in connection with existing data of a classical IR system. The user enters queries without using complex Boolean expressions.
62475	Query processing in a heterogeneous retrieval network The concept of a large-scale information retrieval network incorporating heterogeneous retrieval systems and users is introduced, and the necessary components for enabling term-based searching of any database by untrained end-users are outlined. We define a normal form for expression of queries, show that such queries can be automatically produced, if necessary, from a natural-language request for information, and give algorithms for translating such queries, with little or no loss of expressiveness, into equivalent queries on both Boolean and term-vector type retrieval systems. We conclude with a proposal for extending this approach to arbitrary database models.
62477	Some measures and procedures for evaluation of the user interface in an information retrieval system Planning the evaluation of an information retrieval system involves two steps: first, a determination of performance descriptors and measures appropriate to the system objectives and, secondly, a development of an evaluation design which ensures the effect of variation in components of interest will be isolated and assessed in an unbiased fashion. This paper examines the question of retrieval system evaluation from the perspective of the user. It presents evaluation procedures which are appropriate to this perspective and which can be used to isolate the effect of variation in the user interface to the system. The general procedure is exemplified by an application to evaluation of an experimental OPAC interface.
62491	Retrieving documents by plausible inference: a priliminary study Choosing an appropriate document representation and search strategy for document retrieval has been largely guided by achieving good average performance instead of optimizing the results for each individual query. A model of retrieval based on plausible inference gives us a different perspective and suggests that techniques should be found for combining multiple sources of evidence (or search strategies) into an overall assessment of a document's relevance, rather than attempting to pick a single strategy. In this paper, we explain our approach to plausible inference for retrieval and describe some preliminary experiments designed to test this approach. The experiments use a spreading activation search to implement the plausible inference process. The results show that significant effectiveness improvements are possible using this approach.
62498	Rough sets and information retrieval The theory of rough sets was introduced [PAWLAK82]. It allows us to classify objects into sets of equivalent members based on their attributes. We may then examine any combination of the same objects (or even their attributes) using the resultant classification. The theory has direct applications in the design and evaluation of classification schemes and the selection of discriminating attributes. Pawlak's papers discuss its application in the domain of medical diagnostic systems. Here we apply it to the design of information retrieval systems accessing collections of documents. Advantages offered by the theory are: the implicit inclusion of Boolean logic; term weighting; and the ability to rank retrieved documents. In the first section we describe the theory. This is derived from the work by [PAWLAK84, PAWLAK82] and includes only the most relevant aspects of the theory. In the second we apply it to information retrieval. Specifically, we design the approximation space, search strategies as well as illustrate the application of relevance feedback to improve document indexing. Following this in section three we compare the rough set formalism to the Boolean, vector and fuzzy models of information retrieval. Finally we present a small scale evaluation of rough sets which indicates its potential in information retrieval.
62505	Integrated information retrieval for law in a hypertext environment A prototype information retrieval system for lawyers, Justus , has been developed on a Sun workstation to run in a Guide hypertext environment. The hypertext database is created automatically by Justus from machine readable versions of the ordinary printed texts, ideally the publisher's typesetting tapes. The database incorporates primary legal sources, such as statutes and cases, and secondary sources, such as textbooks and a dictionary. Initially, the lawyer may select any document in the system. From this initial document, he may access any other document, or part of any other document, to which reference is made. Reference selection is by a pointing device, such as a mouse. There is no limit on the number of selections that can be made, and no restrictions on the path through the system.
317885	The economics of search An abstract is not available.
511288	The function of semantics in automated language processing This paper is a survey of some of the major semantic models that have been developed for automated semantic analysis of natural language. Current approaches to semantic analysis and logical inference are based mainly on models of human cognitive processes such as Quillian's semantic memory, Simmon's Protosynthex III and others. All existing systems and/or models, more or less experimental, were applied to a small subset of English. They are highly tentative because the definitions of semantic processes and semantically structured lexicons are not formulated rigorously. This is due mainly to the fact that it is unknown whether a unique, consistent hierarchization of the semantic features of language is possible.However, the models described are significant contributions to an unexplored field called semantics. The progressive development of a sophisticated, semantically based system for automated processing of natural language is a realistic goal. It should not be neglected, despite the fact that it is difficult to predict when this goal will be achieved.
511289	How features resolve syntactic ambiguity Ambiguity is a pervasive and important aspect of natural language. Ambiguities, which are disambiguated by context, contribute powerfully to the expressiveness of natural language as compared to formal languages. In computational systems using natural language, problems of properly controlling ambiguity are particularly large, partially because of the necessity to circumvent parsings due to multiple orderings in the application of rules.Features, that is, subcategorizations of parts-of-speech, constitute an effective means for controlling syntactic ambiguity through ordering the hierarchical organization of syntactic constituents. This is the solution adopted for controlling ambiguity in REL English, which is part of the REL (Rapidly Extensible Language) System. REL is a total software system for facilitating man/machine communications. The efficiency of processing natural language in REL English is achieved both by the detailed syntactic aspects which are incorporated into the REL English grammar, and by means of the particular implementation for processing features in the parsing algorithm.
511290	The converse natural language data management system: current status and plans This paper presents an overview of research in progress in which the principal aim is the achievement of more natural and expressive modes of on-line communication with complexly structured data bases. A natural-language compiler has been constructed that accepts sentences in a user-extendable English subset, produces surface and deep-structure syntactic analyses, and uses a network of concepts to construct semantic interpretations formalized as computable procedures. The procedures are evaluated by a data management system that updates, modifies, and searches data bases that can be formalized as finite models of states of affairs. The system has been designed and programmed to handle large vocabularies and large collections of facts efficiently. Plans for extending the research vehicle to interface with a deductive inference component and a voice input-output effort are briefly described.
511293	Full text document retrieval: Hebrew legal texts (report on the first phase of the responsa retrieval project) A full text retrieval system was designed for the responsa literature, which is a large corpus of Hebrew legal cases. The unique problems of the data base --- mixture of Hebrew, Aramaic and vernaculars, lack of vowels and punctuation, extreme language inflection problems, homographs, existence of thousands of grammatical variants of any given keyword --- dictated development of new methods. Among them we list "grammatical synthesis", which synthesizes all grammatical variants of a given keyword; "Compact KWIC", which enables the user to have a glimpse of the nature of the search before having performed it; effective citation index imbedded in full text searches; and, in general, extensive use of both positive and negative feedback within a single search run. A number of searches performed on a relatively small data base gave in each case a recall of 100%. The average precision was 34%. A KWIC of strategic portions of retrieved documents usually enables a quick disposal of non-relevant material.
511303	Quantitative evaluation of design tradeoffs in file systems The design of a file system has never been a simple nor a straightforward task because of its complexity. Heuristics and experience still play a major role in guiding the design process. To organize the entire design process in a more systematic manner, large scale simulation has proved to be an effective technique. The FOREM models developed during the past several years (specifically for the evaluation of file system designs) represent facilities of this type. This paper utilizes the FOREM model as the principal tool and presents a hypothetical design example dealing with many essential issues of the design process. Evaluation of designs of several other actual file systems are also being carried out and will be reported at a later date. Only through quantitative evaluation can each design decision be arrived at correctly and the possible tradeoffs be identified.
511304	Elements of the randomized combinatorial file structure A file structure designed to provide rapid, random access with minimum storage overhead is presented. Storage and retrieval are achieved by direct attribute combination-to-address transformation thereby negating the necessity for large file dictionaries or list-pointer structures. The attribute combination-to-address transformation is conceptually similar to key-to-address transformation techniques, but the transformation is not limited to operations on a single key but operates on the combination of several independent keys (or any subset of the combination) describing an item or request.A storage and retrieval system utilizing the combinatorial file structure is developed. Storage and retrieval results derived from a simulated document library of 4000 items are presented. The new file organization is shown to have marked value with respect to minimum storage overhead and high retrieval speed.
511305	A balanced tree storage and retrieval algorithm A storage and retrieval scheme which places items to be stored at the nodes of a binary tree is discussed. The tree is always balanced in a certain sense thus insuring that no excessively long search paths can exist. In addition to presenting the storage and retrieval algorithms, the deletion problem is also solved. The programming approaches involved yield a non-trivial case study of list-processing techniques. Finally, a cost analysis is given.
62438	A look back and a look forward This paper is in two parts, following the suggestion that I first comment on my own past experience in information retrieval, and then present my views on the present and future.
62442	Natural language techniques for intelligent information retrieval Neither natural language processing nor information retrieval is any longer a young field, but the two areas have yet to achieve a graceful interaction. Mainly, the reason for this incompatibility is that information retrieval technology depends upon relatively simple but robust methods, while natural language processing involves complex knowledge-based systems that have never approached robustness. We provide an analysis of areas in which natural language and information retrieval come together, and describe a system that joins the two fields by combining technology, choice of application area, and knowledge acquisition techniques.
62443	Correction of phonographic errors in natural language interfaces In this paper, we point out that, in applications available to the general public, and/or natural language interfaces, the correction of phonographic errors (which are competence errors) is far more important than the correction of typographical errors (which are simply performance errors). Many studies aimed at the correction of typographical errors have been carried out, but relatively few tackle the problem of phonographic correction, and they are generally based on more or less ad hoc methods. We propose a mathematical framework for phonographic correction by defining a similarity relation between phonetically related substrings and a dissimilarity index between strings. We also provide a simple and efficient algorithm for recognizing words in dictionaries from misspelt inputs including both typographical and phonographic errors.
62446	On the nature and fuction of explanation in intelligent information retrieval We discuss the complexity of explanation activity in human-human goal-directed dialogue, and suggest that this complexity ought to be taken account of in the design of explanation in human-computer interaction. We propose a general model of clarity in human-computer systems, of which explanation is one component. On the bases of: this model; of a model of human-intermediary interaction in the document retrieval situation as one of cooperative model-building for the purpose of developing an appropriate search formulation; and, on the results of empirical observation of human user-human intermediary interaction in information systems, we propose a model for explanation by the computer intermediary in information retrieval.
62448	Knowledge representation, connectionism and conceptual retrieval Knowledge Representation (KR) systems provide support for Artificial Intelligence systems that reason about relationships between objects in their domains of expertise. Because of their support for inference, KR systems appear to have potential to enrich the kind of retrievals that IR systems might make. Ironically, however, the most useful KR systems are limited to reasoning based on a rigid notion of validity, and thus are awkward to use when relevant but inexact retrievals are desired. We have been exploring the potential of a “connectionist” model—the Boltzmann Machine—to overcome this limitation. We report on a number of experiments in which we use a connectionist simulator to support similarity-based reasoning in a frame representation. We draw some tentative, mixed conclusions on the potential for a union of KR, IR, and connectionism.
62451	Two learning schemes in information retrieval Two methods are given to improve weighting schemes by using relevance information of a set of queries. The first method is to estimate parameter values of two independence models in information retrieval — the binary independence model and the non-binary independence model. The parameters estimated here are used to calculate optimal weights for terms in a different set of queries. Performance of this estimation is compared to the inverse document frequency method, the cosine measure, and the statistical similarity measure. The second method is to learn optimal weights of the non-binary independence model adaptively by a learning formula. Experiments are performed on three different document collections CISI, MEDLARS, and CRN4NUL for both methods, and results are reported. Both methods show improvements compared to the existing weighting schemes. Experimental results show that the second method gives slightly better performance than the first one, and has simpler implementation.
62455	Information retrieval using impression of documents as a clue Proposed here is an internal representation and mapping method for multimedia information in which retrieval is based on the impression documents are desired to make. A user interface design for a system using this method is also proposed. The proposed internal representation and mapping method represents each desired document impression as an axis in a semantic space. Documents are represented as points in the space. Queries are represented as subspaces. The proposed user interface design employs a method of visual presentation of the semantic space. For evaluation purposes, a prototype system has been developed. An image retrieval experiment shows that the proposed internal representation and mapping method and the user interface design provide effective tools for information retrieval.
62457	A utility-theoretic analysis of expected search length In this paper the expected search length, which is a measure of retrieval system performance, is investigated from the viewpoint of axiomatic utility theory. Necessary and sufficient criteria for the expected search length to be an ordinal scale and sufficient criteria that it is a ratio scale are given.
75336	In search of knowledge-based search tactics Knowledge-based search tactics are discussed in terms of their role in the functioning of a semantically-based search system for bibliographic information retrieval. This prototype system, EP-X, actively assists users in defining or refining their topics of interest. It does so by applying search tactics to a knowledge-base describing topics in a particular domain and a database describing the contents of individual documents. This paper reviews the empirical studies that lead to the two central concepts implemented in EP-X: Semantically-based search; Knowledge-based search tactics.
75341	Integrated information retrieval in a knowledge worker support system This paper describes the design of the information retrieval facilities of an integrated information system called EUROMATH. EUROMATH is an example of a Knowledge Worker Support System: it has been designed specifically to support mathematicians in their research work. EUROMATH is required to provide uniform retrieval facilities for searching in a user's personal data, in a shared database of structured documents and in public, bibliographic databases. The design of information retrieval facilities that satisfy these and other requirements posed several interesting design issues regarding the integration of various retrieval techniques. As well as a uniform query language, designed to be highly usable by the target user group, the retrieval facilities provide expert intermediary functions, i.e. sophisticated support for the retrieval of bibliographic data. This support is achieved using a model of the user, a model of the user's information need and a set of search strategies based on those used by human intermediaries. The expert intermediary facilities include extensive help facilities, automatic query reformulation and browsing of a variety of sources of query terms.
75342	Retrieval system evaluation using recall and precision: problems and answers An abstract is not available.
75347	Retrieving highly dynamic widely distributed information Wide area networks provide a variety of information sources which can be exploited only by appropriate information retrieval techniques such as repeated automatic query of remote databases and bulletin boards. Distinctive features of the content and access methods of information on wide area nets are discussed from an IR perspective. The development, algorithms, and analysis of a functioning system are also presented.
75348	The constituent object parser: syntactic structure matching for information retrieval An abstract is not available.
75350	File organizations and access methods for CLV disks A large and important class of optical disc technology are CLV format discs such as CD ROM and WORM. In this paper, we examine the issues related to the implementation and performance of several different file organizations on CLV format optical discs such as CD ROM and WORM. The organizations examined are based on hashing and trees. The CLV recording scheme is shown to be a good environment for efficiently implementing hashing. Single seek access and storage utilization levels approaching 100% can be achieved for CD ROM's. It is shown that a B-tree organization is not a good choice for WORM discs (both CAV and CLV), but a modified ISAM approach can be appropriate for WORM discs. We describe clustered BIM's, a class of tree organizations appropriate for CD ROMS. Expressions for the expected retrieval performance of both hashing and trees are also given. The paper concludes by outlining recent results and future directions on buffered implementations of access methods for WORM discs, as well as advantages of signature based access methods for text retrieval in WORM disc architectures.
75352	A new approach to text searching We introduce a family of simple and fast algorithms for solving the classical string matching problem, string matching with don't care symbols and complement symbols, and multiple patterns. In addition we solve the same problems allowing up to k mismatches. Among the features of these algorithms are that they are real time algorithms, they don't need to buffer the input, and they are suitable to be implemented in hardware.
75353	Multikey access methods based on term discrimination and signature clustering In order to improve the two-level signature file method designed by Sacks-Davis et al. [20], we propose new multikey access methods based on term discrimination and signature clustering. By term discrimination, we create separate, efficient access methods for the terms frequently used in user queries. We in addition cluster similar signatures by means of these terms so that we may achieve good performance on retrieval. Meanwhile we provide the space-time analysis of the proposed methods and compare them with the two-level signature file method. We show that the proposed methods achieve 15-30% savings in retrieval time and require 3-9 % more storage overhead.
75354	Indexing medical reports in a multimedia environment: the RIME experimental approach This paper focuses on the RIME system aimed to the indexing of medical reports in a multimedia environment. This particular application is viewed as representative of a large set of still unanswered needs of large communities of users: domain experts dealing with on-line specialized documentation such as software engineers, medical specialists and so on. In this application textual information appears as an interesting media to access related pictures in the data base. After the presentation of the application and a study of the particular corpus involved we define a semantic model for the documents which is based on a Conceptual Language. Then we detail the indexing process and its various linguistic components which perform the translation of every medical report according to this semantic model.
75357	Information retrieval using a hypertext-based help system Hypertext offers users a simple, flexible way to navigate through electronic information systems but at the potential risk of becoming lost in the network of interconnected pieces of information. A study was conducted on information retrieval using a commercial hypertext based help system. It was found that the predominant search strategy was “browsing” (characterized by scanning tables of contents and paging through topics), rather than employing the indexes (“analytical search”). Although subjects did not become lost, individuals with better spatial visualization ability, as measured by a standardized test, were faster at retrieving information and returned to the top of the information hierarchy less often than those with poorer spatial visualization ability. These results support previous studies that have found a strong preference by users to browse in hypertext systems and extend those findings to a new domain (help), a different type of user interface, and a different information architecture. In addition, the results demonstrate the importance of spatial visualization ability for efficient navigation and information retrieval in a hierarchical hypertext system.
75358	A hypertext knowledge based for primary care - LIMEDS in LINCKS In organized health care, primary care is the first level. It is characterized by the wide span of health problems managed as well as remote location from traditional medical information and knowledge sources. The LIMEDS project has formulated the special requirements for integrated knowledge and data base management in primary care. This paper presents Gösta's book , a hypertext knowledge base implemented in LINCKS, an object oriented, networked database system. Firstly, aspects which make integrated hypermedia systems particularly suitable for application in primary health care are explored. We then describe the hypertext knowledge base, consisting of 500 basic text objects and 3000 links, and current implementations using the NODE data model. NODE is implemented on a SUN III fileserver, and the user interface for the hypertext context on Apple Macintosh (TM). Combination of design methods towards a parallel means-ends strategy was found to be necessary to achieve Gösta's book . Design groups need to be composed of computer science, medical, psychological and organizational competences.
75359	Settings and the setting structure: the description and automated propagation of networks for perusing videodisk image states This paper describes a system for formally representing spatial relationships between videodisc image states called settings . A number of setting relations are defined, these being based on the manipulations of the camera typically used in the production of the moving film: zooming in or out, panning etc.. An algorithm is presented which, given a limited level of initial specification by a describer, will constrain, where possible, the setting relations holding between all pairs of settings. The resulting network is called the settings structure . The paper begins by placing the settings structure into the context of its being one part of the CLORIS system.
75360	Research toward the development of a lexical knowledge base for natural language processing This paper documents research toward building a complete lexicon containing all the words found in general newspaper text. It is intended to provide the reader with an understanding of the inherent limitations of existing vocabulary collection methods and the need for greater attention to multi-word phrases as the building blocks of text. Additionally, while traditional reference books define many proper nouns, they appear to be very limited in their coverage of the new proper nouns appearing daily in newspapers. Proper nouns appear to require a grammar and lexicon of components much the way general parsing of text requires syntactic rules and a lexicon of common nouns.
75361	Information retrieval and software reuse Software reuse is widely believed to be the most promising technology for improving software quality and productivity. There are many technical and non-technical problems to be solved, however, before widespread reuse of software lifecycle objects becomes a reality. One class of problem concerns the classification, storage, and retrieval of reusable components. Panel members will discuss these problems and some approaches to solving them.
860437	Salton Award Lecture - Information retrieval and computer science: an evolving relationship Following the tradition of these acceptance talks, I will be giving my thoughts on where our field is going. Any discussion of the future of information retrieval (IR) research, however, needs to be placed in the context of its history and relationship to other fields. Although IR has had a very strong relationship with library and information science, its relationship to computer science (CS) and its relative standing as a sub-discipline of CS has been more dynamic. IR is quite an old field, and when a number of CS departments were forming in the 60s, it was not uncommon for a faculty member to be pursuing research related to IR. Early ACM curriculum recommendations for CS contained courses on information retrieval, and encyclopedias described IR and database systems as different aspects of the same field. By the 70s, there were only a few IR researchers in CS departments in the U.S., database systems was a separate (and thriving) field, and many felt that IR had stagnated and was largely irrelevant. The truth, in fact, was far from that. The IR research community was a small, but dedicated, group of researchers in the U.S. and Europe who were motivated by a desire to understand the process of information retrieval and to build systems that would help people find the right information in text databases. This was (and is) a hard goal and led to different evaluation metrics and methodologies than the database community. Progress in the field was hampered by a lack of large-scale testbeds and tests were limited to databases containing at most a few hundred document abstracts. In the 80s AI boom, IR was still not a mainstream area, despite its focus on a human task involving natural language. IR focused on a statistical approach to language rather than the much more popular knowledge-based approach. The fact that IR conferences mix papers on effectiveness as measured by human judgments with papers measuring performance of file organizations for large-scale systems has meant that IR has always been difficult to classify into simple categories such as "systems" or "AI" that are often used in CS departments. Since the early 90s, just about everything has changed. Large, full-text databases were finally made available for experimentation through DARPA funding and TREC. This has had an enormous positive impact on the quantity and quality of IR research. The advent of the Web search engine has validated the longstanding claims made by IR researchers that simple queries and ranking were the right techniques for information access in a largely unstructured information world. What has not changed is that there are still relatively few IR researchers in CS departments. There are, however, many more people in CS departments doing IR-related research, which is just about the same thing. Conferences in databases, machine learning, computational linguistics, and data mining publish a number of IR papers done by people who would not primarily consider themselves as IR researchers. Given that there is an increasing diffusion of IR ideas into the CS community, it is worth stating what IR, as a field of CS, has accomplished: Search engines have become the infrastructure for much of information access in our society. IR has provided the basic research on the algorithms and data structures for these engines, and continues to develop new capabilities such as cross-lingual search, distributed search, question answering, and topic detection and tracking. IR championed the statistical approach to language long before it was accepted by other researchers working on language technologies. Statistical NLP is now mainstream and results from that field are being used to improve IR systems (in question answering, for example). IR focused on evaluation as a research area, and developed an evaluation methodology based on large, standardized testbeds and comparison with human judgments that has been adopted by researchers in a number of other language technology areas. IR, because of its focus on measuring success based on human judgments, has always acknowledged the importance of the user and interaction as a part of information access. This led to a number of contributions to the design of query and search interfaces and learning techniques based on user feedback. Although these achievements are important, the long-term goals of the IR field have not yet been met. What are those goals? One possibility that is often mentioned is the MEMEX of Vannevar Bush [1]. Another, more recent, statement of long-term challenges was made in the report of the IR Challenges Workshop [2]: Global Information Access: Satisfy human information needs through natural, efficient interaction with an automated system that leverages world-wide structured and unstructured data in any language. Contextual Retrieval; Combine search technologies and knowledge about query and user context into a single framework in order to provide the most appropriate answer for a user's information need. These goals are, in fact, very similar to long-term challenges coming out of other CS fields. For example, Jim Gray, a Turing Award winner from the database area, mentioned in his address a personal and world MEMEX as long-term goals for his field and CS in general [3]. IR's long-term goals are clearly important long-term goals for the whole of CS, and achieving those goals will involve everyone interested in the general area of information management and retrieval. Rather than talking about what IR can do in isolation to progress towards its goals, I would prefer to talk about what IR can do in collaboration with other areas. There are many examples of potential collaborative research areas. Collaborations with researchers from the NLP and information extraction communities have been developing for some time in order to study topics such as advanced question answering. On the other hand, not enough has been done to work with the database community to develop probabilistic retrieval models for unstructured, semi-structured, and structured data. There have been a number of attempts to combine IR and database functionality, none of which has been particularly successful. Most recently, some groups have been working on combining IR search with XML documents, but what is needed is a comprehensive examination of the issues and problems by teams from both areas working together, and the creation of new testbeds that can be used to evaluate proposed models. The time is right for such collaborations. Another example of where database, IR, and networking people can work together is in the development of distributed, heterogeneous information systems. This requires significant new research in areas like peer-to-peer architectures, semantic heterogeneity, automatic metadata generation, and retrieval models. If the information systems described above are extended to include new data types such as video, images, sound, and the whole range of scientific data (such as from the biosciences, geoscience, and astronomy), then a broad range of new challenges are added that need to be tackled in collaboration with people who know about these types of data. There should also be more cooperation between the data mining, IR, and summarization communities to tackle the core problem of defining what is new and interesting in streams of data. These and other similar collaborations will the basis for the future development of the IR field. We will continue to work on research problems that specifically interest us, but this research will increasingly be in the context of larger efforts. IR concepts and IR research will be an important part of the evolving mix of CS expertise that will be used to solve the "grand" challenges.
860441	Empirical development of an exponential probabilistic model for text retrieval: using textual analysis to build a better model Much work in information retrieval focuses on using a model of documents and queries to derive retrieval algorithms. Model based development is a useful alternative to heuristic development because in a model the assumptions are explicit and can be examined and refined independent of the particular retrieval algorithm. We explore the explicit assumptions underlying the naïve framework by performing computational analysis of actual corpora and queries to devise a generative document model that closely matches text. Our thesis is that a model so developed will be more accurate than existing models, and thus more useful in retrieval, as well as other applications. We test this by learning from a corpus the best document model. We find the learned model better predicts the existence of text data and has improved performance on certain IR tasks.
860467	Probabilistic term variant generator for biomedical terms This paper presents an algorithm to generate possible variants for biomedical terms. The algorithm gives each variant its generation probability representing its plausibility, which is potentially useful for query and dictionary expansions. The probabilistic rules for generating variants are automatically learned from raw texts using an existing abbreviation extraction technique. Our method, therefore, requires no linguistic knowledge or labor-intensive natural language resource. We conducted an experiment using 83,142 MEDLINE abstracts for rule induction and 18,930 abstracts for testing. The results indicate that our method will significantly increase the number of retrieved documents for long biomedical terms.
860477	Latent concepts and the number orthogonal factors in latent semantic analysis We seek insight into Latent Semantic Indexing by establishing a method to identify the optimal number of factors in the reduced matrix for representing a keyword. This method is demonstrated empirically by duplicating all documents containing a term t , and inserting new documents in the database that replace t with t' . By examining the number of times term t is identified for a search on term t' (precision) using differing ranges of dimensions, we find that lower ranked dimensions identify related terms and higher-ranked dimensions discriminate between the synonyms.
860478	A frequency-based and a poisson-based definition of the probability of being informative This paper reports on theoretical investigations about the assumptions underlying the inverse document frequency ( idf ). We show that an intuitive idf -based probability function for the probability of a term being informative assumes disjoint document events. By assuming documents to be independent rather than disjoint, we arrive at a Poisson-based probability of being informative. The framework is useful for understanding and deciding the parameter estimation and combination in probabilistic retrieval models.
860502	Resource selection and data fusion in multimedia distributed digital libraries An abstract is not available.
860504	Toward a unification of text and link analysis This paper presents a simple yet profound idea. By thinking about the relationships between and within terms and documents, we can generate a richer representation that encompasses aspects of Web link analysis as well as text analysis techniques from information retrieval. This paper shows one path to this unified representation, and demonstrates the use of eigenvector calculations from Web link analysis by stepping through a simple example.
860506	Topic distillation using hierarchy concept tree In this paper, we propose a new approach for topic distillation on World Wide Web. Topic distillation is to find quality documents related to the user query topic. Our approach is based on Bharat's topic distillation algorithm [1]. We present the analysis of hyperlink graph structure using hierarchy concept tree to solve the mixed hubs problem that is also remained in the Bharat's algorithm. For assigning better weights to hyperlinks which point to relevant documents among hyperlinks in a document, we try to find the relationship in documents connected by hyperlinks using content analysis and we assign weights to hyperlinks based on the relationship. We evaluated this algorithm using 50 topics on WT10g corpus and obtained improved results.
860507	Using manually-built web directories for automatic evaluation of known-item retrieval Information retrieval system evaluation is complicated by the need for manually assessed relevance judgments. Large manually-built directories on the web open the door to new evaluation procedures. By assuming that web pages are the known relevant items for queries that exactly match their title, we use the ODP (Open Directory Project) and Looksmart directories for system evaluation. We test our approach with a sample from a log of ten million web queries and show that such an evaluation is unbiased in terms of the directory used, stable with respect to the query set selected, and correlated with a reasonably large manual evaluation.
860510	Automatic ranking of retrieval systems in imperfect environments The empirical investigation of the effectiveness of information retrieval (IR) systems requires a test collection, a set of query topics, and a set of relevance judgments made by human assessors for each query. Previous experiments show that differences in human relevance assessments do not affect the relative performance of retrieval systems. Based on this observation, we propose and evaluate a new approach to replace the human relevance judgments by an automatic method. Ranking of retrieval systems with our methodology correlates positively and significantly with that of human-based evaluations. In the experiments, we assume a Web-like imperfect environment: the indexing information for all documents is available for ranking, but some documents may not be available for retrieval. Such conditions can be due to document deletions or network problems. Our method of simulating imperfect environments can be used for Web search engine assessment and in estimating the effects of network conditions (e.g., network unreliability) on IR system performance.
860511	An investigation of broad coverage automatic pronoun resolution for information retrieval Term weighting methods have been shown to give significant increases in information retrieval performance. The presence of pronomial references in documents reduces the term frequencies of associated words with a consequent effect on term weights and information retrieval behaviour. This investigation explores the impact on information retrieval performance of broad coverage automatic pronoun resolution. Results indicate that this approach has potential to improve both precision at fixed cutoff levels and average precision.
860512	Syntactic features in question answering Syntactic information potentially plays a much more important role in question answering than it does in information retrieval. Although many people have used syntactic evidence in Question Answering, there haven't been many detailed experiments reported in the literature. The aim of the experiment described in this paper is to study the impact of a particular approach for using syntactic information on question answering effectiveness. Our results indicate that a combination of syntactic information with heuristics for ranking potential answers can perform better than the ranking heuristics on their own.
860514	When query expansion fails The effectiveness of queries in information retrieval can be improved through query expansion. This technique automatically introduces additional query terms that are statistically likely to match documents on the intended topic. However, query expansion techniques rely on fixed parameters. Our investigation of the effect of varying these parameters shows that the strategy of using fixed values is questionable.
860516	Fractal summarization: summarization based on fractal theory In this paper, we introduce the fractal summarization model based on the fractal theory. In fractal summarization, the important information is captured from the source text by exploring the hierarchical structure and salient features of the document. A condensed version of the document that is informatively close to the original is produced iteratively using the contractive transformation in the fractal theory. User evaluation has shown that fractal summarization outperforms traditional summarization.
860517	A unified model for metasearch and the efficient evaluation of retrieval systems via the hedge algorithm We present a unified framework for simultaneously solving both the pooling problem (the construction of efficient document pools for the evaluation of retrieval systems) and metasearch (the fusion of ranked lists returned by retrieval systems in order to increase performance). The implementation is based on the Hedge algorithm for online learning, which has the advantage of convergence to bounded error rates approaching the performance of the best linear combination of the underlying systems. The choice of a loss function closely related to the average precision measure of system performance ensures that the judged document set performs well, both in constructing a metasearch list and as a pool for the accurate evaluation of retrieval systems. Our experimental results on TREC data demonstrate excellent performance in all measures---evaluation of systems, retrieval of relevant documents, and generation of metasearch lists.
860518	Statistical visual feature indexes in video retrieval Four statistical visual feature indexes are proposed: SLM (Shot Length Mean), the average length of each shot in a video; SLD (Shot Length Deviation), the standard deviation of shot lengths for a video; ONM (Object Number Mean), the average number of objects per frame of the video; and OND (Object Number Deviation), the standard deviation of the number of objects per frame across the video. Each of these indexes provides a unique perspective on video content. A novel video retrieval interface has been developed as a platform to examine our assumption that the new indexes facilitate some video retrieval tasks. Initial feedback is promising and formal experiments are planned.
860519	Enhancing cross-language information retrieval by an automatic acquisition of bilingual terminology from comparable corpora This paper presents an approach to bilingual lexicon extraction from comparable corpora and evaluations on Cross-Language Information Retrieval. We explore a bi-directional extraction of bilingual terminology primarily from comparable corpora. A combined statistics-based and linguistics-based model to select best translation candidates to phrasal translation is proposed. Evaluations using a large test collection for Japanese-English revealed the proposed combination of bi-directional comparable corpora, bilingual dictionaries and transliteration, augmented with linguistics-based pruning to be highly effective in Cross-Language Information Retrieval.
860520	Document-self expansion for text categorization Approaches to increase training examples to hopefully improve classification effectiveness are proposed in this work. The approaches were verified by use of two Chinese collections classified by two top-performing classifiers.
860521	An architecture for peer-to-peer information retrieval An abstract is not available.
860522	User-trainable video annotation using multimodal cues This paper describes progress towards a general framework for incorporating multimodal cues into a trainable system for automatically annotating user-defined semantic concepts in broadcast video. Models of arbitrary concepts are constructed by building classifiers in a score space defined by a pre-deployed set of multimodal models. Results show annotation for user-defined concepts both in and outside the pre-deployed set is competitive with our best video-only models on the TREC Video 2002 corpus. An interesting side result shows speech-only models give performance comparable to our best video-only models for detecting visual concepts such as "outdoors", "face" and "cityscape".
860523	Incorporating query term dependencies in language models for document retrieval An abstract is not available.
860524	Error analysis of difficult TREC topics Given the experimental nature of information retrieval, progress critically depends on analyzing the errors made by existing retrieval approaches and understanding their limitations. Our research explores various hypothesized reasons for hard topics in TREC-8 ad hoc task, and shows that the bad performance is partially due to the existence of highly distracting sub-collections that can dominate the overall performance.
860527	eBizSearch: a niche search engine for e-business Niche Search Engines offer an efficient alternative to traditional search engines when the results returned by general-purpose search engines do not provide a sufficient degree of relevance. By taking advantage of their domain of concentration they achieve higher relevance and offer enhanced features. We discuss a new niche search engine, eBizSearch, based on the technology of CiteSeer and dedicated to e-business and e-business documents. We present the integration of CiteSeer in the framework of eBizSearch and the process necessary to tune the whole system towards the specific area of e-business. We also discuss how using machine learning algorithms we generate metadata to make eBizSearch Open Archives compliant. eBizSearch is a publicly available service and can be reached at [3].
860530	A comparison of various approaches for using probabilistic dependencies in language modeling An abstract is not available.
860531	Topic hierarchy generation via linear discriminant projection An abstract is not available.
860532	A personalised information retrieval tool Industry professionals and everyday users of the Internet have long accepted that due to both the size and growth of this ubiquitous repository, new tools are needed to assist with the finding and extraction of very specific resources relevant to a user's task. Previously, this definition of relevance has been based on the extremely generic matching between resources and query terms, but recently the emphasis is shifting towards a more personalised model based on the relevance of a particular resource for one specific user. We introduce a prototype, tt Fetch, which adopts this concept within an information-seeking environment specifically designed to provide users with the means to better describe a problem (s)he doesn't understand.
860543	Rule-based word clustering for text classification This paper introduces a rule-based, context-dependent word clustering method, with the rules derived from various domain databases and the word text orthographic properties. Besides significant dimensionality reduction, our experiments show that such rule-based word clustering improves by 8 the overall accuracy of extracting bibliographic fields from references, and by 18.32 on average the class-specific performance on the line classification of document headers.
860553	DefScriber: a hybrid system for definitional QA An abstract is not available.
860555	SE-LEGO: creating metasearch engines on demand An abstract is not available.
803132	WEIRD: An approach to concept-based information retrieval WEIRD is an automatic document retrieval system designed and implemented at Syracuse University, which attempts to advance the art of computerized retrieval from word-matching to judging conceptual similarity. WEIRD uses a vector space model to represent the relations among terms and documents. Items in the space are located according to their -&-ldquo;meaning-&-rdquo;, which is their proximity to all other items in the data base as measured by co-occurrence frequencies. This is done without manipulating large matrices. The dimensions of the space are not used to define relations; items are defined solely by their position relative to the other items. Retrieval is determined by Euclidean distance from the plotted query. In the first section of the paper the basic characteristics of WEIRD are described. Second, the results of a preliminary evaluation are reported. Alternatives for further development of WEIRD are then considered.
803139	A tree algorithm for nearest neighbor searching in document retrieval systems The problem of finding nearest neighbors to a query in a document collection is a special case of associative retrieval, in which searches are performed using more than one key. A nearest neighbors associative retrieval algorithm, suitable for document retrieval using similarity matching, is described. The basic structure used is a binary tree, at each node a set of keys (concepts) is tested to select the most promising branch. Backtracking to initially rejected branches is allowed and often necessary. Under certain conditions, the search time required by this algorithm is 0(log 2 N) k . N is the number of documents, and k is a system-dependent parameter. A series of experiments with a small collection confirm the predictions made using the analytic model; k is approximately 4 in this situation. This algorithm is compared with two other searching algorithms; sequential search and clustered search. For large collections, the average search time for this algorithm is less than that for a sequential search and greater than that for a clustered search. However, the clustered search, unlike the sequential search and this algorithm, does not guarantee that the near neighbors found are actually the nearest neighbors.
803141	Does relevance feedback improve document retrieval performance? Many authors (1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7) have suggested that overall performance of a document retrieval system is improved by relevance feedback. Relevance feedback denotes the last three steps in the following process: 1) the searcher enters a query, 2) the system prepares a ranked list of suggested documents, 3) the searcher judges some of the documents for relevancy, 4) the searcher informs the system of these documents judged and of the judgement, 5) the system constructs a new query based on the descriptors used in the original query and the descriptors used in the documents judged, 6) the system prepares a second ranked list of suggested documents. The presumption is that the second list is better than the first. By all performance measures (e.g. -&-ldquo;fluid ranking-&-rdquo; and -&-ldquo;frozen ranking-&-rdquo;), the second list is better than the first. However, if one reranks documents in the original list so as to reflect the searcher's efforts (step 3), the corresponding performance measures are comparable to those for the second list. The marginal difference between the performance measures for the -&-rdquo;reranked original-&-rdquo; list (searcher's efforts alone) and the second list (which includes computer efforts) makes it unclear if the cost of steps 4 through 6 above can be justified. It is hoped that advocates of relevance feedback will present -&-ldquo;reranked original-&-rdquo; performance measures as a basis for any performance improvement claims. This paper also presents three reasonable, easily understood retrieval procedures for which the frozen ranking, the fluid ranking, and the reranked original evaluations are -&-ldquo;obviously-&-rdquo; the pertinent way to evaluate. Relevance feedback techniques as implemented in Salton's SMART DRS appear to show that it is worthwhile for user's to read abstracts prior to evaluation of full texts. The last indication presented in this paper is that the relevance feedback performance improvements noted using SMART are due mostly to the user making assessments; subsequent computer efforts appear to be most likely to result in no further change. For a query for which there is a subsequent change, the change is as likely to be harmful as helpful.
42006	A statistical similarity measure Within the framework of the vector space models, a statistical similarity measure between document and query is proposed. In this approach the assumption that term (or atomic) vectors are pairwise orthogonal is not required. In addition, it provides a natural and consistent interpretation of term occurrence frequencies obtained from autoindexing.
42007	Probabilistic search term weighting - some negative results The effect of probabilistic search term weighting on the improvement of retrieval quality has been demonstrated in various experiments described in the literature. In this paper, we investigate the feasibility of this method for boolean retrieval with terms from a prescribed indexing vocabulary. This is a quite different test setting in comparison to other experiments where linear retrieval with free text terms was used. The experimental results show that in our case no improvement over a simple coordination match function can be achieved. On the other hand, models based on probabilistic indexing outperform the ranking procedures using search term weights.
42010	Outline of a knowledge base model for an intelligent information retrieval system We attempt in this paper to outline a method for the automatic construction of a knowledge base. We propose some methods and a domain knowledge model. A new idea is to conceive a system that is able to each phase of its construction to acquire domain knowledge from all new information that it is building, in particular the indexing terms; the last section is an attempt in this sense.
42012	Informational zooming: an interaction model for the graphical access to text knowledge bases An abstract is not available.
42014	Why do some people have more difficulty learning to use an information retrieval system than others? The population using information retrieval systems is becoming increasingly diverse. We find a wide range of skills in ability to use these systems; this diverse population must be accommodated by the next generation of systems. This paper reports on a study to identify variables related to information retrieval aptitude, based on results from earlier studies of searchers and programmers. A sample of undergraduate subjects from English, psychology, and engineering majors was given a series of psychometric tests and compared to known populations. We find that engineering majors exhibit academic background and personality characteristics most like those of skilled searchers and programmers, with contrasting patterns or no discernible patterns in English and psychology majors. The strength of most associations increases when restricted to subjects who have either stayed in one major or who have changed major only within one disciplinary area. About half the variance in choice of major can be explained by scores on the tests administered, and a comparable amount of variance in test scores can be explained by the academic background variables.
42017	A failure analysis of the limitation of suffixing in an online environment The interaction of suffixing algorithms and ranking techniques in retrieval performance, particularly in an online environment, was investigated. Three general purpose suffixing algorithms were used for retrieval on the Cranfield 1400, Medlars, and CACM collections, and the results analysed with several standard evaluation measures. An examination of the retrieval performance using suffixing suggested two modifications to ranking techniques: variable weighting of word variants and selective stemming depending on query length. The experimental data is presented, and the limitations of suffixing in an online environment is discussed.
42018	Fast object partitioning using Stochastic learning automata Let &OHgr; = {A 1 , …, A W } be a set of W objects to be partitioned into R classes {P 1 , …, P R }. The objects are accessed in groups of unknown size and the size of these groups need not be equal. Additionally, the joint access probabilities of the objects are unknown. The intention is that the objects accessed more frequently together are located in the same class. This problem has been shown to be NP-hard [15, 16]. In this paper, we propose two stochastic learning automata solutions to the problem. Although the first one is relatively fast, its accuracy is not so remarkable in some environments. The second solution, which uses a new variable structure stochastic automation, demonstrates an excellent partitioning capability. Experimentally, this solution converges an order of magnitude faster than the best known algorithm in the literature [15, 16].
42019	A dynamic cluster maintenance system for information retrieval Partitioning by clustering of very large databases is a necessity to reduce the space/time complexity of retrieval operations. However, the contemporary and modern retrieval environments demand dynamic maintenance of clusters. A new cluster maintenance strategy is proposed and its similarity/stability characteristics, cost analysis, and retrieval behavior in comparison with unclustered and completely reclustered database environments have been examined by means of a series of experiments.
42020	Non-hierarchical document clustering using the ICL distribution array processor This paper considers the suitability and efficiency of a highly parallel computer, the ICL Distributed Array Processor (DAP), for document clustering. Algorithms are described for the implementation of the single-pass and reallocation clustering methods on the DAP and on a conventional mainframe computer. These methods are used to classify the Cranfield, Vaswani and UKCIS document test collections. The results suggest that the parallel architecture of the DAP is not well suited to the variable-length records which characterise bibliographic data.
42021	Optimal determination of user-oriented clusters User-oriented clustering schemes enable the classification of documents based upon the user perception of the similarity between documents, rather than on some similarity function presumed by the designer to represent the user criteria. In this paper, an enhancement of such a clustering scheme is presented. This is accomplished by the formulation of the user-oriented clustering as a function-optimization problem. The problem formulated is termed the Boundary Selection Problem (BSP). Heuristic approaches to solve the BSP are proposed and a preliminary for evaluation of these approaches is provided.
42022	A formal treatment of missing & imprecise information Missing, non-applicable and imprecise values arise frequently in Office Information Systems. There is a need to treat them in a consistent and useful manner. This paper proposes a method and gives the precise semantics of the retrieval operations in a system where imprecision is allowed. It also suggests a way to handle the uncertainty introduced by imprecise data values.
42023	Adaptive linear information retrieval models Missing, non-applicable and imprecise values arise frequently in Office Information Systems. There is a need to treat them in a consistent and useful manner. This paper proposes a method and gives the precise semantics of the retrieval operations in a system where imprecision is allowed. It also suggests a way to handle the uncertainty introduced by imprecise data values.
42025	TIRS: a topological information retrieval system satisfying the requirements of the Waller-Kraft wish list Most document retrieval systems based on probabilistic models of feature distributions assume random selection of documents for retrieval. The assumptions of these models are met when documents are randomly selected from the database or when retrieving all available documents. A more suitable model for retrieval of a single document assumes that the best document available is to be retrieved first. Models of document retrieval systems assuming random selection and best-first selection are developed and compared under binary independence and two Poisson independence feature distribution models. Under the best-first model, feature discrimination varies with the number of documents in each relevance class in the database. A weight similar to the Inverse Document Frequency weight and consistent with the best-first model is suggested which does not depend on knowledge of the characteristics of relevant documents.
42028	A relational model for unstructured documents The logical structure of a document is usually a tree in which the order of the nodes is important at least at some level of the tree. We call a document unstructured if its structure is a single-level ordered tree. The purpose of this paper is to present a many-sorted algebra for handling unstructured documents. The documents in the model are represented by relations. An algebra for handling documents of one type can be extended to an algebra for handling documents of several types. Further, an algebra for handling documents can be extended by the relational algebra for handling documents and relations in a common algebra. The model of this paper can be regarded as a part of a general document model. On the other hand, unstructured documents themselves are an important group of documents. We will show by examples that the simple model covers a wide range of document handling and information retrieval problems.
42031	Predictive test compression by hashing The knowledge of a short substring constitutes a good basis for guessing the next character in a natural language text. This observation, i.e. repeated guessing and encoding of subsequent characters, is very fundamental for the predictive text compression. The paper describes a family of such compression methods, using a hash table for searching the prediction information. The experiments show that the methods produce good compression gains and, moreover, are very fast. The one-pass versions are especially apt for “on-the-fly” compression of transmitted data, and could be a basis for specialized hardware.
42034	Thesaurus based concept spaces An abstract is not available.
42035	EP-X: a demonstration of semantically based search of bibliographic databases EP-X (Environmental Pollution eXpert) is a prototype knowledge-based system that assists users in conducting bibliographic searches of the environmental pollution literature. This system combines artificial intelligence and human factors engineering techniques, allowing us to redesign traditional bibliographic information retrieval interfaces. The result supports semantically-based search as opposed to the typical character-string matching approach. This paper discusses a sample interaction with EP-X, the knowledge representations necessary to support this semantically-based interaction, preliminary results of empirical studies to evaluate the interface, and recommendations for future directions
42037	An approach to image retrieval from large image databases In this paper we address the problem of retrieving images from large image databases, giving a partial description of the image content. This approach allows a limited automatic analysis for image belonging to a domain described in advance to the system using a formalism based on fuzzy sets. The image query processing is based on special access structures generated from the image analysis process.
42038	Data cashing in IR systems Information retrieval (IR) systems provide individual remote access to centrally managed data. The current proliferation of personal computer systems, as well as advances in storage and communication technology, have created new possibilities for designing information systems which are easily accessible, economical, and responsive to user needs. This paper outlines methods of integrating personal computers (PCs) into large information systems, with emphasis on effective use of the storage and processing capabilities of these computers. In particular we discuss means for caching retrieved data at PC-equipped user sites, noting that caching in this environment poses unique problems. An event-driven simulation program is described which models information system operation. This simulator is being used to examine caching strategies. Some results of these studies are presented.
42039	Improved techniques for processing queries in full-text systems In static full-text retrieval systems, which accommodate metrical as well as Boolean operators, the traditional approach to query processing uses a “concordance”, from which large sets of coordinates are retrieved and then merged and/or collated. Alternatively, in a system with l documents, the concordance can be replaced by a set of bit-maps of fixed length l , which are constructed for every different word of the database and serve as occurrence maps. We propose to combine the concordance and bit-map approaches, and show how this can speed up the processing of queries: fast ANDing and ORing of the maps in a preprocessing stage, lead to large I/O savings in collating coordinates of keywords needed to satisfy the metrical and Boolean constraints. Moreover, the bit-maps give partial information on the distribution of the coordinates of the keywords, which can be used when queries must be processed by stages, due to their complexity and the sizes of the involved sets of coordinates. The new techniques are partially implemented at the Responsa Retrieval Project.
98009	EXPRESS: an experimental interface for factual information retrieval The EXPRESS system has been designed and implemented in order to explore methods for user assistance in accessing complexly structured factual databases, e.g. relational product databases. Terminological support in this area has to take into account that different controlled vocabularies may be used in a variety of attributes spread over several relations. In our approach, traditional thesaurus structures are extended in order to cope with these problems and to encode further domain-specific knowledge. User support in query reformulation is based on this enriched thesaurus as well as on the local evaluation of the retrieved data sets. Concepts for the representation of retrieval strategies in the form of plans and their potential use in future systems are discussed.
98011	Machine learning and vectorial matching for an image retrieval model: EXPRIM and the system RIVAGE An abstract is not available.
98013	Online query refinement on information retrieval systems: a process model of searcher/system interactions This article reports findings of empirical research that investigated information searchers' online query refinement process. Prior studies have recognized the information specialists' role in helping searchers articulate and refine queries. Using a semantic network and a Problem Behavior Graph to represent the online search process, our study revealed that searchers also refined their own queries in an online task environment. The information retrieval system played a passive role in assisting online query refinement, which was, however, or that confirmed Taylor's four-level query formulation model. Based on our empirical findings, we proposed using a process model to facilitate and improve query refinement in an online environment. We believe incorporating this model into retrieval systems can result in the design of more “intelligent” and useful information retrieval systems.
98223	A dynamic signature technique for multimedia databases A signature file acts as a filtering mechanism to reduce the amount of data that needs to be searched during query evaluation. Even though several techniques for organizing and searching signature files have been proposed in literature, they have serious limitations when applied to multimedia databases, where integrated access methods to text and image content are needed. A new signature technique, called Quick Filter, is proposed in the paper. According to this technique, signatures are divided into partitions, each of which holds signatures sharing the same characteristic key. As a result, it is possible to determine if the signatures in a partition satisfy a query by merely examining the key. Partitions not matching the key need not be searched. This method is based on dynamic hashing since signatures are hashed into partitions according to the keys and the file size, computed algorithmically from the signatures. Implementation of this technique is illustrated using an example and is verified by analytical performance evaluation. The result is a signature technique which satisfies the requirements for access methods in multimedia databases: dynamicity, with respect to insertions and updates, good query processing performance on large databases for high-weight queries .
98228	Construction of a dynamic Thesaurus and its use for associated information retrieval An information retrieval system based on a dynamic thesaurus was developed utilizing the connectionist approach. The dynamic thesaurus consists of nodes, which represent each term of a thesaurus, and links, which represent the connections between nodes. Term information that is automatically extracted from user's relevant documents is used to change node weights and generate links. Node weights and links reflect a user's particular interest. A document retrieval experiment was conducted in which both a high recall rate and a high precision rate were achieved. The topics discussed in this paper: Connectionist Model, Automatic Indexing, Information Retrieval, and Thesaurus.
98229	Knowledge-based retrieval of office documents Document classification and retrieval systems for office applications require knowledge management to describe the semantics of documents related to procedural and domain dependent aspects of the office work to be described: operational dependencies, documents relationships and references to regulations and laws are concepts which are not explicitly stated in the text. This paper presents a semantic model for office documents classification and retrieval based on knowledge representation of the office procedural environment and of the application domain. Navigation along knowledge networks for document retrieval and browsing is described.
98233	Order preserving minimal perfect hash functions and information retrieval Rapid access to information is essential for a wide variety of retrieval systems and applications. Hashing has long been used when the fastest possible direct search is desired, but is generally not appropriate when sequential or range searches are also required. This paper describes a hashing method, developed for collections that are relatively static, that supports both direct and sequential access. Indeed, the algorithm described gives hash functions that are optimal in terms of time and hash table space utilization, and that preserve any a priori ordering desired. Furthermore, the resulting order preserving minimal perfect hash functions (OPMPHFs) can be found using space and time that is on average linear in the number of keys involved.
98236	Construction of optimal graphs for bit-vector compression Bitmaps are data structures occurring often in information retrieval. They are useful; they are also large and expensive to store. For this reason, considerable effort has been devoted to finding techniques for compressing them. These techniques are most effective for sparse bitmaps. We propose a preprocessing stage, in which bitmaps are first clustered and the clusters used to transform their member bitmaps into sparser ones, that can be more effectively compressed. The clustering method efficiently generates a graph structure on the bitmaps. The results of applying our algorithm to the Bible is presented: for some sets of bitmaps, our method almost doubled the compression savings.
98242	The automatic generation of extended queries In the extended vector space model, each document vector consists of a set of subvectors representing the multiple concepts or concept classes present in the document. Typical information concepts, in addition to the usual content terms or descriptors, include author names, bibliographic links, etc. The extended vector space model is known to improve retrieval effectiveness. However, a major impediment to the use of the extended model is the construction of an extended query. In this paper, we describe a method for automatically extending a query containing only content terms (a single concept class) to a representation containing multiple concept classes. No relevance feedback is involved. Experiments using the CACM collection resulted in an average precision 34% better than that obtained using the standard single-concept term vector model.
98249	Parallel text searching in serial files using a processor farm This paper discusses the implementation of a parallel text retrieval system using a microprocessor network. The system is designed to allow fast searching in document databases organised using the serial file structure, with a very rapid initial text signature search being followed by a more detailed, but more time-consuming, pattern matching search. The network is built from transputers, high performance microprocessors developed specifically for the construction of highly parallel computing systems, which are linked together in a processor farm. The paper discusses the design and implementation of processor farms, and then reports our initial studies of the efficiency of searching that can be achieved using this approach to text retrieval from serial files.
98252	An architecture for probabilistic concept-based information retrieval An abstract is not available.
98901	Determining the functionality features of an intelligent interface to an information retrieval system In this paper, we propose a method for specifying the functionality of an intelligent interface to large-scale information retrieval systems, and for implementing those functions in an operational environment. The method is based on a progressive, three-stage model of intelligent information support; a high-level cognitive task analysis of the information retrieval problem; a low-level specification of the host system functionality; and, derivation of explicit relations between the system functions and the cognitive tasks. This method is applied, by example, in the context of the European Space Agency Information Retrieval Service, with some specific suggestions for implementation of a stage one intelligent interface to that system.
2348520	User-aware caching and prefetching query results in web search engines Query results caching is an efficient technique for Web search engines. In this paper we present User-Aware Cache, a novel approach tailored for query results caching, that is based on user characteristics. We then use a trace of around 30 million queries to evaluate User-Aware Cache, as well as traditional methods and theoretical upper bounds. Experimental results show that this approach can achieve hit ratios better than state-of-the-art methods.
2348521	Using eye-tracking with dynamic areas of interest for analyzing interactive information retrieval Based on a new framework for capturing dynamic areas of interest in eye-tracking, we model the user search process as a Markov-chain. The analysis indicates possible system improvements and yields parameter estimates for the Interactive Probability Ranking Principle (IPRP).
2348525	Will this #hashtag be popular tomorrow? Hashtags are widely used in Twitter to define a shared context for events or topics. In this paper, we aim to predict hashtag popularity in near future (i.e., next day). Given a hashtag that has the potential to be popular in the next day, we construct a hashtag profile using the tweets containing the hashtag, and extract both content and context features for hashtag popularity prediction. We model this prediction problem as a classification problem and evaluate the effectiveness of the extracted features and classification models.
2348537	Medical information retrieval: an instance of domain-specific search Due to an explosion in the amount of medical information available, search techniques are gaining importance in the medical domain. This tutorial discusses recent results on search in the medical domain, including the outcome of surveys on end user requirements, research relevant to the field, and current medical and health search applications available. Finally, the extent to which available techniques meet user requirements are discussed, and open challenges in the field are identified.
2348505	Queries without clicks: evaluating retrieval effectiveness based on user feedback Until recently, the lack of user activity on search results was perceived as a sign of user dissatisfaction from retrieval performance. However, recent studies have reported that some queries might not be followed by clicks to the content of the retrieved results, because the search task can be satisfied in the list of retrieved results the user views without the need to click through them. In this paper, we propose a method for evaluating user satisfaction from the results of searches that are not followed by clickthrough activity to the retrieved results. We found that there is a strong association between some implicit measures of user activity and user's explicit satisfaction judgments. Moreover, we developed a predictive model of user satisfaction based on implicit measures, achieving accuracy up to 86%.
2348511	Short text classification using very few words We propose a simple, scalable, and non-parametric approach for short text classification. Leveraging the well studied and scalable Information Retrieval (IR) framework, our approach mimics human labeling process for a piece of short text. It first selects the most representative and topical-indicative words from a given short text as query words, and then searches for a small set of labeled short texts best matching the query words. The predicted category label is the majority vote of the search results. Evaluated on a collection of more than 12K Web snippets, the proposed approach achieves comparable classification accuracy with the baseline Maximum Entropy classifier using as few as 3 query words and top-5 best matching search hits. Among the four query word selection schemes proposed and evaluated in our experiments, term frequency together with clarity gives the best classification accuracy.
2348514	Text selections as implicit relevance feedback Users' search activity has been used as implicit feedback to model search interests and improve the performance of search systems. In search engines, this behavior usually takes the form of queries and result clicks. However, richer data on how people engage with search results can now be captured at scale, creating new opportu-nities to enhance search. In this poster we focus on one type of newly-observable behavior: text selection events on search-result captions. We show that we can use text selections as implicit feedback to significantly improve search result relevance.
2348518	Twanchor text: a preliminary study of the value of tweets as anchor text It is well known that anchor text plays an important role in search, providing signals that are often not present in the source document itself. The paper reports results of a preliminary investigation on the value of tweets and tweet conversations as anchor text. We show that using tweets as anchors improves significantly over using HTML anchors, and significantly increases recall of news item retrieval.
2348519	Unsupervised linear score normalization revisited We give a fresh look into score normalization for merging result-lists, isolating the problem from other components. We focus on three of the simplest, practical, and widely-used linear methods which do not require any training data, i.e. MinMax, Sum, and Z-Score. We provide theoretical arguments on why and when the methods work, and evaluate them experimentally. We find that MinMax is the most robust under many circumstances, and that Sum is - in contrast to previous literature - the worst. Based on the insights gained, we propose another three simple methods which work as good or better than the baselines.
2348412	Improving tweet stream classification by detecting changes in word probability We propose a classification model of tweet streams in Twitter, which are representative of document streams whose statistical properties will change over time. Our model solves several problems that hinder the classification of tweets; in particular, the problem that the probabilities of word occurrence change at different rates for different words. Our model switches between two probability estimates based on full and recent data for each word when detecting changes in word probability. This switching enables our model to achieve both accurate learning of stationary words and quick response to bursty words. We then explain how to implement our model by using a word suffix array, which is a full-text search index. Using the word suffix array allows our model to handle the temporal attributes of word n-grams effectively. Experiments on three tweet data sets demonstrate that our model offers statistically significant higher topic-classification accuracy than conventional temporally-aware classification models.
2348413	Predicting quality flaws in user-generated content: the case of wikipedia The detection and improvement of low-quality information is a key concern in Web applications that are based on user-generated content; a popular example is the online encyclopedia Wikipedia. Existing research on quality assessment of user-generated content deals with the classification as to whether the content is high-quality or low-quality. This paper goes one step further: it targets the prediction of quality flaws, this way providing specific indications in which respects low-quality content needs improvement. The prediction is based on user-defined cleanup tags, which are commonly used in many Web applications to tag content that has some shortcomings. We apply this approach to the English Wikipedia, which is the largest and most popular user-generated knowledge source on the Web. We present an automatic mining approach to identify the existing cleanup tags, which provides us with a training corpus of labeled Wikipedia articles. We argue that common binary or multiclass classification approaches are ineffective for the prediction of quality flaws and hence cast quality flaw prediction as a one-class classification problem. We develop a quality flaw model and employ a dedicated machine learning approach to predict Wikipedia's most important quality flaws. Since in the Wikipedia setting the acquisition of significant test data is intricate, we analyze the effects of a biased sample selection. In this regard we illustrate the classifier effectiveness as a function of the flaw distribution in order to cope with the unknown (real-world) flaw-specific class imbalances. The flaw prediction performance is evaluated with 10,000 Wikipedia articles that have been tagged with the ten most frequent quality flaws: provided test data with little noise, four flaws can be detected with a precision close to 1.
2348401	An IR-based evaluation framework for web search query segmentation This paper presents the first evaluation framework for Web search query segmentation based directly on IR performance. In the past, segmentation strategies were mainly validated against manual annotations. Our work shows that the goodness of a segmentation algorithm as judged through evaluation against a handful of human annotated segmentations hardly reflects its effectiveness in an IR-based setup. In fact, state-of the-art algorithms are shown to perform as good as, and sometimes even better than human annotations a fact masked by previous validations. The proposed framework also provides us an objective understanding of the gap between the present best and the best possible segmentation algorithm. We draw these conclusions based on an extensive evaluation of six segmentation strategies, including three most recent algorithms, vis-a-vis segmentations from three human annotators. The evaluation framework also gives insights about which segments should be necessarily detected by an algorithm for achieving the best retrieval results. The meticulously constructed dataset used in our experiments has been made public for use by the research community.
2348402	On per-topic variance in IR evaluation We explore the notion, put forward by Cormack &#38; Lynam and Robertson, that we should consider a document collection used for Cranfield-style experiments as a sample from some larger population of documents. In this view, any per-topic metric (such as average precision) should be regarded as an estimate of that metric's true value for that topic in the full population, and therefore as carrying its own per-topic variance or estimate precision or noise. As in the two mentioned papers, we explore this notion by simulating other samples from the same large population. We investigate different ways of performing this simulation. One use of this analysis is to refine the notion of statistical significance of a difference between two systems (in most such analyses, each per-topic measurement is treated as equally precise). We propose a mixed-effects model method to measure significance, and compare it experimentally with the traditional t-test.
2348403	An uncertainty-aware query selection model for evaluation of IR systems We propose a mathematical framework for query selection as a mechanism for reducing the cost of constructing information retrieval test collections. In particular, our mathematical formulation explicitly models the uncertainty in the retrieval effectiveness metrics that is introduced by the absence of relevance judgments. Since the optimization problem is computationally intractable, we devise an adaptive query selection algorithm, referred to as Adaptive, that provides an approximate solution. Adaptive selects queries iteratively and assumes that no relevance judgments are available for the query under consideration. Once a query is selected, the associated relevance assessments are acquired and then used to aid the selection of subsequent queries. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the algorithm on two TREC test collections as well as a test collection of an online search engine with 1000 queries. Our experimental results show that the queries chosen by Adaptive produce reliable performance ranking of systems. The ranking is better correlated with the actual systems ranking than the rankings produced by queries that were selected using the considered baseline methods.
2348437	Political search trends We present Political Search Trends, a browser based web search analysis tool that (i) assigns a political leaning to web search queries, (ii) detects trending political queries in a given week, and (iii) links search queries to fact-checked statements. In terms of methodology, it showcases the power of analyzing queries leading to clicks on selected, annotated web sites of interest.
2348491	Looking inside the box: context-sensitive translation for cross-language information retrieval Cross-language information retrieval (CLIR) today is dominated by techniques that use token-to-token mappings from bilingual dictionaries. Yet, state-of-the-art statistical translation models (e.g., using Synchronous Context-Free Grammars) are far richer, capturing multi-term phrases, term dependencies, and contextual constraints on translation choice. We present a novel CLIR framework that is able to reach inside the translation "black box" and exploit these sources of evidence. Experiments on the TREC-5/6 English-Chinese test collection show this approach to be promising.
2348495	On building a reusable Twitter corpus The Twitter real-time information network is the subject of research for information retrieval tasks such as real-time search. However, so far, reproducible experimentation on Twitter data has been impeded by restrictions imposed by the Twitter terms of service. In this paper, we detail a new methodology for legally building and distributing Twitter corpora, developed through collaboration between the Text REtrieval Conference (TREC) and Twitter. In particular, we detail how the first publicly available Twitter corpus - referred to as Tweets2011 - was distributed via lists of tweet identifiers and specialist tweet crawling software. Furthermore, we analyse whether this distribution approach remains robust over time, as tweets in the corpus are removed either by users or Twitter itself. Tweets2011 was successfully used by 58 participating groups for the TREC 2011 Microblog track, while our results attest to the robustness of the crawling methodology over time.
2348483	Identifying entity aspects in microblog posts Online reputation management is about monitoring and handling the public image of entities (such as companies) on the Web. An important task in this area is identifying "aspects" of the entity of interest (such as products, services, competitors, key people, etc.) given a stream of microblog posts referring to the entity. In this paper we compare different IR techniques and opinion target identification methods for automatically identifying aspects and find that (i) simple statistical methods such as TF.IDF are a strong baseline for the task, significantly outperforming opinion-oriented methods, and (ii) only considering terms tagged as nouns improves the results for all the methods analyzed.
2348453	A study of term weighting schemes using class information for text classification 
2348457	BReK12: a book recommender for K-12 users Ideally, students in K-12 grade levels can turn to book recommenders to locate books that match their interests. Existing book recommenders, however, fail to take into account the readability levels of their users, and hence their recommendations may be unsuitable for the users. To address this issue, we introduce BReK12, a recommender that targets K-12 users and prioritizes the reading level of its users in suggesting books of interest. Empirical studies conducted using the Bookcrossing dataset show that BReK12 outperforms a number of existing recommenders (developed for general users) in identifying books appealing to K-12 users.
2348456	Anticipatory search: using context to initiate search Identifying content for which a user may search has a variety of applications, including ranking and recommendation. In this poster, we examine how pre-search context can be used to predict content that the user will seek before they have even specified a search query. We call this anticipatory search. Using a log-based approach, we compare different methods for predicting the content to be searched using different attributes of the pre-query context and behavioral signals from previous visitors to the most recent browse URL. Each method covers different cases and shows promise for query-free anticipatory search on the Web.
2348458	Clarity re-visited We present a novel interpretation of Clarity [5], a widely used query performance predictor. While Clarity is commonly described as a measure of the "distance" between the language model of the top-retrieved documents and that of the collection, we show that it actually quantifies an additional property of the result list, namely, its diversity. This analysis, along with empirical evaluation, helps to explain the low prediction quality of Clarity for large-scale Web collections.
2348475	Finding interesting posts in Twitter based on retweet graph analysis Millions of posts are being generated in real-time by users in social networking services, such as Twitter. However, a considerable number of those posts are mundane posts that are of interest to the authors and possibly their friends only. This paper investigates the problem of automatically discovering valuable posts that may be of potential interest to a wider audience. Specifically, we model the structure of Twitter as a graph consisting of users and posts as nodes and retweet relations between the nodes as edges. We propose a variant of the HITS algorithm for producing a static ranking of posts. Experimental results on real world data demonstrate that our method can achieve better performance than several baseline methods.
2348471	Exploiting term dependence while handling negation in medical search In medical records, negative qualifiers, e.g. no or without, are commonly used by health practitioners to identify the absence of a medical condition. Without considering whether the term occurs in a negative or positive context, the sole presence of a query term in a medical record is insufficient to imply that the record is relevant to the query. In this paper, we show how to effectively handle such negation within a medical records information retrieval system. In particular, we propose a term representation that tackles negated language in medical records, which is further extended by considering the dependence of negated query terms. We evaluate our negation handling technique within the search task provided by the TREC Medical Records 2011 track. Our results, which show a significant improvement upon a system that does not consider negated context within records, attest the importance of handling negation.
2348465	Effect of written instructions on assessor agreement Assessors frequently disagree on the topical relevance of documents. How much of this disagreement is due to ambiguity in assessment instructions? We have two assessors assess TREC Legal Track documents for relevance, some to a general topic description, others to detailed assessment guidelines. We find that detailed guidelines lead to no significant increase in agreement amongst assessors or between assessors and the official qrels.
2348317	Efficient in-memory top-k document retrieval For over forty years the dominant data structure for ranked document retrieval has been the inverted index. Inverted indexes are effective for a variety of document retrieval tasks, and particularly efficient for large data collection scenarios that require disk access and storage. However, many efficiency-bound search tasks can now easily be supported entirely in memory as a result of recent hardware advances. In this paper we present a hybrid algorithmic framework for in-memory bag of-words ranked document retrieval using a self-index derived from the FM-Index, wavelet tree, and the compressed suffix tree data structures, and evaluate the various algorithmic trade-offs for performing efficient queries entirely in-memory. We compare our approach with two classic approaches to bag-of-words queries using inverted indexes, term-at-a-time (TAAT) and document-at-a-time (DAAT) query processing. We show that our framework is competitive with state-of-the-art indexing structures, and describe new capabilities provided by our algorithms that can be leveraged by future systems to improve effectiveness and efficiency for a variety of fundamental search operations.
2348318	Index maintenance for time-travel text search Time-travel text search enriches standard text search by temporal predicates, so that users of web archives can easily retrieve document versions that are considered relevant to a given keyword query and existed during a given time interval. Different index structures have been proposed to efficiently support time-travel text search. None of them, however, can easily be updated as the Web evolves and new document versions are added to the web archive. In this work, we describe a novel index structure that efficiently supports time-travel text search and can be maintained incrementally as new document versions are added to the web archive. Our solution uses a sharded index organization, bounds the number of spuriously read index entries per shard, and can be maintained using small in-memory buffers and append-only operations. We present experiments on two large-scale real-world datasets demonstrating that maintaining our novel index structure is an order of magnitude more efficient than periodically rebuilding one of the existing index structures, while query-processing performance is not adversely affected.
2348314	Personalization of search results using interaction behaviors in search sessions Personalization of search results offers the potential for significant improvement in information retrieval performance. User interactions with the system and documents during information-seeking sessions provide a wealth of information about user preferences and their task goals. In this paper, we propose methods for analyzing and modeling user search behavior in search sessions to predict document usefulness and then using information to personalize search results. We generate prediction models of document usefulness from behavior data collected in a controlled lab experiment with 32 participants, each completing uncontrolled searching for 4 tasks in the Web. The generated models are then tested with another data set of user search sessions in radically different search tasks and constrains. The documents predicted useful and not useful by the models are used to modify the queries in each search session using a standard relevance feedback technique. The results show that application of the models led to consistently improved performance over a baseline that did not take account of user interaction information. These findings have implications for designing systems for personalized search and improving user search experience.
2348310	Adaptive diversification of recommendation results via latent factor portfolio This paper studies result diversification in collaborative filtering. We argue that the diversification level in a recommendation list should be adapted to the target users' individual situations and needs. Different users may have different ranges of interests -- the preference of a highly focused user might include only few topics, whereas that of the user with broad interests may encompass a wide range of topics. Thus, the recommended items should be diversified according to the interest range of the target user. Such an adaptation is also required due to the fact that the uncertainty of the estimated user preference model may vary significantly between users. To reduce the risk of the recommendation, we should take the difference of the uncertainty into account as well. In this paper, we study the adaptive diversification problem theoretically. We start with commonly used latent factor models and reformulate them using the mean-variance analysis from the portfolio theory in text retrieval. The resulting Latent Factor Portfolio (LFP) model captures the user's interest range and the uncertainty of the user preference by employing the variance of the learned user latent factors. It is shown that the correlations between items (and thus the item diversity) can be obtained by using the correlations between latent factors (topical diversity), which in return significantly reduce the computation load. Our mathematical derivation also reveals that diversification is necessary, not only for risk-averse system behavior (non-adpative), but also for the target users' individual situations (adaptive), which are represented by the distribution and the variance of the latent user factors. Our experiments confirm the theoretical insights and show that LFP succeeds in improving latent factor models by adaptively introducing recommendation diversity to fit the individual user's needs.
2348306	Summarizing highly structured documents for effective search interaction As highly structured documents with rich metadata (such as products, movies, etc.) become increasingly prevalent, searching those documents has become an important IR problem. Unfortunately existing work on document summarization, especially in the context of search, has been mainly focused on unstructured documents, and little attention has been paid to highly structured documents. Due to the different characteristics of structured and unstructured documents, the ideal approaches for document summarization might be different. In this paper, we study the problem of summarizing highly structured documents in a search context. We propose a new summarization approach based on query-specific facet selection. Our approach aims to discover the important facets hidden behind a query using a machine learning approach, and summarizes retrieved documents based on those important facets. In addition, we propose to evaluate summarization approaches based on a utility function that measures how well the summaries assist users in interacting with the search results. Furthermore, we develop a game on Mechanical Turk to evaluate different summarization approaches. The experimental results show that the new summarization approach significantly outperforms two existing ones.
2348309	Increasing temporal diversity with purchase intervals The development of Web 2.0 technology has led to huge economic benefits and challenges for both e-commerce websites and online shoppers. One core technology to increase sales and consumers' satisfaction is the use of recommender systems. Existing product recommender systems consider the order of items purchased by users to obtain a list of recommended items. However, they do not consider the time interval between the products purchased. For example, there is often an interval of 2-3 months between the purchase of printer ink cartridges or refills. Thus, recommending appropriate ink cartridges one week before the user needs to replace the depleted ink cartridges would increase the likelihood of a purchase decision. In this paper, we propose to utilize the purchase interval information to improve the performance of the recommender systems for e-commerce. We design an efficient algorithm to compute the purchase intervals between product pairs from users' purchase history and integrate this information into the marginal utility model. We evaluate our approach on a real world ecommerce dataset. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach significantly improves the conversion rate and temporal diversity compared to state-of-the-art algorithms.
2348301	Time drives interaction: simulating sessions in diverse searching environments Real life information retrieval takes place in sessions, where users search by iterating between various cognitive, perceptual and motor subtasks through an interactive interface. The sessions may follow diverse strategies, which, together with the interface characteristics, affect user effort (cost), experience and session effectiveness. In this paper we propose a pragmatic evaluation approach based on scenarios with explicit subtask costs. We study the limits of effectiveness of diverse interactive searching strategies in two searching environments (the scenarios) under overall cost constraints. This is based on a comprehensive simulation of 20 million sessions in each scenario. We analyze the effectiveness of the session strategies over time, and the properties of the most and the least effective sessions in each case. Furthermore, we will also contrast the proposed evaluation approach with the traditional one, rank based evaluation, and show how the latter may hide essential factors that affect users' performance and satisfaction - and gives even counter-intuitive results.
2348398	Using preference judgments for novel document retrieval There has been considerable interest in incorporating diversity in search results to account for redundancy and the space of possible user needs. Most work on this problem is based on subtopics: diversity rankers score documents against a set of hypothesized subtopics, and diversity rankings are evaluated by assigning a value to each ranked document based on the number of novel (and redundant) subtopics it is relevant to. This can be seen as modeling a user who is always interested in seeing more novel subtopics, with progressively decreasing interest in seeing the same subtopic multiple times. We put this model to test: if it is correct, then users, when given a choice, should prefer to see a document that has more value to the evaluation. We formulate some specific hypotheses from this model and test them with actual users in a novel preference-based design in which users express a preference for document A or document B given document C. We argue that while the user study shows the subtopic model is good, there are many other factors apart from novelty and redundancy that may be influencing user preferences. From this, we introduce a new framework to construct an ideal diversity ranking using only preference judgments, with no explicit subtopic judgments whatsoever.
2348397	Combining implicit and explicit topic representations for result diversification Result diversification deals with ambiguous or multi-faceted queries by providing documents that cover as many subtopics of a query as possible. Various approaches to subtopic modeling have been proposed. Subtopics have been extracted internally, e.g., from retrieved documents, and externally, e.g., from Web resources such as query logs. Internally modeled subtopics are often implicitly represented, e.g., as latent topics, while externally modeled subtopics are often explicitly represented, e.g., as reformulated queries. We propose a framework that: i)combines both implicitly and explicitly represented subtopics; and ii)allows flexible combination of multiple external resources in a transparent and unified manner. Specifically, we use a random walk based approach to estimate the similarities of the explicit subtopics mined from a number of heterogeneous resources: click logs, anchor text, and web n-grams. We then use these similarities to regularize the latent topics extracted from the top-ranked documents, i.e., the internal (implicit) subtopics. Empirical results show that regularization with explicit subtopics extracted from the right resource leads to improved diversification results, indicating that the proposed regularization with (explicit) external resources forms better (implicit) topic models. Click logs and anchor text are shown to be more effective resources than web n-grams under current experimental settings. Combining resources does not always lead to better results, but achieves a robust performance. This robustness is important for two reasons: it cannot be predicted which resources will be most effective for a given query, and it is not yet known how to reliably determine the optimal model parameters for building implicit topic models.
2348393	Mixture model with multiple centralized retrieval algorithms for result merging in federated search Result merging is an important research problem in federated search for merging documents retrieved from multiple ranked lists of selected information sources into a single list. The state-of-the-art result merging algorithms such as Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) and Sample-Agglomerate Fitting Estimate (SAFE) try to map document scores retrieved from different sources to comparable scores according to a single centralized retrieval algorithm for ranking those documents. Both SSL and SAFE arbitrarily select a single centralized retrieval algorithm for generating comparable document scores, which is problematic in a heterogeneous federated search environment, since a single centralized algorithm is often suboptimal for different information sources. Based on this observation, this paper proposes a novel approach for result merging by utilizing multiple centralized retrieval algorithms. One simple approach is to learn a set of combination weights for multiple centralized retrieval algorithms (e.g., logistic regression) to compute comparable document scores. The paper shows that this simple approach generates suboptimal results as it is not flexible enough to deal with heterogeneous information sources. A mixture probabilistic model is thus proposed to learn more appropriate combination weights with respect to different types of information sources with some training data. An extensive set of experiments on three datasets have proven the effectiveness of the proposed new approach.
2348396	Personalized diversification of search results Search personalization and diversification are often seen as opposing alternatives to cope with query uncertainty, where, given an ambiguous query, it is either preferable to adapt the search result to a specific aspect that may interest the user (personalization) or to regard multiple aspects in order to maximize the probability that some query aspect is relevant to the user (diversification). In this work, we question this antagonistic view, and hypothesize that these two directions may in fact be effectively combined and enhance each other. We research the introduction of the user as an explicit random variable in state of the art diversification methods, thus developing a generalized framework for personalized diversification. In order to evaluate our hypothesis, we conduct an evaluation with real users using crowdsourcing services. The obtained results suggest that the combination of personalization and diversification achieves competitive performance, improving the base-line, plain personalization, and plain diversification approaches in terms of both diversity and accuracy measures.
2348390	When web search fails, searchers become askers: understanding the transition While Web search has become increasingly effective over the last decade, for many users' needs the required answers may be spread across many documents, or may not exist on the Web at all. Yet, many of these needs could be addressed by asking people via popular Community Question Answering (CQA) services, such as Baidu Knows, Quora, or Yahoo! Answers. In this paper, we perform the first large-scale analysis of how searchers become askers. For this, we study the logs of a major web search engine to trace the transformation of a large number of failed searches into questions posted on a popular CQA site. Specifically, we analyze the characteristics of the queries, and of the patterns of search behavior that precede posting a question; the relationship between the content of the attempted queries and of the posted questions; and the subsequent actions the user performs on the CQA site. Our work develops novel insights into searcher intent and behavior that lead to asking questions to the community, providing a foundation for more effective integration of automated web search and social information seeking.
2348388	Vote calibration in community question-answering systems User votes are important signals in community question-answering (CQA) systems. Many features of typical CQA systems, e.g. the best answer to a question, status of a user, are dependent on ratings or votes cast by the community. In a popular CQA site, Yahoo! Answers, users vote for the best answers to their questions and can also thumb up or down each individual answer. Prior work has shown that these votes provide useful predictors for content quality and user expertise, where each vote is usually assumed to carry the same weight as others. In this paper, we analyze a set of possible factors that indicate bias in user voting behavior -- these factors encompass different gaming behavior, as well as other eccentricities, e.g., votes to show appreciation of answerers. These observations suggest that votes need to be calibrated before being used to identify good answers or experts. To address this problem, we propose a general machine learning framework to calibrate such votes. Through extensive experiments based on an editorially judged CQA dataset, we show that our supervised learning method of content-agnostic vote calibration can significantly improve the performance of answer ranking and expert ranking.
2348387	Dual role model for question recommendation in community question answering Question recommendation that automatically recommends a new question to suitable users to answer is an appealing and challenging problem in the research area of Community Question Answering (CQA). Unlike in general recommender systems where a user has only a single role, each user in CQA can play two different roles (dual roles) simultaneously: as an asker and as an answerer. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to systematically investigate the distinctions between the two roles and their different influences on the performance of question recommendation in CQA. Moreover, we propose a Dual Role Model (DRM) to model the dual roles of users effectively. With different indepen-dence assumptions, two variants of DRM are achieved. Finally, we present the DRM based approach to question recommendation which provides a mechanism for naturally integrating the user relation between the answerer and the asker with the content re-levance between the answerer and the question into a uni-fied probabilistic framework. Experiments using a real-world data crawled from Yahoo! Answers show that: (1) there are evident distinctions between the two roles of users in CQA. Additionally, the answerer role is more effective than the asker role for modeling candidate users in question recommendation; (2) compared with baselines utilizing a single role or blended roles based methods, our DRM based approach consistently and significantly improves the performance of question recommendation, demonstrating that our approach can model the user in CQA more reasonably and precisely.
2348385	Robust ranking models via risk-sensitive optimization Many techniques for improving search result quality have been proposed. Typically, these techniques increase average effectiveness by devising advanced ranking features and/or by developing sophisticated learning to rank algorithms. However, while these approaches typically improve average performance of search results relative to simple baselines, they often ignore the important issue of robustness. That is, although achieving an average gain overall, the new models often hurt performance on many queries. This limits their application in real-world retrieval scenarios. Given that robustness is an important measure that can negatively impact user satisfaction, we present a unified framework for jointly optimizing effectiveness and robustness. We propose an objective that captures the tradeoff between these two competing measures and demonstrate how we can jointly optimize for these two measures in a principled learning framework. Experiments indicate that ranking models learned this way significantly decreased the worst ranking failures while maintaining strong average effectiveness on par with current state-of-the-art models.
2348384	Top-k learning to rank: labeling, ranking and evaluation In this paper, we propose a novel top-k learning to rank framework, which involves labeling strategy, ranking model and evaluation measure. The motivation comes from the difficulty in obtaining reliable relevance judgments from human assessors when applying learning to rank in real search systems. The traditional absolute relevance judgment method is difficult in both gradation specification and human assessing, resulting in high level of disagreement on judgments. While the pairwise preference judgment, as a good alternative, is often criticized for increasing the complexity of judgment from O(n) to (n log n). Considering the fact that users mainly care about top ranked search results, we propose a novel top-k labeling strategy which adopts the pairwise preference judgment to generate the top k ordering items from n documents (i.e. top-k ground-truth) in a manner similar to that of HeapSort. As a result, the complexity of judgment is reduced to O(n log k). With the top-k ground-truth, traditional ranking models (e.g. pairwise or listwise models) and evaluation measures (e.g. NDCG) no longer fit the data set. Therefore, we introduce a new ranking model, namely FocusedRank, which fully captures the characteristics of the top-k ground-truth. We also extend the widely used evaluation measures NDCG and ERR to be applicable to the top-k ground-truth, referred as &#954;-NDCG and &#954;-ERR, respectively. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on benchmark data collections to demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of our top-k labeling strategy and ranking models.
2348383	Structural relationships for large-scale learning of answer re-ranking Supervised learning applied to answer re-ranking can highly improve on the overall accuracy of question answering (QA) systems. The key aspect is that the relationships and properties of the question/answer pair composed of a question and the supporting passage of an answer candidate, can be efficiently compared with those captured by the learnt model. In this paper, we define novel supervised approaches that exploit structural relationships between a question and their candidate answer passages to learn a re-ranking model. We model structural representations of both questions and answers and their mutual relationships by just using an off-the-shelf shallow syntactic parser. We encode structures in Support Vector Machines (SVMs) by means of sequence and tree kernels, which can implicitly represent question and answer pairs in huge feature spaces. Such models together with the latest approach to fast kernel-based learning enabled the training of our rerankers on hundreds of thousands of instances, which previously rendered intractable for kernelized SVMs. The results on two different QA datasets, e.g., Answerbag and Jeopardy! data, show that our models deliver large improvement on passage re-ranking tasks, reducing the error in Recall of BM25 baseline by about 18%. One of the key findings of this work is that, despite its simplicity, shallow syntactic trees allow for learning complex relational structures, which exhibits a steep learning curve with the increase in the training size.
2348376	Placing images on the world map: a microblog-based enrichment approach Estimating the geographic location of images is a task which has received increasing attention recently. Large numbers of images uploaded to platforms such as Flickr do not contain GPS-based latitude/longitude coordinates. Obtaining such geographic information is beneficial for a variety of applications including travelogues, visual place descriptions and personalized travel recommendations. While most works in this area only exploit an image's textual meta-data (tags, title, etc.) to estimate at what geographic location the image was taken, we consider an additional textual dimension: the image owner's traces on the social Web. Specifically, we hypothesize that information extracted from a person's microblog stream(s) can be utilized to improve the accuracy with which the geographic location of the images is estimated. In this paper, we investigate this hypothesis on the example of Twitter streams and find it to be confirmed. The median error distance in kilometres decreases by up to 67% in comparison to existing state-of-the-art. The best results are achieved when tweets that were posted up to two days before and after an image was taken are considered. Moreover, we also find another type of additional information useful: population density data.
2348377	Where is who: large-scale photo retrieval by facial attributes and canvas layout The ubiquitous availability of digital cameras has made it easier than ever to capture moments of life, especially the ones accompanied with friends and family. It is generally believed that most family photos are with faces that are sparsely tagged. Therefore, a better solution to manage and search in the tremendously growing personal or group photos is highly anticipated. In this paper, we propose a novel way to search for face photos by simultaneously considering attributes (e.g., gender, age, and race), positions, and sizes of the target faces. To better match the content and layout of the multiple faces in mind, our system allows the user to graphically specify the face positions and sizes on a query "canvas," where each attribute combination is defined as an icon for easier representation. As a secondary feature, the user can even place specific faces from the previous search results for appearance-based retrieval. The scenario has been realized on a tablet device with an intuitive touch interface. Experimenting with a large-scale Flickr dataset of more than 200k faces, the proposed formulation and joint ranking have made us achieve a hit rate of 0.420 at rank 100, significantly improving from 0.036 of the prior search scheme using attributes alone. We have also achieved an average running time of 0.0558 second by the proposed block-based indexing approach.
2348379	Mining the web for points of interest A point of interest (POI) is a focused geographic entity such as a landmark, a school, an historical building, or a business. Points of interest are the basis for most of the data supporting location-based applications. In this paper we propose to curate POIs from online sources by bootstrapping training data from Web snippets, seeded by POIs gathered from social media. This large corpus is used to train a sequential tagger to recognize mentions of POIs in text. Using Wikipedia data as the training data, we can identify POIs in free text with an accuracy that is 116% better than the state of the art POI identifier in terms of precision, and 50% better in terms of recall. We show that using Foursquare and Gowalla checkins as seeds to bootstrap training data from Web snippets, we can improve precision between 16% and 52%, and recall between 48% and 187% over the state-of-the-art. The name of a POI is not sufficient, as the POI must also be associated with a set of geographic coordinates. Our method increases the number of POIs that can be localized nearly three-fold, from 134 to 395 in a sample of 400, with a median localization accuracy of less than one kilometer.
2348363	Automatic suggestion of query-rewrite rules for enterprise search Enterprise search is challenging for several reasons, notably the dynamic terminology and jargon that are specific to the enterprise domain. This challenge is partly addressed by having domain experts maintaining the enterprise search engine and adapting it to the domain specifics. Those administrators commonly address user complaints about relevant documents missing from the top matches. For that, it has been proposed to allow administrators to influence search results by crafting query-rewrite rules, each specifying how queries of a certain pattern should be modified or augmented with additional queries. Upon a complaint, the administrator seeks a semantically coherent rule that is capable of pushing the desired documents up to the top matches. However, the creation and maintenance of rewrite rules is highly tedious and time consuming. Our goal in this work is to ease the burden on search administrators by automatically suggesting rewrite rules. This automation entails several challenges. One major challenge is to select, among many options, rules that are ``natural'' from a semantic perspective (e.g., corresponding to closely related and syntactically complete concepts). Towards that, we study a machine-learning classification approach. The second challenge is to accommodate the cross-query effect of rules---a rule introduced in the context of one query can eliminate the desired results for other queries and the desired effects of other rules. We present a formalization of this challenge as a generic computational problem. As we show that this problem is highly intractable in terms of complexity theory, we present heuristic approaches and optimization thereof. In an experimental study within IBM intranet search, those heuristics achieve near-optimal quality and well scale to large data sets.
2348360	Social-network analysis using topic models In this paper, we discuss how we can extend probabilistic topic models to analyze the relationship graph of popular social-network data, so that we can group or label the edges and nodes in the graph based on their topic similarity. In particular, we first apply the well-known Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model and its existing variants to the graph-labeling task and argue that the existing models do not handle popular nodes (nodes with many incoming edges) in the graph very well. We then propose possible extensions to this model to deal with popular nodes. Our experiments show that the proposed extensions are very effective in labeling popular nodes, showing significant improvements over the existing methods. Our proposed methods can be used for providing, for instance, more relevant friend recommendations within a social network.
2348367	Learning to predict response times for online query scheduling Dynamic pruning strategies permit efficient retrieval by not fully scoring all postings of the documents matching a query -- without degrading the retrieval effectiveness of the top-ranked results. However, the amount of pruning achievable for a query can vary, resulting in queries taking different amounts of time to execute. Knowing in advance the execution time of queries would permit the exploitation of online algorithms to schedule queries across replicated servers in order to minimise the average query waiting and completion times. In this work, we investigate the impact of dynamic pruning strategies on query response times, and propose a framework for predicting the efficiency of a query. Within this framework, we analyse the accuracy of several query efficiency predictors across 10,000 queries submitted to in-memory inverted indices of a 50-million-document Web crawl. Our results show that combining multiple efficiency predictors with regression can accurately predict the response time of a query before it is executed. Moreover, using the efficiency predictors to facilitate online scheduling algorithms can result in a 22% reduction in the mean waiting time experienced by queries before execution, and a 7% reduction in the mean completion time experienced by users.
2348365	A generalized hidden Markov model with discriminative training for query spelling correction Query spelling correction is a crucial component of modern search engines. Existing methods in the literature for search query spelling correction have two major drawbacks. First, they are unable to handle certain important types of spelling errors, such as concatenation and splitting. Second, they cannot efficiently evaluate all the candidate corrections due to the complex form of their scoring functions, and a heuristic filtering step must be applied to select a working set of top-K most promising candidates for final scoring, leading to non-optimal predictions. In this paper we address both limitations and propose a novel generalized Hidden Markov Model with discriminative training that can not only handle all the major types of spelling errors, including splitting and concatenation errors, in a single unified framework, but also efficiently evaluate all the candidate corrections to ensure the finding of a globally optimal correction. Experiments on two query spelling correction datasets demonstrate that the proposed generalized HMM is effective for correcting multiple types of spelling errors. The results also show that it significantly outperforms the current approach for generating top-K candidate corrections, making it a better first-stage filter to enable any other complex spelling correction algorithm to have access to a better working set of candidate corrections as well as to cover splitting and concatenation errors, which no existing method in academic literature can correct.
2348368	Prefetching query results and its impact on search engines We investigate the impact of query result prefetching on the efficiency and effectiveness of web search engines. We propose offline and online strategies for selecting and ordering queries whose results are to be prefetched. The offline strategies rely on query log analysis and the queries are selected from the queries issued on the previous day. The online strategies select the queries from the result cache, relying on a machine learning model that estimates the arrival times of queries. We carefully evaluate the proposed prefetching techniques via simulation on a query log obtained from Yahoo! web search. We demonstrate that our strategies are able to improve various performance metrics, including the hit rate, query response time, result freshness, and query degradation rate, relative to a state-of-the-art baseline.
2348369	Online result cache invalidation for real-time web search Caches of results are critical components of modern Web search engines, since they enable lower response time to frequent queries and reduce the load to the search engine backend. Results in long-lived cache entries may become stale, however, as search engines continuously update their index to incorporate changes to the Web. Consequently, it is important to provide mechanisms that control the degree of staleness of cached results, ideally enabling the search engine to always return fresh results. In this paper, we present a new mechanism that identifies and invalidates query results that have become stale in the cache online. The basic idea is to evaluate at query time and against recent changes if cache hits have had their results have changed. For enhancing invalidation efficiency, the generation time of cached queries and their chronological order with respect to the latest index update are used to early prune unaffected queries. We evaluate the proposed approach using documents that change over time and query logs of the Yahoo! search engine. We show that the proposed approach ensures good query results (50% fewer stale results) and high invalidation accuracy (90% fewer unnecessary invalidations) compared to a baseline approach that makes invalidation decisions off-line. More importantly, the proposed approach induces less processing overhead, ensuring an average throughput 73% higher than that of the baseline approach.
2348353	Automatic refinement of patent queries using concept importance predictors Patent prior art queries are full patent applications which are much longer than standard web search topics. Such queries are composed of hundreds of terms and do not represent a focused information need. One way to make the queries more focused is to select a group of key terms as representatives. Existing works show that such a selection to reduce patent queries is a challenging task mainly because of the presence of ambiguous terms. Given this setup, we present a query modeling approach where we utilize patent-specific characteristics to generate more precise queries. We propose to automatically disambiguate query terms by employing noun phrases that are extracted using the global analysis of the patent collection. We further introduce a method for predicting whether expansion using noun phrases would improve the retrieval effectiveness. Our experiments show that we can obtain almost 20% improvement by performing query expansion using the true importance of the noun phrase queries. Based on this observation, we introduce various features that can be used to estimate the importance of the noun phrase query. We evaluated the effectiveness of the proposed method on the patent prior art search collection CLEF-IP 2010. Our experimental results indicate that the proposed features make good predictors of the noun phrase importance, and selective application of noun phrase queries using the importance predictors outperforms existing query generation methods.
2348354	Automatic term mismatch diagnosis for selective query expansion People are seldom aware that their search queries frequently mismatch a majority of the relevant documents. This may not be a big problem for topics with a large and diverse set of relevant documents, but would largely increase the chance of search failure for less popular search needs. We aim to address the mismatch problem by developing accurate and simple queries that require minimal effort to construct. This is achieved by targeting retrieval interventions at the query terms that are likely to mismatch relevant documents. For a given topic, the proportion of relevant documents that do not contain a term measures the probability for the term to mismatch relevant documents, or the term mismatch probability. Recent research demonstrates that this probability can be estimated reliably prior to retrieval. Typically, it is used in probabilistic retrieval models to provide query dependent term weights. This paper develops a new use: Automatic diagnosis of term mismatch. A search engine can use the diagnosis to suggest manual query reformulation, guide interactive query expansion, guide automatic query expansion, or motivate other responses. The research described here uses the diagnosis to guide interactive query expansion, and create Boolean conjunctive normal form (CNF) structured queries that selectively expand 'problem' query terms while leaving the rest of the query untouched. Experiments with TREC Ad-hoc and Legal Track datasets demonstrate that with high quality manual expansion, this diagnostic approach can reduce user effort by 33%, and produce simple and effective structured queries that surpass their bag of word counterparts.
2348355	Generating reformulation trees for complex queries Search queries have evolved beyond keyword queries. Many complex queries such as verbose queries, natural language question queries and document-based queries are widely used in a variety of applications. Processing these complex queries usually requires a series of query operations, which results in multiple sequences of reformulated queries. However, previous query representations, either the "bag of words" method or the recently proposed "query distribution" method, cannot effectively model these query sequences, since they ignore the relationships between two queries. In this paper, a reformulation tree framework is proposed to organize multiple sequences of reformulated queries as a tree structure, where each path of the tree corresponds to a sequence of reformulated queries. Specifically, a two-level reformulation tree is implemented for verbose queries. This tree effectively combines two query operations, i.e., subset selection and query substitution, within the same framework. Furthermore, a weight estimation approach is proposed to assign weights to each node of the reformulation tree by considering the relationships with other nodes and directly optimizing retrieval performance. Experiments on TREC collections show that this reformulation tree based representation significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art techniques.
2348356	Proximity-based rocchio's model for pseudo relevance Rocchio's relevance feedback model is a classic query expansion method and it has been shown to be effective in boosting information retrieval performance. The selection of expansion terms in this method, however, does not take into account the relationship between the candidate terms and the query terms (e.g., term proximity). Intuitively, the proximity between candidate expansion terms and query terms can be exploited in the process of query expansion, since terms closer to query terms are more likely to be related to the query topic. In this paper, we study how to incorporate proximity information into the Rocchio's model, and propose a proximity-based Rocchio's model, called PRoc, with three variants. In our PRoc models, a new concept (proximity-based term frequency, ptf) is introduced to model the proximity information in the pseudo relevant documents, which is then used in three kinds of proximity measures. Experimental results on TREC collections show that our proposed PRoc models are effective and generally superior to the state-of-the-art relevance feedback models with optimal parameters.A direct comparison with positional relevance model (PRM) on the GOV2 collection also indicates our proposed model is at least competitive to the most recent progress.
2348350	Personalized click shaping through lagrangian duality for online recommendation Online content recommendation aims to identify trendy articles in a continuously changing dynamic content pool. Most of existing works rely on online user feedback, notably clicks, as the objective and maximize it by showing articles with highest click-through rates. Recently, click shaping was introduced to incorporate multiple objectives in a constrained optimization framework. The work showed that significant tradeoff among the competing objectives can be observed and thus it is important to consider multiple objectives. However, the proposed click shaping approach is segment-based and can only work with a few non-overlapping user segments. It remains a challenge of how to enable deep personalization in click shaping. In this paper, we tackle the challenge by proposing personalized click shaping. The main idea is to work with the Lagrangian duality formulation and explore strong convexity to connect dual and primal solutions. We show that our formulation not only allows efficient conversion from dual to primal for online personalized serving, but also enables us to solve the optimization faster by approximation. We conduct extensive experiments on a large real data set and our experimental results show that the personalized click shaping can significantly outperform the segmented one, while achieving the same ability to balance competing objectives.
2348358	Modeling user posting behavior on social media User generated content is the basic element of social media websites. Relatively few studies have systematically analyzed the motivation to create and share content, especially from the perspective of a common user. In this paper, we perform a comprehensive analysis of user posting behavior on a popular social media website, Twitter. Specifically, we assume that user behavior is mainly influenced by three factors: breaking news, posts from social friends and user's intrinsic interest, and propose a mixture latent topic model to combine all these factors. We evaluated our model on a large-scale Twitter dataset from three different perspectives: the perplexity of held-out content, the performance of predicting retweets and the quality of generated latent topics. The results were encouraging, our model clearly outperformed its competitors.
2348345	Image ranking based on user browsing behavior Ranking of images is difficult because many factors determine their importance (e.g., popularity, quality, entertainment value, context, etc.). In social media platforms, ranking also depends on social interactions and on the visibility of the images both inside and outside those platforms. In this context, the application of standard ranking methods is not clearly understood, and neither are the subtleties associated with taking into account social interaction, internal, and external factors. In this paper, we use a large Flickr dataset and investigate these factors by performing an in-depth analysis of several ranking algorithms using both internal (i.e., within Flickr) and external (i.e., links from outside of Flickr) factors. We analyze rankings given by common metrics used in image retrieval (e.g., number of favorites), and compare them with metrics based on page views (e.g., time spent, number of views). In addition, we represent users' navigation by a graph and combine session models with some of these metrics, comparing with PageRank and BrowseRank. Our experiments show significant differences between the rankings, providing insights on the impact of social interactions, internal, and external factors in image ranking.
2348342	A subjunctive exploratory search interface to support media studies researchers Media studies concerns the study of production, content, and/or reception of various types of media. Today's continuous production and storage of media is changing the way media studies researchers work and requires the development of new search models and tools. We investigate the research cycle of media studies researchers and find that it is an iterative process consisting of several search processes in which data is gathered and the research question is refined. Changes in the research question, however, trigger new data gathering processes. Based on these outcomes we propose a subjunctive exploratory search interface to support media studies researchers in refining their research question in an earlier stage of their research. To assess the subjunctive interface we conduct a user study and compare to a traditional exploratory search interface. We find that with the subjunctive interface users explore more diverse topics than with the standard interface and that users formulate more specific research questions. Although the subjunctive interface is more complex, this does not decrease its usability. These findings suggest that the subjunctive interface supports media studies researchers. The advantage of a subjunctive interface for exploration suggests a new direction for the development of exploratory search systems.
2348341	Explanatory semantic relatedness and explicit spatialization for exploratory search Exploratory search, in which a user investigates complex concepts, is cumbersome with today's search engines. We present a new exploratory search approach that generates interactive visualizations of query concepts using thematic cartography (e.g. choropleth maps, heat maps). We show how the approach can be applied broadly across both geographic and non-geographic contexts through explicit spatialization, a novel method that leverages any figure or diagram -- from a periodic table, to a parliamentary seating chart, to a world map -- as a spatial search environment. We enable this capability by introducing explanatory semantic relatedness measures. These measures extend frequently-used semantic relatedness measures to not only estimate the degree of relatedness between two concepts, but also generate human-readable explanations for their estimates by mining Wikipedia's text, hyperlinks, and category structure. We implement our approach in a system called Atlasify, evaluate its key components, and present several use cases.
2348349	Predicting the ratings of multimedia items for making personalized recommendations Existing multimedia recommenders suggest a specific type of multimedia items rather than items of different types personalized for a user based on his/her preference. Assume that a user is interested in a particular family movie, it is appealing if a multimedia recommendation system can suggest other movies, music, books, and paintings closely related to the movie. We propose a comprehensive, personalized multimedia recommendation system, denoted MudRecS, which makes recommendations on movies, music, books, and paintings similar in content to other movies, music, books, and/or paintings that a MudRecS user is interested in. MudRecS does not rely on users' access patterns/histories, connection information extracted from social networking sites, collaborated filtering methods, or user personal attributes (such as gender and age) to perform the recommendation task. It simply considers the users' ratings, genres, role players (authors or artists), and reviews of different multimedia items, which are abundant and easy to find on the Web. MudRecS predicts the ratings of multimedia items that match the interests of a user to make recommendations. The performance ofMudRecS has been compared with current state-of-the-art multimedia recommenders using various multimedia datasets, and the experimental results show that MudRecS significantly outperforms other systems in accurately predicting the ratings of multimedia items to be recommended.
2348346	Modeling concept dynamics for large scale music search Continuing advances in data storage and communication technologies have led to an explosive growth in digital music collections. To cope with their increasing scale, we need effective Music Information Retrieval (MIR) capabilities like tagging, concept search and clustering. Integral to MIR is a framework for modelling music documents and generating discriminative signatures for them. In this paper, we introduce a multimodal, layered learning framework called DMCM. Distinguished from the existing approaches that encode music as an ensemble of order-less feature vectors, our framework extracts from each music document a variety of acoustic features, and translates them into low-level encodings over the temporal dimension. From them, DMCM elucidates the concept dynamics in the music document, representing them with a novel music signature scheme called Stochastic Music Concept Histogram (SMCH) that captures the probability distribution over all the concepts. Experiment results with two large music collections confirm the advantages of the proposed framework over existing methods on various MIR tasks.
2348330	Language intent models for inferring user browsing behavior Modeling user browsing behavior is an active research area with tangible real-world applications, e.g., organizations can adapt their online presence to their visitors browsing behavior with positive effects in user engagement, and revenue. We concentrate on online news agents, and present a semi-supervised method for predicting news articles that a user will visit after reading an initial article. Our method tackles the problem using language intent models trained on historical data which can cope with unseen articles. We evaluate our method on a large set of articles and in several experimental settings. Our results demonstrate the utility of language intent models for predicting user browsing behavior within online news sites.
2348332	Efficient query recommendations in the long tail via center-piece subgraphs We present a recommendation method based on the well-known concept of center-piece subgraph, that allows for the time/space efficient generation of suggestions also for rare, i.e., long-tail queries. Our method is scalable with respect to both the size of datasets from which the model is computed and the heavy workloads that current web search engines have to deal with. Basically, we relate terms contained into queries with highly correlated queries in a query-flow graph. This enables a novel recommendation generation method able to produce recommendations for approximately 99% of the workload of a real-world search engine. The method is based on a graph having term nodes, query nodes, and two kinds of connections: term-query and query-query. The first connects a term to the queries in which it is contained, the second connects two query nodes if the likelihood that a user submits the second query after having issued the first one is sufficiently high. On such large graph we need to compute the center-piece subgraph induced by terms contained into queries. In order to reduce the cost of the above computation, we introduce a novel and efficient method based on an inverted index representation of the model. We experiment our solution on two real-world query logs and we show that its effectiveness is comparable (and in some case better) than state-of-the-art methods for head-queries. More importantly, the quality of the recommendations generated remains very high also for long-tail queries, where other methods fail even to produce any suggestion. Finally, we extensively investigate scalability and efficiency issues and we show the viability of our method in real world search engines.
2348333	Supporting efficient top-k queries in type-ahead search Type-ahead search can on-the-fly find answers as a user types in a keyword query. A main challenge in this search paradigm is the high-efficiency requirement that queries must be answered within milliseconds. In this paper we study how to answer top-k queries in this paradigm, i.e., as a user types in a query letter by letter, we want to efficiently find the k best answers. Instead of inventing completely new algorithms from scratch, we study challenges when adopting existing top-k algorithms in the literature that heavily rely on two basic list-access methods: random access and sorted access. We present two algorithms to support random access efficiently. We develop novel techniques to support efficient sorted access using list pruning and materialization. We extend our techniques to support fuzzy type-ahead search which allows minor errors between query keywords and answers. We report our experimental results on several real large data sets to show that the proposed techniques can answer top-k queries efficiently in type-ahead search.
2348335	Group matrix factorization for scalable topic modeling Topic modeling can reveal the latent structure of text data and is useful for knowledge discovery, search relevance ranking, document classification, and so on. One of the major challenges in topic modeling is to deal with large datasets and large numbers of topics in real-world applications. In this paper, we investigate techniques for scaling up the non-probabilistic topic modeling approaches such as RLSI and NMF. We propose a general topic modeling method, referred to as Group Matrix Factorization (GMF), to enhance the scalability and efficiency of the non-probabilistic approaches. GMF assumes that the text documents have already been categorized into multiple semantic classes, and there exist class-specific topics for each of the classes as well as shared topics across all classes. Topic modeling is then formalized as a problem of minimizing a general objective function with regularizations and/or constraints on the class-specific topics and shared topics. In this way, the learning of class-specific topics can be conducted in parallel, and thus the scalability and efficiency can be greatly improved. We apply GMF to RLSI and NMF, obtaining Group RLSI (GRLSI) and Group NMF (GNMF) respectively. Experiments on a Wikipedia dataset and a real-world web dataset, each containing about 3 million documents, show that GRLSI and GNMF can greatly improve RLSI and NMF in terms of scalability and efficiency. The topics discovered by GRLSI and GNMF are coherent and have good readability. Further experiments on a search relevance dataset, containing 30,000 labeled queries, show that the use of topics learned by GRLSI and GNMF can significantly improve search relevance.
2348339	Learning hash codes for efficient content reuse detection Content reuse is extremely common in user generated mediums. Reuse detection serves as be the basis for many applications. However, along with the explosion of Internet and continuously growing uses of user generated mediums, the task becomes more critical and difficult. In this paper, we present a novel efficient and scalable approach to detect content reuse. We propose a new signature generation algorithm, which is based on learned hash functions for words. In order to deal with tens of billions of documents, we implement the detection approach on graphical processing units (GPUs). The experimental comparison in this paper involves studies of efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed approach in different types of document collections, including ClueWeb09, Tweets2011, and so on. Experimental results show that the proposed approach can achieve the same detection rates with state-of-the-art systems while uses significantly less execution time than them (from 400X to 1500X speedup).
2348322	Studies of the onset and persistence of medical concerns in search logs The Web provides a wealth of information about medical symptoms and disorders. Although this content is often valuable to consumers, studies have found that interaction with Web content may heighten anxiety and stimulate healthcare utilization. We present a longitudinal log-based study of medical search and browsing behavior on the Web. We characterize how users focus on particular medical concerns and how concerns persist and influence future behavior, including changes in focus of attention in searching and browsing for health information. We build and evaluate models that predict transitions from searches on symptoms to searches on health conditions, and escalations from symptoms to serious illnesses. We study the influence that the prior onset of concerns may have on future behavior, including sudden shifts back to searching on the concern amidst other searches. Our findings have implications for refining Web search and retrieval to support people pursuing diagnostic information.
2348323	A semi-supervised approach to modeling web search satisfaction Web search is an interactive process that involves actions from Web search users and responses from the search engine. Many research efforts have been made to address the problem of understanding search behavior in general. Some of this work focused on predicting whether a particular user has succeeded in achieving her search goal or not. Most of these studies have faced the problem of the lack of reliable labeled data to learn from. Unlike labeled data, unlabeled data recording behavioral signals in Web search is widely available in search logs. In this work, we study the plausibility of using labeled and unlabeled data to learn better models of user behavior that can be used to predict search success more effectively. We present a semi-supervised approach to modeling Web search satisfaction. The proposed approach can use either labeled data only or both labeled and unlabeled data. We show that the proposed model outperforms previous methods for modeling search success using labeled data. We also show that adding unlabeled data improves the effectiveness of the proposed models and that the proposed method outperforms other strong semi-supervised baselines.
2348320	To index or not to index: time-space trade-offs in search engines with positional ranking functions Positional ranking functions, widely used in Web search engines, improve result quality by exploiting the positions of the query terms within documents. However, it is well known that positional indexes demand large amounts of extra space, typically about three times the space of a basic nonpositional index. Textual data, on the other hand, is needed to produce text snippets. In this paper, we study time-space trade-offs for search engines with positional ranking functions and text snippet generation. We consider both index-based and non-index based alternatives for positional data. We aim to answer the question of whether one should index positional data or not. We show that there is a wide range of practical time-space trade-offs. Moreover, we show that both position and textual data can be stored using about 71% of the space used by traditional positional indexes, with a minor increase in query time. This yields considerable space savings and outperforms, both in space and time, recent alternatives from the literature. We also propose several efficient compressed text representations for snippet generation, which are able to use about half of the space of current state-of-the-art alternatives with little impact in query processing time.
2348327	Mining query subtopics from search log data Most queries in web search are ambiguous and multifaceted. Identifying the major senses and facets of queries from search log data, referred to as query subtopic mining in this paper, is a very important issue in web search. Through search log analysis, we show that there are two interesting phenomena of user behavior that can be leveraged to identify query subtopics, referred to as `one subtopic per search' and `subtopic clarification by keyword'. One subtopic per search means that if a user clicks multiple URLs in one query, then the clicked URLs tend to represent the same sense or facet. Subtopic clarification by keyword means that users often add an additional keyword or keywords to expand the query in order to clarify their search intent. Thus, the keywords tend to be indicative of the sense or facet. We propose a clustering algorithm that can effectively leverage the two phenomena to automatically mine the major subtopics of queries, where each subtopic is represented by a cluster containing a number of URLs and keywords. The mined subtopics of queries can be used in multiple tasks in web search and we evaluate them in aspects of the search result presentation such as clustering and re-ranking. We demonstrate that our clustering algorithm can effectively mine query subtopics with an F1 measure in the range of 0.896-0.956. Our experimental results show that the use of the subtopics mined by our approach can significantly improve the state-of-the-art methods used for search result clustering. Experimental results based on click data also show that the re-ranking of search result based on our method can significantly improve the efficiency of users' ability to find information.
2348325	An exploration of ranking heuristics in mobile local search Users increasingly rely on their mobile devices to search local entities, typically businesses, while on the go. Even though recent work has recognized that the ranking signals in mobile local search (e.g., distance and customer rating score of a business) are quite different from general Web search, they have mostly treated these signals as a black-box to extract very basic features (e.g., raw distance values and rating scores) without going inside the signals to understand how exactly they affect the relevance of a business. However, as it has been demonstrated in the development of general information retrieval models, it is critical to explore the underlying behaviors/heuristics of a ranking signal to design more effective ranking features. In this paper, we follow a data-driven methodology to study the behavior of these ranking signals in mobile local search using a large-scale query log. Our analysis reveals interesting heuristics that can be used to guide the exploitation of different signals. For example, users often take the mean value of a signal (e.g., rating) from the business result list as a "pivot" score, and tend to demonstrate different click behaviors on businesses with lower and higher signal values than the pivot; the clickrate of a business generally is sublinearly decreasing with its distance to the user, etc. Inspired by the understanding of these heuristics, we further propose different transformation methods to generate more effective ranking features. We quantify the improvement of the proposed new features using real mobile local search logs over a period of 14 months and show that the mean average precision can be improved by over 7%.
2348324	Social annotations: utility and prediction modeling Social features are increasingly integrated within the search results page of the main commercial search engines. There is, however, little understanding of the utility of social features in traditional search. In this paper, we study utility in the context of social annotations, which are markings indicating that a person in the social network of the user has liked or shared a result document. We introduce a taxonomy of social relevance aspects that influence the utility of social annotations in search, spanning query classes, the social network, and content relevance. We present the results of a user study quantifying the utility of social annotations and the interplay between social relevance aspects. Through the user study we gain insights on conditions under which social annotations are most useful to a user. Finally, we present machine learned models for predicting the utility of a social annotation using the user study judgments as an optimization criterion. We model the learning task with features drawn from web usage logs, and show empirical evidence over real-world head and tail queries that the problem is learnable and that in many cases we can predict the utility of a social annotation.
2348328	Search, interrupted: understanding and predicting search task continuation Many important search tasks require multiple search sessions to complete. Tasks such as travel planning, large purchases, or job searches can span hours, days, or even weeks. Inevitably, life interferes, requiring the searcher either to recover the "state" of the search manually (most common), or plan for interruption in advance (unlikely). The goal of this work is to better understand, characterize, and automatically detect search tasks that will be continued in the near future. To this end, we analyze a query log from the Bing Web search engine to identify the types of intents, topics, and search behavior patterns associated with long-running tasks that are likely to be continued. Using our insights, we develop an effective prediction algorithm that significantly outperforms both the previous state-of-the-art method, and even the ability of human judges, to predict future task continuation. Potential applications of our techniques would allow a search engine to pre-emptively "save state" for a searcher (e.g., by caching search results), perform more targeted personalization, and otherwise better support the searcher experience for interrupted search tasks.
2348289	Adaptive query suggestion for difficult queries Query suggestion is a useful tool to help users formulate better queries. Although this has been found highly useful globally, its effect on different queries may vary. In this paper, we examine the impact of query suggestion on queries of different degrees of difficulty. It turns out that query suggestion is much more useful for difficult queries than easy queries. In addition, the suggestions for difficult queries should rely less on their similarity to the original query. In this paper, we use a learning-to-rank approach to select query suggestions, based on several types of features including a query performance prediction. As query suggestion has different impacts on different queries, we propose an adaptive suggestion approach that makes suggestions only for difficult queries. We carry out experiments on real data from a search engine. Our results clearly indicate that an approach targeting difficult queries can bring higher gain than a uniform suggestion approach.
2348292	Privacy-aware image classification and search Modern content sharing environments such as Flickr or YouTube contain a large amount of private resources such as photos showing weddings, family holidays, and private parties. These resources can be of a highly sensitive nature, disclosing many details of the users' private sphere. In order to support users in making privacy decisions in the context of image sharing and to provide them with a better overview on privacy related visual content available on the Web, we propose techniques to automatically detect private images, and to enable privacy-oriented image search. To this end, we learn privacy classifiers trained on a large set of manually assessed Flickr photos, combining textual metadata of images with a variety of visual features. We employ the resulting classification models for specifically searching for private photos, and for diversifying query results to provide users with a better coverage of private and public content. Large-scale classification experiments reveal insights into the predictive performance of different visual and textual features, and a user evaluation of query result rankings demonstrates the viability of our approach.
2348293	Manhattan hashing for large-scale image retrieval Hashing is used to learn binary-code representation for data with expectation of preserving the neighborhood structure in the original feature space. Due to its fast query speed and reduced storage cost, hashing has been widely used for efficient nearest neighbor search in a large variety of applications like text and image retrieval. Most existing hashing methods adopt Hamming distance to measure the similarity (neighborhood) between points in the hashcode space. However, one problem with Hamming distance is that it may destroy the neighborhood structure in the original feature space, which violates the essential goal of hashing. In this paper, Manhattan hashing (MH), which is based on Manhattan distance, is proposed to solve the problem of Hamming distance based hashing. The basic idea of MH is to encode each projected dimension with multiple bits of natural binary code (NBC), based on which the Manhattan distance between points in the hashcode space is calculated for nearest neighbor search. MH can effectively preserve the neighborhood structure in the data to achieve the goal of hashing. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to adopt Manhattan distance with NBC for hashing. Experiments on several large-scale image data sets containing up to one million points show that our MH method can significantly outperform other state-of-the-art methods.
2348290	Learning to suggest: a machine learning framework for ranking query suggestions We consider the task of suggesting related queries to users after they issue their initial query to a web search engine. We propose a machine learning approach to learn the probability that a user may find a follow-up query both useful and relevant, given his initial query. Our approach is based on a machine learning model which enables us to generalize to queries that have never occurred in the logs as well. The model is trained on co-occurrences mined from the search logs, with novel utility and relevance models, and the machine learning step is done without any labeled data by human judges. The learning step allows us to generalize from the past observations and generate query suggestions that are beyond the past co-occurred queries. This brings significant gains in coverage while yielding modest gains in relevance. Both offline (based on human judges) and online (based on millions of user interactions) evaluations demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms strong baselines.
2348294	Boosting multi-kernel locality-sensitive hashing for scalable image retrieval Similarity search is a key challenge for multimedia retrieval applications where data are usually represented in high-dimensional space. Among various algorithms proposed for similarity search in high-dimensional space, Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) is the most popular one, which recently has been extended to Kernelized Locality-Sensitive Hashing (KLSH) by exploiting kernel similarity for better retrieval efficacy. Typically, KLSH works only with a single kernel, which is often limited in real-world multimedia applications, where data may originate from multiple resources or can be represented in several different forms. For example, in content-based multimedia retrieval, a variety of features can be extracted to represent contents of an image. To overcome the limitation of regular KLSH, we propose a novel Boosting Multi-Kernel Locality-Sensitive Hashing (BMKLSH) scheme that significantly boosts the retrieval performance of KLSH by making use of multiple kernels. We conduct extensive experiments for large-scale content-based image retrieval, in which encouraging results show that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art techniques.
2484029	Learning latent friendship propagation networks with interest awareness for link prediction It's well known that the transitivity of friendship is a popular sociological principle in social networks. However, it's still unknown that to what extent people's friend-making behaviors follow this principle and to what extent it can benefit the link prediction task. In this paper, we try to adopt this sociological principle to explain the evolution of networks and study the latent friendship propagation. Unlike traditional link prediction approaches, we model link formation as results of individuals' friend-making behaviors combined with personal interests. We propose the Latent Friendship Propagation Network (LFPN), which depicts the evolution progress of one's egocentric network and reveals future growth potentials driven by the transitivity of friendship based on personal interests. We model individuals' social behaviors using the Latent Friendship Propagation Model (LFPM), a probabilistic generative model from which the LFPN can be learned effectively. To evaluate the power of the friendship propagation in link prediction, we design LFPN-RW which models the friend-making behavior as a random walk upon the LFPN naturally and captures the co-influence effect of the friend circles as well as personal interests to provide more accurate prediction. Experimental results on real-world datasets show that LFPN-RW outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches. This convinces that the transitivity of friendship actually plays important roles in the evolution of social networks.
2484047	Modeling user's receptiveness over time for recommendation Existing recommender systems model user interests and the social influences independently. In reality, user interests may change over time, and as the interests change, new friends may be added while old friends grow apart and the new friendships formed may cause further interests change. This complex interaction requires the joint modeling of user interest and social relationships over time. In this paper, we propose a probabilistic generative model, called Receptiveness over Time Model (RTM), to capture this interaction. We design a Gibbs sampling algorithm to learn the receptiveness and interest distributions among users over time. The results of experiments on a real world dataset demonstrate that RTM-based recommendation outperforms the state-of-the-art recommendation methods. Case studies also show that RTM is able to discover the user interest shift and receptiveness change over time
2484046	The impact of solid state drive on search engine cache management Caching is an important optimization in search engine architectures. Existing caching techniques for search engine optimization are mostly biased towards the reduction of random accesses to disks, because random accesses are known to be much more expensive than sequential accesses in traditional magnetic hard disk drive (HDD). Recently, solid state drive (SSD) has emerged as a new kind of secondary storage medium, and some search engines like Baidu have already used SSD to completely replace HDD in their infrastructure. One notable property of SSD is that its random access latency is comparable to its sequential access latency. Therefore, the use of SSDs to replace HDDs in a search engine infrastructure may void the cache management of existing search engines. In this paper, we carry out a series of empirical experiments to study the impact of SSD on search engine cache management. The results give insights to practitioners and researchers on how to adapt the infrastructure and how to redesign the caching policies for SSD-based search engines.
2484042	Ranking document clusters using markov random fields An important challenge in cluster-based document retrieval is ranking document clusters by their relevance to the query. We present a novel cluster ranking approach that utilizes Markov Random Fields (MRFs). MRFs enable the integration of various types of cluster-relevance evidence; e.g., the query-similarity values of the cluster's documents and query-independent measures of the cluster. We use our method to re-rank an initially retrieved document list by ranking clusters that are created from the documents most highly ranked in the list. The resultant retrieval effectiveness is substantially better than that of the initial list for several lists that are produced by effective retrieval methods. Furthermore, our cluster ranking approach significantly outperforms state-of- the-art cluster ranking methods. We also show that our method can be used to improve the performance of (state-of- the-art) results-diversification methods.
2484045	Sumblr: continuous summarization of evolving tweet streams With the explosive growth of microblogging services, short-text messages (also known as tweets) are being created and shared at an unprecedented rate. Tweets in its raw form can be incredibly informative, but also overwhelming. For both end-users and data analysts it is a nightmare to plow through millions of tweets which contain enormous noises and redundancies. In this paper, we study continuous tweet summarization as a solution to address this problem. While traditional document summarization methods focus on static and small-scale data, we aim to deal with dynamic, quickly arriving, and large-scale tweet streams. We propose a novel prototype called Sumblr (SUMmarization By stream cLusteRing) for tweet streams. We first propose an online tweet stream clustering algorithm to cluster tweets and maintain distilled statistics called Tweet Cluster Vectors. Then we develop a TCV-Rank summarization technique for generating online summaries and historical summaries of arbitrary time durations. Finally, we describe a topic evolvement detection method, which consumes online and historical summaries to produce timelines automatically from tweet streams. Our experiments on large-scale real tweets demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of our approach.
2484041	User model-based metrics for offline query suggestion evaluation Query suggestion or auto-completion mechanisms are widely used by search engines and are increasingly attracting interest from the research community. However, the lack of commonly accepted evaluation methodology and metrics means that it is not possible to compare results and approaches from the literature. Moreover, often the metrics used to evaluate query suggestions tend to be an adaptation from other domains without a proper justification. Hence, it is not necessarily clear if the improvements reported in the literature would result in an actual improvement in the users' experience. Inspired by the cascade user models and state-of-the-art evaluation metrics in the web search domain, we address the query suggestion evaluation, by first studying the users behaviour from a search engine's query log and thereby deriving a new family of user models describing the users interaction with a query suggestion mechanism. Next, assuming a query log-based evaluation approach, we propose two new metrics to evaluate query suggestions, pSaved and eSaved. Both metrics are parameterised by a user model. pSaved is defined as the probability of using the query suggestions while submitting a query. eSaved equates to the expected relative amount of effort (keypresses) a user can avoid due to the deployed query suggestion mechanism. Finally, we experiment with both metrics using four user model instantiations as well as metrics previously used in the literature on a dataset of 6.1M sessions. Our results demonstrate that pSaved and eSaved show the best alignment with the users satisfaction amongst the considered metrics.
2484039	A low rank structural large margin method for cross-modal ranking Cross-modal retrieval is a classic research topic in multimedia information retrieval. The traditional approaches study the problem as a pairwise similarity function problem. In this paper, we consider this problem from a new perspective as a listwise ranking problem and propose a general cross-modal ranking algorithm to optimize the listwise ranking loss with a low rank embedding, which we call Latent Semantic Cross-Modal Ranking (LSCMR). The latent low-rank embedding space is discriminatively learned by structural large margin learning to optimize for certain ranking criteria directly. We evaluate LSCMR on the Wikipedia and NUS-WIDE dataset. Experimental results show that this method obtains significant improvements over the state-of-the-art methods.
2484038	On the measurement of test collection reliability The reliability of a test collection is proportional to the number of queries it contains. But building a collection with many queries is expensive, so researchers have to find a balance between reliability and cost. Previous work on the measurement of test collection reliability relied on data-based approaches that contemplated random what if scenarios, and provided indicators such as swap rates and Kendall tau correlations. Generalizability Theory was proposed as an alternative founded on analysis of variance that provides reliability indicators based on statistical theory. However, these reliability indicators are hard to interpret in practice, because they do not correspond to well known indicators like Kendall tau correlation. We empirically established these relationships based on data from over 40 TREC collections, thus filling the gap in the practical interpretation of Generalizability Theory. We also review the computation of these indicators, and show that they are extremely dependent on the sample of systems and queries used, so much that the required number of queries to achieve a certain level of reliability can vary in orders of magnitude. We discuss the computation of confidence intervals for these statistics, providing a much more reliable tool to measure test collection reliability. Reflecting upon all these results, we review a wealth of TREC test collections, arguing that they are possibly not as reliable as generally accepted and that the common choice of 50 queries is insufficient even for stable rankings.
2484037	Semantic hashing using tags and topic modeling It is an important research problem to design efficient and effective solutions for large scale similarity search. One popular strategy is to represent data examples as compact binary codes through semantic hashing, which has produced promising results with fast search speed and low storage cost. Many existing semantic hashing methods generate binary codes for documents by modeling document relationships based on similarity in a keyword feature space. Two major limitations in existing methods are: (1) Tag information is often associated with documents in many real world applications, but has not been fully exploited yet; (2) The similarity in keyword feature space does not fully reflect semantic relationships that go beyond keyword matching. This paper proposes a novel hashing approach, Semantic Hashing using Tags and Topic Modeling (SHTTM), to incorporate both the tag information and the similarity information from probabilistic topic modeling. In particular, a unified framework is designed for ensuring hashing codes to be consistent with tag information by a formal latent factor model and preserving the document topic/semantic similarity that goes beyond keyword matching. An iterative coordinate descent procedure is proposed for learning the optimal hashing codes. An extensive set of empirical studies on four different datasets has been conducted to demonstrate the advantages of the proposed SHTTM approach against several other state-of-the-art semantic hashing techniques. Furthermore, experimental results indicate that the modeling of tag information and utilizing topic modeling are beneficial for improving the effectiveness of hashing separately, while the combination of these two techniques in the unified framework obtains even better results.
2484036	Incorporating vertical results into search click models In modern search engines, an increasing number of search result pages (SERPs) are federated from multiple specialized search engines (called verticals, such as Image or Video). As an effective approach to interpret users' click-through behavior as feedback information, most click models were designed to reduce the position bias and improve ranking performance of ordinary search results, which have homogeneous appearances. However, when vertical results are combined with ordinary ones, significant differences in presentation may lead to user behavior biases and thus failure of state-of-the-art click models. With the help of a popular commercial search engine in China, we collected a large scale log data set which contains behavior information on both vertical and ordinary results. We also performed eye-tracking analysis to study user's real-world examining behavior. According these analysis, we found that different result appearances may cause different behavior biases both for vertical results (local effect) and for the whole result lists (global effect). These biases include: examine bias for vertical results (especially those with multimedia components), trust bias for result lists with vertical results, and a higher probability of result revisitation for vertical results. Based on these findings, a novel click model considering these biases besides position bias was constructed to describe interaction with SERPs containing verticals. Experimental results show that the new Vertical-aware Click Model (VCM) is better at interpreting user click behavior on federated searches in terms of both log-likelihood and perplexity than existing models.
2484035	Addressing cold-start in app recommendation: latent user models constructed from twitter followers As a tremendous number of mobile applications (apps) are readily available, users have difficulty in identifying apps that are relevant to their interests. Recommender systems that depend on previous user ratings (i.e., collaborative filtering, or CF) can address this problem for apps that have sufficient ratings from past users. But for apps that are newly released, CF does not have any user ratings to base recommendations on, which leads to the cold-start problem. In this paper, we describe a method that accounts for nascent information culled from Twitter to provide relevant recommendation in such cold-start situations. We use Twitter handles to access an app's Twitter account and extract the IDs of their Twitter-followers. We create pseudo-documents that contain the IDs of Twitter users interested in an app and then apply latent Dirichlet allocation to generate latent groups. At test time, a target user seeking recommendations is mapped to these latent groups. By using the transitive relationship of latent groups to apps, we estimate the probability of the user liking the app. We show that by incorporating information from Twitter, our approach overcomes the difficulty of cold-start app recommendation and significantly outperforms other state-of-the-art recommendation techniques by up to 33%.
2484033	Taily: shard selection using the tail of score distributions Search engines can improve their efficiency by selecting only few promising shards for each query. State-of-the-art shard selection algorithms first query a central index of sampled documents, and their effectiveness is similar to searching all shards. However, the search in the central index also hurts efficiency. Additionally, we show that the effectiveness of these approaches varies substantially with the sampled documents. This paper proposes Taily, a novel shard selection algorithm that models a query's score distribution in each shard as a Gamma distribution and selects shards with highly scored documents in the tail of the distribution. Taily estimates the parameters of score distributions based on the mean and variance of the score function's features in the collections and shards. Because Taily operates on term statistics instead of document samples, it is efficient and has deterministic effectiveness. Experiments on large web collections (Gov2, CluewebA and CluewebB) show that Taily achieves similar effectiveness to sample-based approaches, and improves upon their efficiency by roughly 20% in terms of used resources and response time.
2484032	Topic hierarchy construction for the organization of multi-source user generated contents User generated contents (UGCs) carry a huge amount of high quality information. However, the information overload and diversity of UGC sources limit their potential uses. In this research, we propose a framework to organize information from multiple UGC sources by a topic hierarchy which is automatically generated and updated using the UGCs. We explore the unique characteristics of UGCs like blogs, cQAs, microblogs, etc., and introduce a novel scheme to combine them. We also propose a graph-based method to enable incremental update of the generated topic hierarchy. Using the hierarchy, users can easily obtain a comprehensive, in-depth and up-to-date picture of their topics of interests. The experiment results demonstrate how information from multiple heterogeneous sources improves the resultant topic hierarchies. It also shows that the proposed method achieves better F1 scores in hierarchy generation as compared to the state-of-the-art methods.
2484031	Summaries, ranked retrieval and sessions: a unified framework for information access evaluation We introduce a general information access evaluation framework that can potentially handle summaries, ranked document lists and even multi query sessions seamlessly. Our framework first builds a trailtext which represents a concatenation of all the texts read by the user during a search session, and then computes an evaluation metric called U-measure over the trailtext. Instead of discounting the value of a retrieved piece of information based on ranks, U-measure discounts it based on its position within the trailtext. U-measure takes the document length into account just like Time-Biased Gain (TBG), and has the diminishing return property. It is therefore more realistic than rank-based metrics. Furthermore, it is arguably more flexible than TBG, as it is free from the linear traversal assumption (i.e., that the user scans the ranked list from top to bottom), and can handle information access tasks other than ad hoc retrieval. This paper demonstrates the validity and versatility of the U-measure framework. Our main conclusions are: (a) For ad hoc retrieval, U-measure is at least as reliable as TBG in terms of rank correlations with traditional metrics and discriminative power; (b) For diversified search, our diversity versions of U-measure are highly correlated with state-of-the-art diversity metrics; (c) For multi-query sessions, U-measure is highly correlated with Session nDCG; and (d) Unlike rank-based metrics such as DCG, U-measure can quantify the differences between linear and nonlinear traversals in sessions. We argue that our new framework is useful for understanding the user's search behaviour and for comparison across different information access styles (e.g. examining a direct answer vs. examining a ranked list of web pages).
2484064	A location-based news article recommendation with explicit localized semantic analysis The interest of users in handheld devices is strongly related to their location. Therefore, the user location is important, as a user context, for news article recommendation in a mobile environment. This paper proposes a novel news article recommendation that reflects the geographical context of the user. For this purpose, we propose the Explicit Localized Semantic Analysis (ELSA), an ESA-based topical representation of documents. Every location has its own geographical topics, which can be captured from the geo-tagged documents related to the location. Thus, not only news articles but locations are also represented as topic vectors. The main advantage of ELSA is that it stresses only the topics that are relevant to a given location, whereas all topics are equally important in ESA. As a result, geographical topics have different importance according to the user location in ELSA, even if they come from the same article. Another advantage of ELSA is that it allows a simple comparison of the user location and news articles, because it projects both locations and articles onto an identical space composed of Wikipedia topics. In the evaluation of ELSA with the New York Times corpus, it outperformed two simple baselines of Bag-Of-Words and LDA as well as two ESA-based methods. Rt10 of ELSA was improved up to 46.25% over other methods, and its NDCG@k was always higher than those of the others regardless of k.
2484067	Opportunity model for e-commerce recommendation: right product; right time Most of existing e-commerce recommender systems aim to recommend the right product to a user, based on whether the user is likely to purchase or like a product. On the other hand, the effectiveness of recommendations also depends on the time of the recommendation. Let us take a user who just purchased a laptop as an example. She may purchase a replacement battery in 2 years (assuming that the laptop's original battery often fails to work around that time) and purchase a new laptop in another 2 years. In this case, it is not a good idea to recommend a new laptop or a replacement battery right after the user purchased the new laptop. It could hurt the user's satisfaction of the recommender system if she receives a potentially right product recommendation at the wrong time. We argue that a system should not only recommend the most relevant item, but also recommend at the right time. This paper studies the new problem: how to recommend the right product at the right time? We adapt the proportional hazards modeling approach in survival analysis to the recommendation research field and propose a new opportunity model to explicitly incorporate time in an e-commerce recommender system. The new model estimates the joint probability of a user making a follow-up purchase of a particular product at a particular time. This joint purchase probability can be leveraged by recommender systems in various scenarios, including the zero-query pull-based recommendation scenario (e.g. recommendation on an e-commerce web site) and a proactive push-based promotion scenario (e.g. email or text message based marketing). We evaluate the opportunity modeling approach with multiple metrics. Experimental results on a data collected by a real-world e-commerce website(shop.com) show that it can predict a user's follow-up purchase behavior at a particular time with descent accuracy. In addition, the opportunity model significantly improves the conversion rate in pull-based systems and the user satisfaction/utility in push-based systems.
2484066	Copulas for information retrieval In many domains of information retrieval, system estimates of document relevance are based on multidimensional quality criteria that have to be accommodated in a unidimensional result ranking. Current solutions to this challenge are often inconsistent with the formal probabilistic framework in which constituent scores were estimated, or use sophisticated learning methods that make it difficult for humans to understand the origin of the final ranking. To address these issues, we introduce the use of copulas, a powerful statistical framework for modeling complex multi-dimensional dependencies, to information retrieval tasks. We provide a formal background to copulas and demonstrate their effectiveness on standard IR tasks such as combining multidimensional relevance estimates and fusion of results from multiple search engines. We introduce copula-based versions of standard relevance estimators and fusion methods and show that these lead to significant performance improvements on several tasks, as evaluated on large-scale standard corpora, compared to their non-copula counterparts. We also investigate criteria for understanding the likely effect of using copula models in a given retrieval scenario.
2484069	Task-aware query recommendation When generating query recommendations for a user, a natural approach is to try and leverage not only the user's most recently submitted query, or reference query, but also information about the current search context, such as the user's recent search interactions. We focus on two important classes of queries that make up search contexts: those that address the same information need as the reference query (on-task queries), and those that do not (off-task queries). We analyze the effects on query recommendation performance of using contexts consisting of only on-task queries, only off-task queries, and a mix of the two. Using TREC Session Track data for simulations, we demonstrate that on-task context is helpful on average but can be easily overwhelmed when off-task queries are interleaved---a common situation according to several analyses of commercial search logs. To minimize the impact of off-task queries on recommendation performance, we consider automatic methods of identifying such queries using a state of the art search task identification technique. Our experimental results show that automatic search task identification can eliminate the effect of off-task queries in a mixed context. We also introduce a novel generalized model for generating recommendations over a search context. While we only consider query text in this study, the model can handle integration over arbitrary user search behavior, such as page visits, dwell times, and query abandonment. In addition, it can be used for other types of recommendation, including personalized web search.
2484068	Personalized ranking model adaptation for web search Search engines train and apply a single ranking model across all users, but searchers' information needs are diverse and cover a broad range of topics. Hence, a single user-independent ranking model is insufficient to satisfy different users' result preferences. Conventional personalization methods learn separate models of user interests and use those to re-rank the results from the generic model. Those methods require significant user history information to learn user preferences, have low coverage in the case of memory-based methods that learn direct associations between query-URL pairs, and have limited opportunity to markedly affect the ranking given that they only re-order top-ranked items. In this paper, we propose a general ranking model adaptation framework for personalized search. Using a given user-independent ranking model trained offline and limited number of adaptation queries from individual users, the framework quickly learns to apply a series of linear transformations, e.g., scaling and shifting, over the parameters of the given global ranking model such that the adapted model can better fit each individual user's search preferences. Extensive experimentation based on a large set of search logs from a major commercial Web search engine confirms the effectiveness of the proposed method compared to several state-of-the-art ranking model adaptation methods.
2484060	Sentiment diversification with different biases Prior search result diversification work focuses on achieving topical variety in a ranked list, typically equally across all aspects. In this paper, we diversify with sentiments according to an explicit bias. We want to allow users to switch the result perspective to better grasp the polarity of opinionated content, such as during a literature review. For this, we first infer the prior sentiment bias inherent in a controversial topic -- the 'Topic Sentiment'. Then, we utilize this information in 3 different ways to diversify results according to various sentiment biases: (1) Equal diversification to achieve a balanced and unbiased representation of all sentiments on the topic; (2) Diversification towards the Topic Sentiment, in which the actual sentiment bias in the topic is mirrored to emphasize the general perception of the topic; (3) Diversification against the Topic Sentiment, in which documents about the 'minority' or outlying sentiment(s) are boosted and those with the popular sentiment are demoted. Since sentiment classification is an essential tool for this task, we experiment by gradually degrading the accuracy of a perfect classifier down to 40%, and show which diversification approaches prove most stable in this setting. The results reveal that the proportionality-based methods and our SCSF model, considering sentiment strength and frequency in the diversified list, yield the highest gains. Further, in case the Topic Sentiment cannot be reliably estimated, we show how performance is affected by equal diversification when actually an emphasis either towards or against the Topic Sentiment is desired: in the former case, an average of 6.48% is lost across all evaluation measures, whereas in the latter case this is 16.23%, confirming that bias-specific sentiment diversification is crucial.
2484063	Pseudo test collections for training and tuning microblog rankers Recent years have witnessed a persistent interest in generating pseudo test collections, both for training and evaluation purposes. We describe a method for generating queries and relevance judgments for microblog search in an unsupervised way. Our starting point is this intuition: tweets with a hashtag are relevant to the topic covered by the hashtag and hence to a suitable query derived from the hashtag. Our baseline method selects all commonly used hashtags, and all associated tweets as relevance judgments; we then generate a query from these tweets. Next, we generate a timestamp for each query, allowing us to use temporal information in the training process. We then enrich the generation process with knowledge derived from an editorial test collection for microblog search. We use our pseudo test collections in two ways. First, we tune parameters of a variety of well known retrieval methods on them. Correlations with parameter sweeps on an editorial test collection are high on average, with a large variance over retrieval algorithms. Second, we use the pseudo test collections as training sets in a learning to rank scenario. Performance close to training on an editorial test collection is achieved in many cases. Our results demonstrate the utility of tuning and training microblog search algorithms on automatically generated training material.
2484056	Leveraging conceptual lexicon: query disambiguation using proximity information for patent retrieval Patent prior art search is a task in patent retrieval where the goal is to rank documents which describe prior art work related to a patent application. One of the main properties of patent retrieval is that the query topic is a full patent application and does not represent a focused information need. This query by document nature of patent retrieval introduces new challenges and requires new investigations specific to this problem. Researchers have addressed this problem by considering different information resources for query reduction and query disambiguation. However, previous work has not fully studied the effect of using proximity information and exploiting domain specific resources for performing query disambiguation. In this paper, we first reduce the query document by taking the first claim of the document itself. We then build a query-specific patent lexicon based on definitions of the International Patent Classification (IPC). We study how to expand queries by selecting expansion terms from the lexicon that are focused on the query topic. The key problem is how to capture whether an expansion term is focused on the query topic or not. We address this problem by exploiting proximity information. We assign high weights to expansion terms appearing closer to query terms based on the intuition that terms closer to query terms are more likely to be related to the query topic. Experimental results on two patent retrieval datasets show that the proposed method is effective and robust for query expansion, significantly outperforming the standard pseudo relevance feedback (PRF) and existing baselines in patent retrieval.
2484053	Beliefs and biases in web search People's beliefs, and unconscious biases that arise from those beliefs, influence their judgment, decision making, and actions, as is commonly accepted among psychologists. Biases can be observed in information retrieval in situations where searchers seek or are presented with information that significantly deviates from the truth. There is little understanding of the impact of such biases in search. In this paper we study search-related biases via multiple probes: an exploratory retrospective survey, human labeling of the captions and results returned by a Web search engine, and a large-scale log analysis of search behavior on that engine. Targeting yes-no questions in the critical domain of health search, we show that Web searchers exhibit their own biases and are also subject to bias from the search engine. We clearly observe searchers favoring positive information over negative and more than expected given base rates based on consensus answers from physicians. We also show that search engines strongly favor a particular, usually positive, perspective, irrespective of the truth. Importantly, we show that these biases can be counterproductive and affect search outcomes; in our study, around half of the answers that searchers settled on were actually incorrect. Our findings have implications for search engine design, including the development of ranking algorithms that con-sider the desire to satisfy searchers (by validating their beliefs) and providing accurate answers and properly considering base rates. Incorporating likelihood information into search is particularly important for consequential tasks, such as those with a medical focus.
2484059	An experimental study on implicit social recommendation Social recommendation problems have drawn a lot of attention recently due to the prevalence of social networking sites. The experiments in previous literature suggest that social information is very effective in improving traditional recommendation algorithms. However, explicit social information is not always available in most of the recommender systems, which limits the impact of social recommendation techniques. In this paper, we study the following two research problems: (1) In some systems without explicit social information, can we still improve recommender systems using implicit social information? (2) In the systems with explicit social information, can the performance of using implicit social information outperform that of using explicit social information? In order to answer these two questions, we conduct comprehensive experimental analysis on three recommendation datasets. The result indicates that: (1) Implicit user and item social information, including similar and dissimilar relationships, can be employed to improve traditional recommendation methods. (2) When comparing implicit social information with explicit social information, the performance of using implicit information is slightly worse. This study provides additional insights to social recommendation techniques, and also greatly widens the utility and spreads the impact of previous and upcoming social recommendation approaches.
2484057	Emerging topic detection for organizations from microblogs Microblog services have emerged as an essential way to strengthen the communications among individuals and organizations. These services promote timely and active discussions and comments towards products, markets as well as public events, and have attracted a lot of attentions from organizations. In particular, emerging topics are of immediate concerns to organizations since they signal current concerns of, and feedback by their users. Two challenges must be tackled for effective emerging topic detection. One is the problem of real-time relevant data collection and the other is the ability to model the emerging characteristics of detected topics and identify them before they become hot topics. To tackle these challenges, we first design a novel scheme to crawl the relevant messages related to the designated organization by monitoring multi-aspects of microblog content, including users, the evolving keywords and their temporal sequence. We then develop an incremental clustering framework to detect new topics, and employ a range of content and temporal features to help in promptly detecting hot emerging topics. Extensive evaluations on a representative real-world dataset based on Twitter data demonstrate that our scheme is able to characterize emerging topics well and detect them before they become hot topics.
2484051	An incremental approach to efficient pseudo-relevance feedback Pseudo-relevance feedback is an important strategy to improve search accuracy. It is often implemented as a two-round retrieval process: the first round is to retrieve an initial set of documents relevant to an original query, and the second round is to retrieve final retrieval results using the original query expanded with terms selected from the previously retrieved documents. This two-round retrieval process is clearly time consuming, which could arguably be one of main reasons that hinder the wide adaptation of the pseudo-relevance feedback methods in real-world IR systems. In this paper, we study how to improve the efficiency of pseudo-relevance feedback methods. The basic idea is to reduce the time needed for the second round of retrieval by leveraging the query processing results of the first round. Specifically, instead of processing the expand query as a newly submitted query, we propose an incremental approach, which resumes the query processing results (i.e. document accumulators) for the first round of retrieval and process the second round of retrieval mainly as a step of adjusting the scores in the accumulators. Experimental results on TREC Terabyte collections show that the proposed incremental approach can improve the efficiency of pseudo-relevance feedback methods by a factor of two without sacrificing their effectiveness.
2484052	Personalized time-aware tweets summarization We focus on the problem of selecting meaningful tweets given a user's interests; the dynamic nature of user interests, the sheer volume, and the sparseness of individual messages make this an challenging problem. Specifically, we consider the task of time-aware tweets summarization, based on a user's history and collaborative social influences from ``social circles.'' We propose a time-aware user behavior model, the Tweet Propagation Model (TPM), in which we infer dynamic probabilistic distributions over interests and topics. We then explicitly consider novelty, coverage, and diversity to arrive at an iterative optimization algorithm for selecting tweets. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of our personalized time-aware tweets summarization method based on TPM.
2484086	Incorporating popularity in topic models for social network analysis Topic models are used to group words in a text dataset into a set of relevant topics. Unfortunately, when a few words frequently appear in a dataset, the topic groups identified by topic models become noisy because these frequent words repeatedly appear in "irrelevant" topic groups. This noise has not been a serious problem in a text dataset because the frequent words (e.g., the and is) do not have much meaning and have been simply removed before a topic model analysis. However, in a social network dataset we are interested in, they correspond to popular persons (e.g., Barack Obama and Justin Bieber) and cannot be simply removed because most people are interested in them. To solve this "popularity problem", we explicitly model the popularity of nodes (words) in topic models. For this purpose, we first introduce a notion of a "popularity component" and propose topic model extensions that effectively accommodate the popularity component. We evaluate the effectiveness of our models with a real-world Twitter dataset. Our proposed models achieve significantly lower perplexity (i.e., better prediction power) compared to the state-of-the-art baselines. In addition to the popularity problem caused by the nodes with high incoming edge degree, we also investigate the effect of the outgoing edge degree with another topic model extensions. We show that considering outgoing edge degree does not help much in achieving lower perplexity.
2484088	Faster and smaller inverted indices with treaps We introduce a new representation of the inverted index that performs faster ranked unions and intersections while using less space. Our index is based on the treap data structure, which allows us to intersect/merge the document identifiers while simultaneously thresholding by frequency, instead of the costlier two-step classical processing methods. To achieve compression we represent the treap topology using compact data structures. Further, the treap invariants allow us to elegantly encode differentially both document identifiers and frequencies. Results show that our index uses about 20% less space, and performs queries up to three times faster, than state-of-the-art compact representations.
2484083	Retrieving documents with mathematical content Many documents with mathematical content are published on the Web, but conventional search engines that rely on keyword search only cannot fully exploit their mathematical information. In particular, keyword search is insufficient when expressions in a document are not annotated with natural keywords or the user cannot describe her query with keywords. Retrieving documents by querying their mathematical content directly is very appealing in various domains such as education, digital libraries, engineering, patent documents, medical sciences, etc. Capturing the relevance of mathematical expressions also greatly enhances document classification in such domains. Unlike text retrieval, where keywords carry enough semantics to distinguish text documents and rank them, math symbols do not contain much semantic information on their own. In fact, mathematical expressions typically consist of few alphabetical symbols organized in rather complex structures. Hence, the structure of an expression, which describes the way such symbols are combined, should also be considered. Unfortunately, there is no standard testbed with which to evaluate the effectiveness of a mathematics retrieval algorithm. In this paper we study the fundamental and challenging problems in mathematics retrieval, that is how to capture the relevance of mathematical expressions, how to query them, and how to evaluate the results. We describe various search paradigms and propose retrieval systems accordingly. We discuss the benefits and drawbacks of each approach, and further compare them through an extensive empirical study.
2484084	Looking ahead: query preview in exploratory search Exploratory search is a complex, iterative information seeking activity that involves running multiple queries and finding and examining many documents. We designed a query preview control that visualizes the distribution of newly-retrieved and re-retrieved documents prior to running the query. When evaluating the preview control with a control condition, we found effects on both people's information seeking behavior and improved retrieval performance. People spent more time formulating a query and were more likely to explore search results more deeply, retrieved a more diverse set of documents, and found more different relevant documents when using the preview.
2484081	A general evaluation measure for document organization tasks A number of key Information Access tasks -- Document Retrieval, Clustering, Filtering, and their combinations -- can be seen as instances of a generic {em document organization} problem that establishes priority and relatedness relationships between documents (in other words, a problem of forming and ranking clusters). As far as we know, no analysis has been made yet on the evaluation of these tasks from a global perspective. In this paper we propose two complementary evaluation measures -- Reliability and Sensitivity -- for the generic Document Organization task which are derived from a proposed set of formal constraints (properties that any suitable measure must satisfy). In addition to be the first measures that can be applied to any mixture of ranking, clustering and filtering tasks, Reliability and Sensitivity satisfy more formal constraints than previously existing evaluation metrics for each of the subsumed tasks. Besides their formal properties, its most salient feature from an empirical point of view is their strictness: a high score according to the harmonic mean of Reliability and Sensitivity ensures a high score with any of the most popular evaluation metrics in all the Document Retrieval, Clustering and Filtering datasets used in our experiments.
2484078	Efficient query construction for large scale data In recent years, a number of open databases have emerged on the Web, providing Web users with platforms to collaboratively create structured information. As these databases are intended to accommodate heterogeneous information and knowledge, they usually comprise a very large schema and billions of instances. Browsing and searching data on such a scale is not an easy task for a Web user. In this context, interactive query construction offers an intuitive interface for novice users to retrieve information from databases neither requiring any knowledge of structured query languages, nor any prior knowledge of the database schema. However, the existing mechanisms do not scale well on large scale datasets. This paper presents a set of techniques to boost the scalability of interactive query construction, from the perspective of both, user interaction cost and performance. We connect an abstract ontology layer to the database schema to shorten the process of user-computer interaction. We also introduce a search mechanism to enable efficient exploration of query interpretation spaces over large scale data. Extensive experiments show that our approach scales well on Freebase - an open database containing more than 7,000 relational tables in more than 100 domains.
2484075	Fighting search engine amnesia: reranking repeated results Web search engines frequently show the same documents repeatedly for different queries within the same search session, in essence forgetting when the same documents were already shown to users. Depending on previous user interaction with the repeated results, and the details of the session, we show that sometimes the repeated results should be promoted, while some other times they should be demoted. Analysing search logs from two different commercial search engines, we find that results are repeated in about 40% of multi-query search sessions, and that users engage differently with repeats than with results shown for the first time. We demonstrate how statistics about result repetition within search sessions can be incorporated into ranking for personalizing search results. Our results on query logs of two large-scale commercial search engines suggest that we successfully promote documents that are more likely to be clicked by the user in the future while maintaining performance over standard measures of non-personalized relevance.
2484074	An effective implicit relevance feedback technique using affective, physiological and behavioural features The effectiveness of various behavioural signals for implicit relevance feedback models has been exhaustively studied. Despite the advantages of such techniques for a real time information retrieval system, most of the behavioural signals are noisy and therefore not reliable enough to be employed. Among many, a combination of dwell time and task information has been shown to be effective for relevance judgement prediction. However, the task information might not be available to the system at all times. Thus, there is a need for other sources of information which can be used as a substitute for task information. Recently, affective and physiological signals have shown promise as a potential source of information for relevance judgement prediction. However, their accuracy is not high enough to be applicable on their own. This paper investigates whether affective and physiological signals can be used as a complementary source of information for behavioural signals (i.e. dwell time) to create a reliable signal for relevance judgement prediction. Using a video retrieval system as a use case, we study and compare the effectiveness of the affective and physiological signals on their own, as well as in combination with behavioural signals for the relevance judgment prediction task across four different search intentions: seeking information, re-finding a particular information object, and two different entertainment intentions (i.e. entertainment by adjusting arousal level, and entertainment by adjusting mood). Our experimental results show that the effectiveness of studied signals varies across different search intentions, and when affective and physiological signals are combined with dwell time, a significant improvement can be achieved. Overall, these findings will help to implement better search engines in the future.
2484070	A novel TF-IDF weighting scheme for effective ranking Term weighting schemes are central to the study of information retrieval systems. This article proposes a novel TF-IDF term weighting scheme that employs two different within document term frequency normalizations to capture two different aspects of term saliency. One component of the term frequency is effective for short queries, while the other performs better on long queries. The final weight is then measured by taking a weighted combination of these components, which is determined on the basis of the length of the corresponding query. Experiments conducted on a large number of TREC news and web collections demonstrate that the proposed scheme almost always outperforms five state of the art retrieval models with remarkable significance and consistency. The experimental results also show that the proposed model achieves significantly better precision than the existing models.
2484099	Search engine switching detection based on user personal preferences and behavior patterns Sometimes, during a search task users may switch from one search engine to another for several reasons, e.g., dissatisfaction with the current search results or desire for broader topic coverage. Detecting the fact of switching is difficult but important for understanding users' satisfaction with the search engine and the complexity of their search tasks, leading to economic significance for search providers. Previous research on switching detection mainly focused on studying different signals useful for the task and particular reasons for switching. Although it is known that switching is a personal choice of a user and different users have different search behavior, little has been done to understand how these differences could be used for switching detection. In this paper we study the effectiveness of learning personal behavior patterns for switching detection and present a personalized approach which uses user's session history containing sessions with and without switches. Experiments show that users' personal habits and behavior patterns are indeed among the most informative signals. Our findings can be used by a search log analyzer for engine switching detection and potentially other log mining problems, thus providing valuable signals for search providers to improve user experience.
2484097	Extracting query facets from search results Web search queries are often ambiguous or multi-faceted, which makes a simple ranked list of results inadequate. To assist information finding for such faceted queries, we explore a technique that explicitly represents interesting facets of a query using groups of semantically related terms extracted from search results. As an example, for the query ``baggage allowance'', these groups might be different airlines, different flight types (domestic, international), or different travel classes (first, business, economy). We name these groups query facets and the terms in these groups facet terms. We develop a supervised approach based on a graphical model to recognize query facets from the noisy candidates found. The graphical model learns how likely a candidate term is to be a facet term as well as how likely two terms are to be grouped together in a query facet, and captures the dependencies between the two factors. We propose two algorithms for approximate inference on the graphical model since exact inference is intractable. Our evaluation combines recall and precision of the facet terms with the grouping quality. Experimental results on a sample of web queries show that the supervised method significantly outperforms existing approaches, which are mostly unsupervised, suggesting that query facet extraction can be effectively learned.
2484098	Modeling term dependencies with quantum language models for IR Traditional information retrieval (IR) models use bag-of-words as the basic representation and assume that some form of independence holds between terms. Representing term dependencies and defining a scoring function capable of integrating such additional evidence is theoretically and practically challenging. Recently, Quantum Theory (QT) has been proposed as a possible, more general framework for IR. However, only a limited number of investigations have been made and the potential of QT has not been fully explored and tested. We develop a new, generalized Language Modeling approach for IR by adopting the probabilistic framework of QT. In particular, quantum probability could account for both single and compound terms at once without having to extend the term space artificially as in previous studies. This naturally allows us to avoid the weight-normalization problem, which arises in the current practice by mixing scores from matching compound terms and from matching single terms. Our model is the first practical application of quantum probability to show significant improvements over a robust bag-of-words baseline and achieves better performance on a stronger non bag-of-words baseline.
2484090	The effect of threshold priming and need for cognition on relevance calibration and assessment Human assessments of document relevance are needed for the construction of test collections, for ad-hoc evaluation, and for training text classifiers. Showing documents to assessors in different orderings, however, may lead to different assessment outcomes. We examine the effect that defineterm{threshold priming}, seeing varying degrees of relevant documents, has on people's calibration of relevance. Participants judged the relevance of a prologue of documents containing highly relevant, moderately relevant, or non-relevant ocuments, followed by a common epilogue of documents of mixed relevance. We observe that participants exposed to only non-relevant documents in the prologue assigned significantly higher average relevance scores to prologue and epilogue documents than participants exposed to moderately or highly relevant documents in the prologue. We also examine how defineterm{need for cognition}, an individual difference measure of the extent to which a person enjoys engaging in effortful cognitive activity, impacts relevance assessments. High need for cognition participants had a significantly higher level of agreement with expert assessors than low need for cognition participants did. Our findings indicate that assessors should be exposed to documents from multiple relevance levels early in the judging process, in order to calibrate their relevance thresholds in a balanced way, and that individual difference measures might be a useful way to screen assessors.
2484096	Compact query term selection using topically related text Many recent and highly effective retrieval models for long queries use query reformulation methods that jointly optimize term weights and term selection. These methods learn using word context and global context but typically fail to capture query context. In this paper, we present a novel term ranking algorithm, PhRank, that extends work on Markov chain frameworks for query expansion to select compact and focused terms from within a query itself. This focuses queries so that one to five terms in an unweighted model achieve better retrieval effectiveness than weighted term selection models that use up to 30 terms. PhRank terms are also typically compact and contain 1-2 words compared to competing models that use query subsets up to 7 words long. PhRank captures query context with an affinity graph constructed using word co-occurrence in pseudo-relevant documents. A random walk of the graph is used for term ranking in combination with discrimination weights. Empirical evaluation using newswire and web collections demonstrates that performance of reformulated queries is significantly improved for long queries and at least as good for short, keyword queries compared to highly competitive information retrieval (IR) models.
2484095	Term level search result diversification Current approaches for search result diversification have been categorized as either implicit or explicit. The implicit approach assumes each document represents its own topic, and promotes diversity by selecting documents for different topics based on the difference of their vocabulary. On the other hand, the explicit approach models the set of query topics, or aspects. While the former approach is generally less effective, the latter usually depends on a manually created description of the query aspects, the automatic construction of which has proven difficult. This paper introduces a new approach: term-level diversification. Instead of modeling the set of query aspects, which are typically represented as coherent groups of terms, our approach uses terms without the grouping. Our results on the ClueWeb collection show that the grouping of topic terms provides very little benefit to diversification compared to simply using the terms themselves. Consequently, we demonstrate that term-level diversification, with topic terms identified automatically from the search results using a simple greedy algorithm, significantly outperforms methods that attempt to create a full topic structure for diversification.
2484094	Preference based evaluation measures for novelty and diversity Novel and diverse document ranking is an effective strategy that involves reducing redundancy in a ranked list to maximize the amount of novel and relevant information available to users. Evaluation for novelty and diversity typically involves an assessor judging each document for relevance against a set of pre-identified subtopics, which may be disambiguations of the query, facets of an information need, or nuggets of information. Alternately, when expressing a emph{preference} for document A or document B, users may implicitly take subtopics into account, but may also take into account other factors such as recency, readability, length, and so on, each of which may have more or less importance depending on user. A emph{user profile} contains information about the extent to which each factor, including subtopic relevance, plays a role in the user's preference for one document over another. A preference-based evaluation can then take this user profile information into account to better model utility to the space of users. In this work, we propose an evaluation framework that not only can consider implicit factors but also handles differences in user preference due to varying underlying information need. Our proposed framework is based on the idea that a user scanning a ranked list from top to bottom and stopping at rank $k$ gains some utility from every document that is relevant their information need. Thus, we model the expected utility of a ranked list by estimating the utility of a document at a given rank using preference judgments and define evaluation measures based on the same. We validate our framework by comparing it to existing measures such as $alpha$-nDCG, ERR-IA, and subtopic recall that require explicit subtopic judgments We show that our proposed measures correlate well with existing measures while having the potential to capture various other factors when real data is used. We also show that the proposed measures can easily handle relevance assessments against multiple user profiles, and that they are robust to noisy and incomplete judgments.
2484093	Improving search result summaries by using searcher behavior data Query-biased search result summaries, or "snippets", help users decide whether a result is relevant for their information need, and have become increasingly important for helping searchers with difficult or ambiguous search tasks. Previously published snippet generation algorithms have been primarily based on selecting document fragments most similar to the query, which does not take into account which parts of the document the searchers actually found useful. We present a new approach to improving result summaries by incorporating post-click searcher behavior data, such as mouse cursor movements and scrolling over the result documents. To achieve this aim, we develop a method for collecting behavioral data with precise association between searcher intent, document examination behavior, and the corresponding document fragments. In turn, this allows us to incorporate page examination behavior signals into a novel Behavior-Biased Snippet generation system (BeBS). By mining searcher examination data, BeBS infers document fragments of most interest to users, and combines this evidence with text-based features to select the most promising fragments for inclusion in the result summary. Our extensive experiments and analysis demonstrate that our method improves the quality of result summaries compared to existing state-of-the-art methods. We believe that this work opens a new direction for improving search result presentation, and we make available the code and the search behavior data used in this study to encourage further research in this area.
2484149	Extractive summarisation via sentence removal: condensing relevant sentences into a short summary Many on-line services allow users to describe their opinions about a product or a service through a review. In order to help other users to find out the major opinion about a given topic, without the effort to read several reviews, multi-document summarisation is required. This research proposes an approach for extractive summarisation, supporting different scoring techniques, such as cosine similarity or divergence, as a method for finding representative sentences. The main contribution of this paper is the definition of an algorithm for sentence removal, developed to maximise the score between the summary and the original document. Instead of ranking the sentences and selecting the most important ones, the algorithm iteratively removes unimportant sentences until a desired compression rate is reached. Experimental results show that variations of the sentence removal algorithm provide good performance.
2484146	Hybrid retrieval approaches to geospatial music recommendation Recent advances in music retrieval and recommendation algorithms highlight the necessity to follow multimodal approaches in order to transcend limits imposed by methods that solely use audio, web, or collaborative filtering data. In this paper, we propose hybrid music recommendation algorithms that combine information on the music content, the music context, and the user context, in particular, integrating location-aware weighting of similarities. Using state-of-the-art techniques to extract audio features and contextual web features, and a novel standardized data set of music listening activities inferred from microblogs (MusicMicro), we propose several multimodal retrieval functions. The main contributions of this paper are (i) a systematic evaluation of mixture coefficients between state-of-the-art audio features and web features, using the first standardized microblog data set of music listening events for retrieval purposes and (ii) novel geospatial music recommendation approaches using location information of microblog users, and a comprehensive evaluation thereof.
2484131	Sopra: a new social personalized ranking function for improving web search We present in this paper a contribution to IR modeling by proposing a new ranking function called SoPRa that considers the social dimension of the Web. This social dimension is any social information that surrounds documents along with the social context of users. Currently, our approach relies on folksonomies for extracting these social contexts, but it can be extended to use any social meta-data, e.g. comments, ratings, tweets, etc. The evaluation performed on our approach shows its benefits for personalized search.
2484132	Effectiveness/efficiency tradeoffs for candidate generation in multi-stage retrieval architectures This paper examines a multi-stage retrieval architecture consisting of a candidate generation stage, a feature extraction stage, and a reranking stage using machine-learned models. Given a fixed set of features and a learning-to-rank model, we explore effectiveness/efficiency tradeoffs with three candidate generation approaches: postings intersection with SvS, conjunctive query evaluation with WAND, and disjunctive query evaluation with WAND. We find no significant differences in end-to-end effectiveness as measured by NDCG between conjunctive and disjunctive WAND, but conjunctive query evaluation is substantially faster. Postings intersection with SvS, while fast, yields substantially lower end-to-end effectiveness, suggesting that document and term frequencies remain important in the initial ranking stage. These findings show that conjunctive WAND is the best overall candidate generation strategy of those we examined.
2484129	Question retrieval with user intent Community Question Answering (CQA) services, such as Yahoo! Answers and WikiAnswers, have become popular with users as one of the central paradigms for satisfying users' information needs. The task of question retrieval in CQA aims to resolve one's query directly by finding the most relevant questions (together with their answers) from an archive of past questions. However, as users can ask any question that they like, a large number of questions in CQA are not about objective (factual) knowledge, but about subjective (sentiment-based) opinions or social interactions. The inhomogeneous nature of CQA leads to reduced performance of standard retrieval models. To address this problem, we present a hybrid approach that blends several language modelling techniques for question retrieval, namely, the classic (query-likelihood) language model, the state-of-the-art translation-based language model, and our proposed intent-based language model. The user intent of each candidate question (objective/subjective/social) is given by a probabilistic classifier which makes use of both textual features and metadata features. Our experiments on two real-world datasets show that our approach can significantly outperform existing ones.
2484128	The cluster hypothesis for entity oriented search In this work we study the cluster hypothesis for entity oriented search (EOS). Specifically, we show that the hypothesis can hold to a substantial extent for several entity similarity measures. We also demonstrate the retrieval effectiveness merits of using clusters of similar entities for EOS.
2484116	Sentiment analysis of user comments for one-class collaborative filtering over ted talks User-generated texts such as reviews, comments or discussions are valuable indicators of users' preferences. Unlike previous works which focus on labeled data from user-contributed reviews, we focus here on user comments which are not accompanied by explicit rating labels. We investigate their utility for a one-class collaborative filtering task such as bookmarking, where only the user actions are given as ground truth. We propose a sentiment-aware nearest neighbor model (SANN) for multimedia recommendations over TED talks, which makes use of user comments. The model outperforms significantly, by more than 25% on unseen data, several competitive baselines.
2484119	RecSys for distributed events: investigating the influence of recommendations on visitor plans Distributed events are collections of events taking place within a small area over the same time period and relating to a single topic. There are often a large number of events on offer and the times in which they can be visited are heavily constrained, therefore the task of choosing events to visit and in which order can be very difficult. In this work we investigate how visitors can be assisted by means of a recommender system via 2 large-scale naturalistic studies (n=860 and n=1047). We show that a recommender system can influence users to select events that result in tighter and more compact routes, thus allowing users to spend less time travelling and more time visiting events.
2484100	Mining touch interaction data on mobile devices to predict web search result relevance Fine-grained search interactions in the desktop setting, such as mouse cursor movements and scrolling, have been shown valuable for understanding user intent, attention, and their preferences for Web search results. As web search on smart phones and tablets becomes increasingly popular, previously validated desktop interaction models have to be adapted for the available touch interactions such as pinching and swiping, and for the different device form factors. In this paper, we present, to our knowledge, the first in-depth study of modeling interactions on touch-enabled device for improving Web search ranking. In particular, we evaluate a variety of touch interactions on a smart phone as implicit relevance feedback, and compare them with the corresponding fine-grained interactions on a desktop computer with mouse and keyboard as the primary input devices. Our experiments are based on a dataset collected from two user studies with 56 users in total, using a specially instrumented version of a popular mobile browser to capture the interaction data. We report a detailed analysis of the similarities and differences of fine-grained search interactions between the desktop and the smart phone modalities, and identify novel patterns of touch interactions indicative of result relevance. Finally, we demonstrate significant improvements to search ranking quality by mining touch interaction data.
2484101	Improve collaborative filtering through bordered block diagonal form matrices Collaborative Filtering-based recommendation algorithms have achieved widespread success on the Web, but little work has been performed to investigate appropriate user-item relationship structures of rating matrices. This paper presents a novel and general collaborative filtering framework based on (Approximate) Bordered Block Diagonal Form structure of user-item rating matrices. We show formally that matrices in (A)BBDF structures correspond to community detection on the corresponding bipartite graphs, and they reveal relationships among users and items intuitionally in recommendation tasks. By this framework, general and special interests of a user are distinguished, which helps to improve prediction accuracy in collaborative filtering tasks. Experimental results on four real-world datasets, including the Yahoo! Music dataset, which is currently the largest, show that the proposed framework helps many traditional collaborative filtering algorithms, such as User-based, Item-based, SVD and NMF approaches, to make more accurate rating predictions. Moreover, by leveraging smaller and denser submatrices to make predictions, this framework contributes to the scalability of recommender systems.
2484105	The impact of intent selection on diversified search evaluation To construct a diversified search test collection, a set of possible subtopics (or intents) needs to be determined for each topic, in one way or another, and perintent relevance assessments need to be obtained. In the TREC Web Track Diversity Task, subtopics are manually developed at NIST, based on results of automatic click log analysis; in the NTCIR INTENT Task, intents are determined by manually clustering 'subtopics strings' returned by participating systems. In this study, we address the following research question: Does the choice of intents for a test collection affect relative performances of diversified search systems? To this end, we use the TREC 2012 Web Track Diversity Task data and the NTCIR-10 INTENT-2 Task data, which share a set of 50 topics but have different intent sets. Our initial results suggest that the choice of intents may affect relative performances, and that this choice may be far more important than how many intents are selected for each topic
2484182	A financial cost metric for result caching Web search engines cache results of frequent and/or recent queries. Result caching strategies can be evaluated using different metrics, hit rate being the most well-known. Recent works take the processing overhead of queries into account when evaluating the performance of result caching strategies and propose cost-aware caching strategies. In this paper, we propose a financial cost metric that goes one step beyond and takes also the hourly electricity prices into account when computing the cost. We evaluate the most well-known static, dynamic, and hybrid result caching strategies under this new metric. Moreover, we propose a financial-cost-aware version of the well-known LRU strategy and show that it outperforms the original LRU strategy in terms of the financial cost metric.
2484189	Scalability and efficiency challenges in commercial web search engines Commercial web search engines rely on very large compute infrastructures to be able to cope with the continuous growth of the Web and user bases. Achieving scalability and efficiency in such large-scale search engines requires making careful architectural design choices while devising algorithmic performance optimizations. Unfortunately, most details about the internal functioning of commercial web search engines remain undisclosed due to their financial value and the high level of competition in the search market. The main objective of this tutorial is to provide an overview of the fundamental scalability and efficiency challenges in commercial web search engines, bridging the existing gap between the industry and academia.
2484172	Ranking explanatory sentences for opinion summarization We introduce a novel sentence ranking problem called explanatory sentence extraction (ESE) which aims to rank sentences in opinionated text based on their usefulness for helping users understand the detailed reasons of sentiments (i.e., "explanatoriness"). We propose and study several general methods for scoring the explanatoriness of a sentence. We create new data sets and propose a new measure for evaluation. Experiment results show that the proposed methods are effective, outperforming a state of the art sentence ranking method for standard text summarization.
2484173	The knowing camera: recognizing places-of-interest in smartphone photos This paper presents a framework called Knowing Camera for real-time recognizing places-of-interest in smartphone photos, with the availability of online geotagged images of such places. We propose a probabilistic field-of-view model which captures the uncertainty in camera sensor data. This model can be used to retrieve a set of candidate images. The visual similarity computation of the candidate images relies on the sparse coding technique. We also propose an ANN filtering technique to speedup the sparse coding. The final ranking combines an uncertain geometric relevance with the visual similarity. Our preliminary experiments conducted in an urban area of a large city show promising results. The most distinguishing feature of our framework is its ability to perform well in contaminated, real-world online image database. Besides, our framework is highly scalable as it does not incur any complex data structure.
2484161	Document features predicting assessor disagreement The notion of relevance differs between assessors, thus giving rise to assessor disagreement. Although assessor disagreement has been frequently observed, the factors leading to disagreement are still an open problem. In this paper we study the relationship between assessor disagreement and various topic independent factors such as readability and cohesiveness. We build a logistic model using reading level and other simple document features to predict assessor disagreement and rank documents by decreasing probability of disagreement. We compare the predictive power of these document-level features with that of a meta-search feature that aggregates a document's ranking across multiple retrieval runs. Our features are shown to be on a par with the meta-search feature, without requiring a large and diverse set of retrieval runs to calculate. Surprisingly, however, we find that the reading level features are negatively correlated with disagreement, suggesting that they are detecting some other aspect of document content.
2484168	Relevance dimensions in preference-based IR evaluation Evaluation of information retrieval (IR) systems has recently been exploring the use of preference judgments over two search result lists. Unlike the traditional method of collecting relevance labels per single result, this method allows to consider the interaction between search results as part of the judging criteria. For example, one result list may be preferred over another if it has a more diverse set of relevant results, covering a wider range of user intents. In this paper, we investigate how assessors determine their preference for one list of results over another with the aim to understand the role of various relevance dimensions in preference-based evaluation. We run a series of experiments and collect preference judgments over different relevance dimensions in side-by-side comparisons of two search result lists, as well as relevance judgments for the individual documents. Our analysis of the collected judgments reveals that preference judgments combine multiple dimensions of relevance that go beyond the traditional notion of relevance centered on topicality. Measuring performance based on single document judgments and NDCG aligns well with topicality based preferences, but shows misalignment with judges' overall preferences, largely due to the diversity dimension. As a judging method, dimensional preference judging is found to lead to improved judgment quality.
2484167	Exploiting semantics for improving clinical information retrieval Clinical information retrieval (IR) presents several challenges including terminology mismatch and granularity mismatch. One of the main objectives in clinical IR is to fill the semantic gap among the queries and documents and go beyond keywords matching. To address these issues, in this paper we attempt to use semantic information to improve the performance of clinical IR systems by representing queries in an expressive and meaningful context. To model a query context initially we model and develop query domain ontology. The query domain ontology represents concepts closely related with query concepts. Query context represents concepts extracted from query domain ontology and weighted according to their semantic relatedness to query concept(s). The query context is then exploited in query expansion and patients records re-ranking for improving clinical retrieval performance. We evaluate our approach on the TREC Medical Records dataset. Results show that our proposed approach significantly improves the retrieval performance compare to classic keyword-based IR model.
2484163	A comparison of the optimality of statistical significance tests for information retrieval evaluation Previous research has suggested the permutation test as the theoretically optimal statistical significance test for IR evaluation, and advocated for the discontinuation of the Wilcoxon and sign tests. We present a large-scale study comprising nearly 60 million system comparisons showing that in practice the bootstrap, t-test and Wilcoxon test outperform the permutation test under different optimality criteria. We also show that actual error rates seem to be lower than the theoretically expected 5%, further confirming that we may actually be underestimating significance.
2484166	Improving LDA topic models for microblogs via tweet pooling and automatic labeling Twitter, or the world of 140 characters poses serious challenges to the efficacy of topic models on short, messy text. While topic models such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) have a long history of successful application to news articles and academic abstracts, they are often less coherent when applied to microblog content like Twitter. In this paper, we investigate methods to improve topics learned from Twitter content without modifying the basic machinery of LDA; we achieve this through various pooling schemes that aggregate tweets in a data preprocessing step for LDA. We empirically establish that a novel method of tweet pooling by hashtags leads to a vast improvement in a variety of measures for topic coherence across three diverse Twitter datasets in comparison to an unmodified LDA baseline and a variety of pooling schemes. An additional contribution of automatic hashtag labeling further improves on the hashtag pooling results for a subset of metrics. Overall, these two novel schemes lead to significantly improved LDA topic models on Twitter content.
2484165	A test collection for entity search in DBpedia We develop and make publicly available an entity search test collection based on the DBpedia knowledge base. This includes a large number of queries and corresponding relevance judgments from previous benchmarking campaigns, covering a broad range of information needs, ranging from short keyword queries to natural language questions. Further, we present baseline results for this collection with a set of retrieval models based on language modeling and BM25. Finally, we perform an initial analysis to shed light on certain characteristics that make this data set particularly challenging.
2484150	Is relevance hard work?: evaluating the effort of making relevant assessments The judging of relevance has been a subject of study in information retrieval for a long time, especially in the creation of relevance judgments for test collections. While the criteria by which assessors? judge relevance has been intensively studied, little work has investigated the process individual assessors go through to judge the relevance of a document. In this paper, we focus on the process by which relevance is judged, and in particular, the degree of effort a user must expend to judge relevance. By better understanding this effort in isolation, we may provide data which can be used to create better models of search. We present the results of an empirical evaluation of the effort users must exert to judge the relevance of document, investigating the effect of relevance level and document size. Results suggest that 'relevant' documents require more effort to judge when compared to highly relevant and not relevant documents, and that effort increases as document size increases.
2484151	Cumulative citation recommendation: classification vs. ranking Cumulative citation recommendation refers to the task of filtering a time-ordered corpus for documents that are highly relevant to a predefined set of entities. This task has been introduced at the TREC Knowledge Base Acceleration track in 2012, where two main families of approaches emerged: classification and ranking. In this paper we perform an experimental comparison of these two strategies using supervised learning with a rich feature set. Our main finding is that ranking outperforms classification on all evaluation settings and metrics. Our analysis also reveals that a ranking-based approach has more potential for future improvements.
2484156	Assessor disagreement and text classifier accuracy Text classifiers are frequently used for high-yield retrieval from large corpora, such as in e-discovery. The classifier is trained by annotating example documents for relevance. These examples may, however, be assessed by people other than those whose conception of relevance is authoritative. In this paper, we examine the impact that disagreement between actual and authoritative assessor has upon classifier effectiveness, when evaluated against the authoritative conception. We find that using alternative assessors leads to a significant decrease in binary classification quality, though less so ranking quality. A ranking consumer would have to go on average 25% deeper in the ranking produced by alternative-assessor training to achieve the same yield as for authoritative-assessor training.
2484212	TweetMogaz: a news portal of tweets Twitter is currently one of the largest social hubs for users to spread and discuss news. For most of the top news stories happening, there are corresponding discussions on social media. In this demonstration TweetMogaz is presented, which is a platform for microblog search and filtering. It creates a real-time comprehensive report about what people discuss and share around news happening in certain regions. TweetMogaz reports the most popular tweets, jokes, videos, images, and news articles that people share about top news stories. Moreover, it allows users to search for specific topics. A scalable automatic technique for microblog filtering is used to obtain relevant tweets to a certain news category in a region. TweetMogaz.com demonstrates the effectiveness of our filtering technique for reporting public response toward news in different Arabic regions including Egypt and Syria in real-time.
2484214	Demonstration of citation pattern analysis for plagiarism detection 
